                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PRODUCTIVITY AND WAGES:
COMMON FACTORS AND IDIOSYNCRASIES ACROSS COUNTRIES AND INDUSTRIES

                                        Edward P. Lazear

                                      Working Paper 26428
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26428


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Edward P. Lazear. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Productivity and Wages: Common Factors and Idiosyncrasies Across Countries and Industries
Edward P. Lazear
NBER Working Paper No. 26428
November 2019, Revised July 2020
JEL No. J00,J30,M50

                                         ABSTRACT

Average wage growth is closely related to aggregate productivity growth across countries and
within countries over time. The commonality of patterns across OECD countries suggests that
common factors are at work. Are productivity-based explanations of wage changes consistent
with increasing variance in wages as well as increases in mean wages as suggested by skill-biased
technological change or other factors? To answer this, it is necessary to observe education-
specific productivity growth. Cross-industry comparisons reveal that industries dominated by
highly educated workers have higher productivity and experienced higher-than-average
productivity growth that is more than sufficient to account for increasing skill differentials.


Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and Hoover Institution
and also NBER
lazear@stanford.edu
I. Introduction

        What causes wages to grow? Either the demand for labor must increase or the supply of
labor must decrease. The amount of labor supplied can be affected by institutional factors, such as
the availability of payments when unemployed, by immigration, by population growth over the
longer run or by changes in household technology altering the value of time outside work.1 But
much, perhaps most of the wage growth that is of primary interest is associated with demand
increases that result from improving productivity of labor.
        There is a direct and unequivocal empirical link between wages and productivity. The
positive relation of one to the other is strong in cross-country comparisons, within a given country
over time, and among workers in a given country at a point in time. The relation, while positive
and strong, is neither perfect nor necessarily unitary. In some situations, productivity differences
outstrip wage variation, while in others the reverse is true.
        More important is that the shifts in productivity have not been neutral. Cross-industry
data provide evidence that rather than merely displacing upward, the entire distribution has
changed shape. The upper tail of the distribution has moved away from the lower tail. The rise in
productivity of the high skilled, typically highly educated workers, relative to the low skilled
typically less educated workers, has generated an increase in skill disparity, which is consistent
with observed increases in inequality over time.
        The analysis here does three things. First, it briefly reviews the theory that links
productivity to wages. Second, OECD data are examined to check, elaborate and replicate
findings that exist in the literature on the relation of average wages to average productivity. Third,
and the heart of this research (section IX), is to show that aggregate productivity masks a key
part of the story. The productivity distribution has not merely shifted. It has stretched out.
Productivity among more educated workers is higher and has grown more rapidly than
productivity of less educated workers. This is consistent with growing wage dispersion, where
the wages of highly educated, high wage workers have pulled away from wages of less educated,
low wage workers.

        1
          The mechanization of much of household work freed up time and was almost certainly a major factor in
the increased labor force participation of women over the 20th century.

                                                       1
        There are a number of potential causes of the spreading out of the productivity
distribution. One is the frequently referenced skill-biased technological change2 that postulates
that changes in technology have affected the productivity of highly educated workers more than
less educated ones.
        Another is that trade has increased in a way that enhances the productivity and wages of
the most skilled workers. For example, trade may allow the developed countries to couple their
labor with that of the developing countries. The low skilled in developing countries, who are
complements to skilled workers, enhance the productivity of developed nations skilled workers.
Those same workers reduce the productivity of developed nations' low skilled workers for whom
the developing countries' labor is a substitute.
        A third possibility is that schools in the United States may have become more proficient
over time in educating the better students relative to the weaker ones. This may be an explicit or
implicit strategy. For example, if tertiary education in the US has improved while K-12 has
remained stagnant or even fallen back, those who go on to college in 2017 will possess more skill
than college graduates in 1987. At the same time, those who complete high school or less in 2017
may be no more skilled than their counterparts who completed their education in 1987.


II. The State of the Literature


        The literature on productivity and growth began with growth models going back at least
to the 1930s.3 All growth models have as byproducts implications for factor shares and wages. A
direct feature of the models is to provide a link between growth in aggregate output, growth in
productivity (defined either as labor or total factor productivity) and growth in wages. The
models generally assume that capital responds in a competitive way to changes in productivity,
but that labor is determined exogenously by population growth. The benchmark case (discussed


        2
         Early well-known papers on this issue include Berman, Bound and Machin (1998), Card and DiNardo
(2002), Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003).
        3
         Harrod (1939) and Domar (1946, 1947) are the best known of the early ones. Solow's path-breaking
work (1956) changed growth accounting and has served as the workhorse model to this day.

                                                      2
below) links wage growth to productivity growth in a one-to-one manner, but this is a
consequence of both supply assumptions and assumptions about technological change.
        There is also a literature that examines explicitly, both empirically and theoretically, the
link between wages and productivity. There are a number of historic and recent examples. More
recent ones include Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013), which examines the decline in labor's
share across 59 countries. The commonality of the decline across many countries at different
income levels and with varying institutions is noteworthy. They attribute about half of the decline
to the lowering price of investment. This is also important because it says that the quantity of
capital is rising, not that the marginal capital investment yields more than in the past.
        A comprehensive analysis by Stansbury and Summers (2017) focuses, like virtually most
of the prior literature, on the relation of wage growth to average productivity growth. Stansbury
and Summers look at various parts of the income distribution, but relate it primarily to changes in
average productivity to determine whether different parts of the wage distribution have grown at
different rates and whether those differences in wage growth rates relate to changes in average
productivity. Their primary conclusion is that productivity increases translate into pay growth and
in general, the authors cannot reject the hypothesis that the increase for the median worker is one-
for-one. The relation of various deciles of the wage distribution to changes in aggregate
productivity is non-monotonic. The highest coefficient is obtained for the 20th percentile and the
lowest for the 30th percentile, although the latter is imprecisely estimated.
        A few prior studies speak to the primary issue of this analysis, which is the relation of a
particular worker's or worker-type's wage to that worker or worker-type's productivity rather
than to aggregate productivity. Hellerstein, Newmark and Trosky (1999) use a matched US
employer-employee dataset to examine the demographic structure of a firm and its productivity
and conclude that with the exception of women, wage differences among groups mirror
productivity differences. Haskel and Slaughter (2002) examine sector-biased technical change
using data from 10 OECD countries in the 1970s and 1980s. They find that sector-biased
technical change is important in accounting for rising skill premiums. Skill-premiums tend to be
rising in skill-intensive sectors.
        Dunne et al. (2004) use plant level data to determine variations in productivity and wages


                                                   3
at the level of the establishment. They find that between-plant variations in both wages and
productivity have increased during the last decades of the 20th century. Faggio, Salvanes and Van
Reenen (2010) use UK data and conclude similarly that productivity inequality across firms has
increased over time using a company-level panel dataset.
        Complete equilibrium models of the labor market are described in Lee and Wolpin (2006,
2010). In the first paper, the goal is to address the fact that employment in the service sector has
grown dramatically relative to the goods sector while wages have not. With complete labor
mobility across sectors, this would not be a surprising outcome because workers would move to
equilibrate wages, but Lee and Wolpin estimate that the costs of mobility are large. They also
estimate that there is a large output loss as a result of the lack of mobility. Wages are equilibrated
by new entrants to the labor market.
        Lee and Wolpin (2010) is more directly related to the subject of this analysis. This is a
comprehensive study that addresses a large number of issues in an integrated framework that
allows for different forms of technological change (skill biased and neutral), capital-labor
complementarities and supply-side considerations like changes in household production that
caused increased labor supply of women. Most germane to the issue here is their finding that
skill-biased technological change accounts for the bulk of the increased college wage premium
and the general increase in wage inequality.
        Hornbeck and Moretti (2018) examine the recipients of benefits from productivity growth
by analyzing geographical differences and find that local effects are more pronounced for high-
school than for college graduates in part because of more mobility among the latter. Van
Biesebroeck (2011) uses data from three African nations and finds, among other things, that
education has larger effects on productivity as the level of development rises.
        The analysis below differs from prior studies either in that of the focus on changes over
time, in the use of industry data for large segments of the population, or in the emphasis on
international comparisons to determine which of the patterns are common across countries.4
Some of the analysis repeats that which has gone before for comparison reasons, but most is


        4
         Additionally, some studies look at individual companies or sectors to try to assess the link between
worker productivity and wages at a disaggregated level.

                                                         4
related to explaining the spreading out of the wage distribution as it relates to education by
matching it with the spreading out of the productivity distribution as it relates to education.
Fundamentally, the question is, to what extent has the education wage premium risen over time
and is the rise in the education productivity premium sufficient to account for that change?
       There are many papers that have studied changes in rates of return to education over time.
The general finding is that the skill differential has increased and explanations for that increase
based on either supply or demand go back to Katz and Murphy (1992). Standard Bureau of Labor
Statistics data from the CPS show that the college premium has grown over time. The ratio of the
mean wage for college graduates to the mean wage for high school graduates has increased
between 1987 and 2017, going from 1.77 to 1.90 for men and 1.77 to 1.97 for women.


III. Theory


       What does theory predict about the relation of wages to productivity? Let us begin with
the simplest situation in which there is only one type of labor. Formally, define productivity by the
average product of labor, or by


(1)    Productivity / Average Product of Labor = Q / L


where Q is output measured in dollars and L is the number of hours of labor employed to produce
it. Also let the aggegate production function be given by


(2)    Q = A f (L, K)


where A and f are time-specific and relate to technology, and where L and K denote labor and
capital employed. Consider a neutral change in productivity which takes the form of a change in
A. In competitive equilibrium, workers are paid their marginal product so the wage is from (2),


(3)    Wage = A fL (L, K)


                                                   5
Substituting (2) into (1) and differentiating with respect to A yields


       MProductivity / MA = f( ) / L + [( L A fL( )-Af( ) ) / L2 ] ML/MA + (AfK( ) / L) MK/MA


or in proportionate terms,


(4)    [ MProductivity / MA ] / Q =
        {f( ) / L + [( L A fL( )-Af( ) ) / L2 ] ML/MA + (AfK( ) / L) MK/MA} / [ A f ( ) / L ]


Analogously, the change in the wage is equal to the change in the marginal product or


        M Wage / M A = fL ( ) + AfLL( ) ML/MA+AfLK ( ) MK/MA


or in proportionate terms


(5)     [M Wage / M A ] / Wage = [fL ( ) + AfLL( ) ML/MA+AfLK ( ) MK/MA ] / [A fL ( )]


       Now assume that all firms are identical and that the supply of labor and capital are both
fixed at the initial levels. Then ML/MA = MK/MA = 0 average and marginal productivity move with
A proportionately. Specifically, [MProductivity / MA] / Q = [f( ) / L] / [ A f ( ) / L ] = 1/A and
[M Wage / M A ] / Wage = fL ( ) / [A fL ( )] = 1/A. This generates the intuition that a 1% increase
in productivity translates into a 1% increase in wage. There are a number of assumptions,
however, that are necessary for this to be true.
       First, the productivity increase here is caused by a neutral shift in technology,
parameterized as an increase in A. Not all technological change that induces productivity
increases are neutral.
       Second, and more important for the empirical purposes below, by examining technology,
the focus is on the demand side only. The expression in (5) is a statement about how the wage
that firms are willing to pay at a given quantity of labor is affected by technology, not about how


                                                   6
the equilibrium wage actually responds to increases in productivity. As is obvious, supply
conditions are essential in determining the equilibrium effect of increases in productivity on the
wage. To derive the result that both productivity and wage increased (proportionately) by 1/A, it
was assumed that both labor and capital were fixed. Consider, for example, an extreme
alternative case where the supply of labor is perfectly elastic. Then all increases in productivity,
which increase the demand for labor in accordance with (4), translate into increases in
employment without any increase in the wage at all. All of the surplus generated by increases in
productivity goes to producers.
        At the microeconomic level, it is usually assumed that in the short run, labor is variable
and that capital is fixed. But at the country level, the reverse is likely to be true. In the short run,
the elasticity of labor supply to the entire country is likely to be low. Higher wages may increase
the amount of labor supplied by the typical worker either through increased employment or
increased hours worked per worker, but not likely by much. Neither population nor labor force
participation rates are too responsive to wages, although the literature on the Earned Income Tax
Credit shows some elasticity on the extensive margin, where higher wages affect the extensive
margin of labor force participation. 5 Capital, on the other hand, is mobile across countries and
supplied highly elastically, even if fixed in the short run to a particular firm. As a result of the
inelasticity of labor supply at the country level, it might be appropriate to expect that most of
country-wide productivity increases take the form of wage increases, rather than employment
increases but those increases could also reflect additional capital, which raises the average product
of labor and wages.
        The nature of technological change is also a determining factor. Consider an alternative to
the neutral shift assumed above that characterizes digitization and may be what many worry about
when thinking about future changes associated with artificial intelligence. An example is the
grocery business as it existed 70 years ago. In the mid-1950s, adding machines were primitive,
mechanical and expensive. Early cash registers, which relied on similar technology, performed few
tasks and were also costly. In many stores, especially small mom and pop ones, checkout



        5
            See for example, Eissa and Liebman (1996), Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001), Eissa and Hoynes (2004).

                                                        7
consisted of bringing items up to the cashier who knew most prices by heart, wrote them down
(often on a brown paper bag used to package the items), and then added them up by hand to
obtain the total. After the customer gave the money to the cashier, it was his job to subtract the
amount owed from the amount given and to return the correct change. This was a skilled job.
The clerk had to have a good memory, had to be facile in arithmetic, and had to exercise care
when doing the calculations. Accuracy was particularly important because every checkout
involved computation and errors might be reported asymmetrically by customers, more likely
when the customer was overcharged than when undercharged. In those days, retail clerks, many
of whom were unionized, were skilled workers. Today, because of digitization, the process is
vastly different from that of earlier years. Most items carry a bar code, which is scanned. The
register computes the tally, details items purchased, and when cash is used, specifies the required
change. The skills required to be a retail clerk today are far fewer than those that characterized
the cashiers of an earlier age.
        Suppose that technological change took the form of the transformation of the grocery
industry. Productivity would have increased because the number of items sold per hour of cashier
time would be higher than it was earlier, but wages might not follow suit.
        Appendix A contains a formalization of that change in technology that characterizes the
market equilibrium before and after the change. The features are described here. Before the
change, production is smooth (Cobb-Douglas), using two types of labor, skilled clerks and
unskilled workers along with standard capital, which is supplied perfectly elastically by the world
capital market. Demand for the product is given and in the initial equilibrium, the profit
maximizing level of output is produced to support a price of $1 for the product. Profits are zero in
equilibrium. There are equal numbers of two types of workers. The skilled workers' wages are
three times those of the unskilled. Then the scanner is invented. It transforms the technology so
that now only one scanning system is needed per store and every worker can use that system.
Now, because all workers are able to use the scanner, there is no distinction by worker type.
Arithmetically astute workers no longer yield any additional value relative to the unskilled. The
new technology raises output, which, given demand for the product lowers the price from 1 to
.95. At the same time, wages (of all workers) fall to a fraction of their former level, profits are


                                                   8
zero again because the cost of the scanner coupled with the fall in price eats up all of the
additional profit that would have been generated by the superior technology. Because the number
of workers is fixed, output per worker rises. Thus, productivity increases, wages fall and prices
fall. Ordinary capital, supplied perfectly elastically on the world market, still receives the same
return as it did before, but the scanner's price is bid up to clear the market and eliminate profits in
the short run. The difference between the selling price of the scanner and its cost of production is
a return to invention, which may over time be eliminated by competition from other scanner
producers.
         This form of automation, where formerly skilled workers are no longer superior to others,
is at the heart of the discussion on artificial intelligence. Machines will replace middle-skilled
workers and capital while a few very skilled workers will reap the rewards. The economic
phenomenon of automation is not a new one, but the concern is that it will be more widespread
and deeper in its effects. This is, of course, an issue of distribution only. The society is richer
after the new technology comes in because more output is produced with a given amount of labor.
In the retail clerk example, the beneficiary was neither labor nor traditional capital. The surplus
and more went to the inventor of the technology. Indeed, the inventor captures more than the
entire additional output in this example because wages are driven down, bringing about not only
the gain from new technology, but also the transfer that goes from labor to the innovator.6
         Conceptually, then, it is possible for wages to move with productivity or in extreme cases,
to move in the opposite direction, even if supply conditions are such that all changes in demand
affect wages rather than employment. The failure to find a link between productivity and wages or
to find that it does not move 1-for-1 is not a statement about market failure or monopsonistic



         6
          This is the "genius effect" that some have discussed. See, for example, Benzell and Brynjolfsson (2019).
Using a somewhat different framework, but related to the model in the appendix, they derive a number of
implications. The declining wages (or lack of growth) comes about in a different manner here than there. The
mechanism here is the homogenization of labor as well as replacement by machines that are substitutes for skilled
labor.
         Unlike Autor and Dorn (2013), machines in the retail example are a substitute for skilled labor and render
skilled and unskilled labor identical. Skilled labor now floods the unskilled labor market and it is this supply effect
that drives down the wages of unskilled labor. Skilled labor's wage declines because the skills are no longer
needed. The implication is that the ranks of the unskilled would be larger and the skilled fewer, but it is
conceivable that those few could earn very high wages.

                                                          9
behavior by employers. It might simply reflect less than perfectly elastic labor supply or non-
neutral changes in technology. As a consequence, the issue of interest is inherently empirical.
This also has implications for labor share because if labor supply is perfectly inelastic, then any
failure to see wage increases that match (proportionately) productivity increases implies declining
labor share.
        Standard economic theory does have implications for what one might expect in
competitive equilibrium. To the extent that one industry experiences an increase in productivity
that is not enjoyed by other industries, there will be little or no wage effect, but there will be
employment effects to the extent that workers are substitutable across industries. For example,
electricians work in furniture factories, but also in hospitals, maintaining facilities in both. If there
is a increase in productivity in health care without a corresponding increase in furniture, then
electricians will move from furniture production to health care, but there will be no effect on
wages of electricians in either industry as long as each makes up a small share of total electrician
employment.
        Suppose instead that the increase in productivity is one that is experienced not by one
industry, but by all industries that use primarily highly skilled, educated workers. In the short run,
wages of educated workers will rise and employment will stay almost constant because of the
inelasticity of the supply of skilled workers. In the long run, the proportion of educated workers
in the economy will change, rising relative to those with less education. Wages are less affected in
the long run because the supply curve is more elastic in the long run than in the short run, but
employment of the highly educated should increase as a result of higher supply elasticity.


IV. The Empirical Question


        The central empirical issue here is whether shifts in average productivity that occurred in
past decades were coupled with changes in the shape of the productivity distribution. It is well-
documented that the wage distribution has spread out. Consider two extreme characterizations of
the causes. First, growing monopsony power by employers and increased labor market
exploitation of less skilled workers has driven their wages down. Note that the monopsony


                                                   10
power and ability to exploit must fall only on the less skilled because during the same period, the
wages of highly paid and highly educated workers (as discussed below) increased.7 The second
extreme alternative is that all labor markets are completely competitive and wages move directly
with productivity. If productivity of the highly skilled increases more when the economy's
average productivity rises, then wages of the highly skilled would diverge from wages of the less
skilled over time. Determining the validity of the second explanation is the subject of this analysis.
        Figure 1 illustrates the point. Initially, productivity is distributed as the solid curve with
mean P. Over time, productivity grows, and the productivity distribution shifts from the solid to
dotted curve with mean P'. Average productivity rises by P'-P but the dotted distribution is not
simply a displacement of the solid distribution. The dotted distribution has a higher variance and
different shape. In particular, the productivity of high productivity workers has grown by more
than the productivity of low productivity workers. The 90th productivity percentile worker before
the change had productivity P90 and the 10th productivity percentile worker before the change
had productivity P10. After the increase in productivity, the 90th percentile worker has
productivity P90' an the 10th percentile worker has productivity P10'. In this example, the 90th
percentile worker's productivity has risen by more than P'-P while the productivity of the 10th
percentile worker has risen by less than P'- P. If workers were paid exactly in accordance with
their productivity, then wages would spread out over time.
        Evidence on the relation of wage increases at various deciles as a function of average
productivity increases is interesting, but not directly relevant to the issue here.8 For example,
suppose it were found that the wage of the 20th percentile grew less rapidly with aggregate
productivity than did the wage of the 90th percentile. This could be explained by the fact that
wages at the bottom are less responsive to productivity increases than wages at the top.
Alternatively, it might simply reflect that productivity at the bottom grew less than average
productivity and productivity at the top grew more than average productivity, while wage
increases exactly matched the productivity increases of the specific worker or worker-type. To


        7
         See for example Manning (2003) and Bhaskar et al. (2002) for a review of modern monopsony literature.
Matsudaira (2014) explores monopsony power in the low-wage labor market.
        8
            This is what is done in Stansbury and Summers (2017).

                                                        11
disentangle these two explanations, measures of productivity changes by worker skill level are
required.


V. Data


        A number of data sources are used from the OECD, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the
Conference Board and the World Bank. They are described below and summary statistics are
provided in appendix C.


A. OECD
        The Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) harmonizes data
on wages and other relevant variables across its member countries and a few others.9 There are
wage data going back in some cases as far as 1973, but for the majority of countries, the data are
complete back to 1990. Wage and productivity data are available for 33 countries back to 2000.
These data allow both cross-country comparisons at a point in time and also analysis of the
relation of wages to productivity within a country over time. They also permit an examination of
the distribution of wage gains as they relate to average productivity as analyzed in Stansbury and
Summers (2017). Specifically, information on the 10th and 90th percentile as well as median wage
is available for most of the OECD countries.10 The consistency of OECD data across countries
and time periods make the OECD data well suited to doing cross country comparisons. The data
that form the basis of the OECD dataset used in this study come from the countries directly. For


        9
           The OECD Income Distribution database (IDD) has been developed to benchmark and monitor
countries' performance to measure income inequality and poverty. The OECD Employment and Labor Market
Statistics database includes a range of annual labor market statistics and indicators from 1960 broken down by sex
and age as well as information about part-time and short-time workers, job tenure, hours worked, unemployment
duration, trade union, employment protection legislation, minimum wages, labor market programs for OECD
countries and non-member economies. See OECD (2019), "Income Distribution", OECD Social and Welfare
Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00654-en (accessed on 04 February 2019) and OECD (2019),
OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00302-en (accessed on
04 February 2019).
        10
           The OECD data set reports both the minimum wage and the ratio of the minimum-to-median, which
allows the median wage to be calculated.

                                                        12
example, the OECD on the United States is taken from the Department of Labor Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS). This is verified by downloading the BLS data and comparing it with the OECD
numbers on the same series. A number of statistics are examined and the OECD data track the
BLS data perfectly from the late 90s on. Appendix B provides a detailed description of the data
used for each variable and its source in the OECD data.


B. US Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Data on Wages
        Two sets of Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data files are used for wages.11 The first is
the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC), which provides detailed information each
year on approximately 75,000 households associated with the March CPS data. These data
provide information on individuals, specifically their wages, demographic characteristics and the
industries in which they are employed. The data are used primarily to compute average wages for
each of the industries used in the productivity analysis. By merging the BLS ASEC data with the
BLS productivity data described below, it is possible to examine both wages and productivity
over time at the industry level. These data are used for years in which industry-level productivity
data are available.
        The second set of files are taken from CPS outgoing rotation group of the monthly CPS
data. The data, which cover 1989 through 2019, yield approximately 2.9 million observations of
wage-earning workers, but since each individual is represented twice (one year apart), there are
1.45 million individual observations that are covered over the 30 year period.12 These data provide

        11
           The CPS is a monthly U.S. household survey conducted jointly by the U.S. Census Bureau and the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. IPUMS-CPS is an integrated set of data from the Current Population Survey (CPS)
from 1962 forward. IPUMS-CPS is microdata--it provides information about individual persons and households.
To make cross-time comparisons using the CPS data more feasible, variables in IPUMS-CPS are harmonized.
IPUMS-CPS also facilitates the study of long-term change by providing detailed documentation covering
comparability issues for each variable and an interactive data extraction system. IPUMS-CPS consists of all
substantive variables from the original CPS samples. See Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah
Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 8.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis,
MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V8.0
        12
           Every household that enters the CPS is interviewed each month for 4 months, ignored for 8 months,
then interviewed again for 4 more months. New households enter each month, so one fourth the households are in
an outgoing rotation each month. The data in the outgoing rotation groups are distinct from the ASEC data in the
greater number of annual observations, but fewer variables available (for example detailed family questions are not

                                                        13
detailed information on hourly wages, demographics, and education. They are used primarily to
document trends in skill differentials.


C. US Bureau of Labor Statistics Data on Productivity
        An important aspect of the analysis involves comparing the productivity and changes in
the productivity of various educational groups with wages and changes in wages. It is virtually
impossible to measure individual productivity except in some firm-based data where measures of
output are readily available. Even in those cases, information on demographic characteristics is
generally unavailable.13 Consequently, it is useful to compare productivity at the industry level
and to match that with the educational and other demographic characteristics of those industries.
The Division of Industry Productivity Studies (DIPS) in the Office of Productivity and
Technology at the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports annual productivity measures by industry in
"Labor Productivity and Costs by Industry and Measure." Three-digit industries based on the
NAICS classification are used here. Both value added in absolute terms and a productivity index
are contained in the dataset. For the purposes here, absolute value added was used, converted to
2019 dollars using CPI-U. The productivity measure, which is output-per-hour worked, is
obtained by dividing real value added by the DIPS data series on total hours worked.14
        Additionally, the Bureau of Labor Statistics collects data on aggregate productivity and on
aggregate compensation in two separate data sources. The first, on productivity, is called
"Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All Persons [OPHNFB]" and the second is
called "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour [COMPRNFB]." These are


covered in the survey). Weekly earnings are available. See Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah
Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 8.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis,
MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V8.0
        13
          See the growing literature in personnel economics on productivity, the most directly applicable being
Lazear (2000), Fernie and Metcalf (1999), Shearer (2004), Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005), Lazear, Shaw
and Stanton (2015), Bartel, Cardiff-Hicks, and Shaw (2017).
        14
          The source file can be downloaded from https://www.bls.gov/lpc/tables.htm. For more description, see
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Labor Productivity and Cost by Industry and Measure,
https://www.bls.gov/lpc/tables.htm.



                                                       14
annual data and allow an examination of the relation of compensation to productivity over time.
For the purposes here, 1951-2017 observations were used (some of which are based on data
points back to 1947) to augment the industry-based productivity data with compensation
information.


D. The Conference Board
       The Total Economy Database (TED) is a comprehensive database with annual data
covering GDP, population, employment, hours, labor quality, capital services, labor productivity,
and total factor productivity for 123 countries in the world. Data are mostly obtained from
national accounts and are available for 68 countries. Most of the OECD tracked countries are
among the 68 in the Conference Board data. This additional source is used to augment the OECD
analysis that relates wages to productivity across countries.15


E. The World Bank
       Wage data are not available in the Conference Board dataset, but the World Bank
provides net national income per capita for the countries used for the Conference Board
productivity analysis. The correlation between World Bank income numbers and the OECD
average wage numbers is very high for those countries of overlap. Income is expressed in 2010
US dollars. 16


VI. Wages and Aggregate Productivity


A. Across Countries
       The most obvious illustration of the correlation between wages and productivity at the


       15
            The Conference Board
            https://www.conference-board.org/data/economydatabase/index.cfm?id=27762


       16
            https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.ADJ.NNTY>PC>KD


                                                  15
aggregate level comes from cross country comparisons. OECD data on wages and productivity
across countries make immediately apparent that the two are linked. Figure 2, which plots the
2017 average wage against labor productivity (the last year for which data are available), defined
as output in US dollars per hour worked, reveals the close co-movement of wages with
productivity. Countries like Switzerland, Norway, Denmark and Luxembourg all have both high
productivity and high wages. At the other end, countries like Mexico, Chile, Latvia, Poland and
Estonia have low productivity and low wages. The correlation coefficient between log wage and
log productivity in 2017 is .84.
        As discussed in the theory section, the ratio of marginal product to average product in
country is given by



(6)




Under certain technologies, the ratio of marginal product to average product is a constant. If the
ratio were invariant across countries, then assuming that wage equals to marginal product,
rearranging terms and taking logs yields


(7)     ln (Wagei) = ln ë + ln( Average Product of Labor i )


for any country i. This forms the basic specification for table 1. The implied coefficient on the
labor productivity in the regression in (7) is 1, but this requires a number of assumptions that are
likely violated. Still, it is useful to examine this benchmark, albeit extreme, case.
        Table 1, column (1) reports a regression of log annual wage on log annual productivity
(defined as hourly productivity, times 1500) in 2017. The coefficient is 1.52, not 1, as implied by
(7). Across countries, there is actually more than a one-for-one increase in wages with
productivity. The difference from 1 is statistically significant.
        Figure 3 provides a different kind of evidence than that shown in figure 2. Figure 2 relates
the level of wages to the level of productivity across countries. Figure 3 looks very much like

                                                   16
figure 2, but the evidence is different. Figure 3 examines how the growth in productivity affects
the growth in wages. The countries that have highest productivity levels in figure 2 are different
from the countries that have highest productivity and wage changes in figure 3. In figure 2, the
highest wage countries are Denmark, Iceland, Luxembourg, Norway and Switzerland. They are
also, without exception, high productivity countries. The highest wage, highest productivity
countries in Figure 2 were not typically the countries that experienced the most rapid increases in
productivity between 1997 and 2017. The countries with the most rapid gains in both productivity
and wages tended to be those like Poland and Lithuania that moved from command structures to
market economies over the period. When the period began in 1997, countries like Switzerland
already had high productivity and high wages, which reflected past increases in productivity that
propelled prior high wage growth in these already rich countries. Countries that are high
productivity and high wage today are high because they experienced favorable wage growth in the
past, but not necessarily in the recent past.
        Columns (2) and (3) report a ô-differenced version of eq. (7). Annual productivity and
wage data are available for 34 countries for most of the years between 1990 and 2017. Column
(2) reports the results of regressing the change in log wages over the past five years on the change
in log productivity over the past five years both over time and across countries with clustering at
the country level. The coefficient on productivity is .81 in column (2), but not significantly
different from 1, suggesting approximately a one-for-one increase in wages with productivity
within the typical country (of the 34 OECD countries on which data are available) over time. The
constant term should drop out and it is estimated to be zero with precision. Column (3) reports
the same analysis, but does so using changes in log wages and log productivity over a 20 year
period rather than a 5 year period. The coefficient is approximately the same as in the five year
difference version, equaling .77. Once again, the constant term is zero, consistent with (7) where
ln ë is differenced out.
        Columns (4) and (5) repeat the analysis of column (1) in levels, but do so on an annual
basis rather than merely for 2017, clustering standard errors at the level of the country. Column
(4) includes country fixed effects while column (5) excludes them. The levels regression with
fixed effects estimates the productivity effects by examining effect of the (average) within-country


                                                 17
variation over time. This is akin to columns (2) and (3). Column (5), which excludes fixed
effects, uses cross-country variation as well, more comparable in logic to column (1) and the
estimates from the two columns are close in magnitude. In column (5), the coefficient is close to
that in column (1). In column (4), which exploits within-country variation because of the fixed
effects, the coefficient is close to those in columns (2) and (3). Taken together, there is little
doubt of the close positive connection between wages and productivity in the OECD countries,
but more ambiguity about whether a 1% increase in productivity generates a 1% increase in
wages.
         The first five columns of table 1 and figures 2 and 3 summarize countries contained in the
OECD data set. For the most part, these are the developed countries of the world and exclude the
poorest countries. It is possible to use other data to analyze a broader set of countries. The
Conference Board provides data on hourly productivity and the World Bank reports net per capita
income for a similar set of countries. The correlation between the Conference Board productivity
numbers and the OECD numbers for countries and years of overlap is very high, equal to .99 for
productivity and .96 for wages.
         Figure A1 shows a scatter that relates wages to productivity for the larger set of countries
in 2017 and is analogous to figure 1 for the OECD tracked countries. The points are closer to the
line in figure A1 than they are in figure 1. This is a standard result. It is easier to explain large
differences than small ones. Thus, difference in productivity between Cambodia and Denmark
does better at predicting difference in wages between Cambodia and Denmark than does
difference in productivity between Denmark and Norway in predicting difference in wages
between those two Scandinavian countries.
         The statistical analyses in columns (6) and (7) of table 1 confirm both that wages are
closely related to productivity in the broader set of countries and that prediction is better when
large differences are being considered. Column (6) corresponds to column (1). The coefficient of
1.39 is similar to the 1.52 obtained in column (1) on the broader set of countries. There are 29
countries in column (6) that are distinct from those in column (1). Similarly, the within-country
variation captured in column (7) by including country fixed effects also demonstrates that wages
grow with productivity within a country. The coefficient in column (7) is not very different from


                                                   18
that obtained in column (4), which uses a subset of the countries and different measures of both
wages and productivity. Also, note that r-squared values are higher in (6) than in (1), which
attests to the ease of explaining large differences in wages with large differences in productivity
over explaining smaller differences.
        Figures 2 and 3 and table 1 speak only to the average (mean) wage in a country and to
output per worker averaged over all workers in the economy. They do not address how wages
are distributed within the country, which will be discussed later. Although not all share equally in
productivity growth, it will be shown that a general proposition is that most, even the poor, tend
to be better off in countries that have high levels of aggregate productivity and that most, even the
poor, tend to enjoy the best wage gains during periods when productivity is growing most rapidly.
More important, it will be shown that the productivity distribution has spread out and that the
increasing variation in productivity across worker types is consistent with increases differences in
wages between top and bottom wage earners.




B. The United States Over Time
        Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics databases17 are used to create figure 4, which
shows the relation of average hourly wages to productivity over time in the United States only.
Four-year moving averages are used to smooth the data. As is apparent, over the almost seven
decade period, the average wage has risen during periods when productivity has risen and shown
poor growth when productivity growth has been weak. It is also clear that wages have risen by a
slightly smaller amount than productivity over the period, particularly in recent years, as
evidenced by the gap between the two series.
        Table 2 reports the results more formally. Column (1) simply regresses the BLS



        17
            U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All Persons
[OPHNFB], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/OPHNFB,
July 1, 2019 and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour
[COMPRNFB], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis;
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/COMPRNFB, July 1, 2019.



                                                     19
compensation index on the BLS output index for the period shown in figure 4, namely 1951-
2017. Column 2 fits the relationship shown in figure 2 by taking changes in the four year moving
average of compensation and productivity. The coefficient on the change in 4-year moving
average of productivity is .77, almost identical to that in the levels specification of column (1).
During the period since 1990, which stands out in figure 3, a 1% change in productivity was
associated with only a .64% increase in compensation growth. This is shown in column (3) of
table 2, which reports the regression of column (2) but restricts the sample to the period from
1990 on. The coefficient is lower in column (3) than in column (2), but the difference is not
significant.


C. Within-Country Variation in OECD Countries
         Table 3 based on the OECD data addresses the issue of within-country productivity and
wages variation over time and parallels the analysis of the last section for the United States. Log
wage is regressed on log of productivity for each of the 34 countries taken separately, which
parallels the specification in column (1) of table 2. Table 3 estimates eq. (7), but does so over time
within a country.
         In all cases, but one (Portugal) the relation between average wage and productivity over
time is positive and significant at conventional levels. This evidence, comparable to that for the
United States using the BLS data, suggests a strong positive connection between productivity and
average wages over time.18 As labor productivity rises within a country, so too does the average
wage.
         Table 3 is a fully-interacted version of column (4) of table 1. In table 1, countries are
allowed to have different intercepts, but are constrained to have the same relation of wages to
productivity over time. In table 3, each country has not only its own intercept, but also a country-
specific relation of wages to productivity. Unsurprisingly, the typical coefficient on log wages in
table 3 does not seem out of line with that estimated in the constrained form in column (4) of table



         18
           The coefficient for the United States in table 3 using the OECD data is not substantially different from
that obtained directly from the BLS data, the latter using a much longer time period to obtain the estimates (see
column (1) of table 2).

                                                         20
1.
       It is important to acknowledge that the magnitudes of the coefficients in table 3 vary
widely, in many cases being below one and in some cases being above one. Nor does there
appear to be any obvious pattern that would easily explain the size of the coefficients. For
example, Luxembourg and Norway, rich countries, as well as Latvia, Lithuania and Mexico, poor
countries, all have coefficients above one. Wealthy Belgium, Finland, Germany, and Japan have
low coefficients (well below one) as does less wealthy Poland.
       The same analysis was repeated using the Conference Board and World Bank data for
non-OECD countries (not shown). As was the case for countries in OECD data, the pattern was
one of strong, statistically significant relationships between log wages and log productivity within
each country over time. In 26 out of 27 cases, a positive and statistically significant relationship
existed. The sole exception was Venezuela, where productivity has risen while wages have fallen
over time.
       What then do the different coefficients across the various countries reflect? Consider the
theory laid out at the outset. There are two obvious candidates. First is that the nature of
technological change that generates productivity increases differs by country. For example,
country 1 might have enjoyed technological change of the neutral variety (in the A term in eq. (2))
while country 2 might have experienced the retail-grocer style of technological change. In
country 1, the coefficient on wages might be expected to be 1, whereas that in country 2 would be
less than 1, and conceivably even negative if average wages were to fall as in the numerical
example provided in appendix A. The second possibility is that the coefficient varies with country-
specific labor supply elasticities, which could conceivably differ across countries, even if the
nature of technological change were invariant across countries.
       The question is whether one story is more likely than another or whether either is
plausible. Supply elasticities could differ because countries might have different labor force
participation levels. Bringing in marginal workers or additional hours might be tougher when
most are employed. This suggests an interaction effect. Using the specification in column (4) of
table 1, one can add an interaction between the log of productivity and the employment ratio.
The expectation is that the higher is the employment ratio, the more inelastic is labor supply,


                                                  21
which would imply that more of the productivity increase would go into increased wage than into
additional employment.
         When an interaction term,


[employment ratio in year t in country i] x [log of annual productivity in year t in country i] ,


is introduced into column (4) specification of table 1, which is based on the OECD data, the
coefficient on that term in a column is indeed positive and significant.19 Although this evidence is
hardly compelling, it does suggest that supply elasticities vary by country in accordance with
current employment rates. In countries with high employment rates, the marginal supply elasticity
may be lower, which would imply a greater wage gain for a given change in productivity.


VII. Wages and Productivity Variations by Wage Percentile


         The OECD data contain information on the wage levels of the 90th and 10th percentile as
well as the country's level of output-per-worker for some countries dating back to 1973 and as
recent as 2017. Additionally, the median wage can be computed for many countries dating as far
back as 1960. These data can be used to determine how various parts of the wage distribution
respond to increases in aggregate productivity.
         Before proceeding, it is important to point out that although interesting for a number of
purposes, the data that match wage increases at various parts of the wage distribution to
aggregate productivity do not speak to the fundamental question, which is "do wages move with
productivity and can the increased skill differential be a reflection of increased disparity in
productivity among the skill classes?" To address this issue, it is necessary to have information on
the productivity of various parts of the skill distribution, not merely information on aggregate
productivity across countries or over time. That is done in a later section. This section simply



         19
           An alternative specification, that allows the effect of productivity to depend on GDP-per-capita was also
tested. The interaction term ( [GDP-per-capital in year t in country i] x [log of annual productivity in year t in
country i] ) does not enter significantly.

                                                         22
relates the change in wages at various parts of the skill distribution to aggregate productivity
measures.
          It is well known that the spread between the wages of the 10th percentile and that of the
90th percentile has grown over time. In the United States, the OECD data reveal that the ratio of
the 90th percentile annual wage to the median annual wage has risen from about 2.05 in 1985 to
over 2.42 in 2017. At the same time, the ratio of the median worker's wage to that of the 10th
percentile worker's wage has risen also from 2.01 to 2.09. This is shown in figure 5.
        The pattern observed in the US is common across OECD countries. Complete 10th,
median and 90th percentile wage data are available for 17 countries from 1997 to 2015.20 Figure 6
displays the results for the 16 OECD countries that excludes the United States, averaged together.
Figure 7 shows the same ratios for the United States, but over a similar period as used for figure
6. (Figure 5 shows the longer period for the US, which begins 1980.) Both the 90th/50th ratio and
50th/10th ratios have risen over the 1997 to 2015 period for these 16 countries taken together.
Table 4 reports the results on a country-by-country basis, comparing the base year of 1997 and
the final year of 2015. All but two countries have witnessed increases in the 90/50 wage ratio over
time and about half have also seen increases in the 50/10 ratio. The spread in the wage
distribution is not only a US phenomenon, although the magnitudes of the 90/50 and 50/10 ratios
in the US are higher than in other countries.21
        The fact that the wage gap between top and bottom earners has widened over time is
consistent with productivity having an effect on wages for many or all income groups. Increasing
wage or skills gaps can occur despite a positive effect of productivity on wages. This can happen
in two ways. First, the increase in productivity may not benefit the poor as much as it does the
upper middle class. That will be shown below to be untrue. Second, the increase in average
productivity may be insufficient to offset whatever is happening to within-distribution differences
in productivity.
         Table 5 reports the results of examining the relation of wages at the 10th and 90th


        20
         The countries are Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and the United States.
        21
             The highest 90/10 ratio is in Israel at 7.22 in 2015.

                                                            23
percentiles to average productivity using the OECD data. Column (1) estimates the relationship
between the 10th percentile wage and average productivity for the United States only over a 45
year period from 1973 through 2017. It appears that the effect of average productivity on 10th
percentile wage is negative, but this merely captures that fact that the 10th percentile wage has
fallen over time (in real terms) and that average productivity has risen over time. Column 2
provides a more accurate picture. The year effect on the 10th percentile wage is negative, but is
mitigated by the average productivity effect. If the scenario in figure 1 is accurate, then the wage
distribution is spreading out over time, which leads to a decline in wages of the 10th percentile
worker. It remains true, however, that a 1% increase, even in average productivity, is associated
with about a 1% increase in the wage of the 10th percentile worker. As average productivity has
grown over time, wages at the 10th percentile have grown with it approximately one for one.
Between 1973 and 2017, the net effect is negative by about .1 log points. Wages for the 10th
percentile are approximately 10% lower in 2017 than in 1973 in real terms.
        Columns (3) and (4) repeat the analysis for countries in the OECD data set other than the
US, with country fixed effects included and standard errors clustered at the country level. As was
the case for the US, the coefficient that relates average productivity to 10th percentile wages is
large and significant, but smaller than that for the US. A 1% change in average productivity is
associated with about a 2/3% increase in 10th percentile wages. Column 4 suggests that unlike the
US, the year effect is zero. In non-US OECD countries, wages at the lower end have not grown
one-for-one with aggregate productivity although the difference between the US coefficient and
OECD coefficient (columns (2) versus (4)) is not statistically significant.
        Columns (4)-(8) are identical to columns 1-4, except that the dependent variable is the 90th
percentile wage, rather than the 10th percentile wage. As was the case for 10th percentile wages,
90th percentile wages move with average productivity approximately one-for-one in the US when
year effects are included. The net effect over the 1973-2017 period is that wages at the 90th
percentile rise by .22 log points or by about 24%. Columns (7) and (8), which report results for
countries in the OECD data set other than the US also show a positive relation of 90th percentile
wages with average productivity, but once again, the relationship is weaker than it is for the
United States, albeit not statistically so.


                                                 24
       Table 6 repeats the analysis, but relates changes in wages to changes in productivity,
where the variables are five-year moving averages of the annual changes in the relevant variables.
Because the specification is in changes, both year and country-fixed effects are excluded. The
results are qualitatively similar to those in table 5. The coefficients are somewhat different from
those in table 5, but none of the differences is statistically significant. The changes in wages, both
for at the 10th and 90th percentile, move with the change in average productivity, although not
necessarily one-for-one. The non-US countries have coefficients that are significantly below 1.
       Summarizing, as is well-known, wage gaps between high earners and low earners have
increased over time in the US and in other countries. Perhaps more important and less well-
known is that increases in aggregate productivity have mitigated the fall in wages for low wage
workers. Productivity and wages are highly correlated over time and not just for the average
worker, but for workers at both the low and high ends of the earnings distribution. Furthermore,
if anything, the association between wages and aggregate productivity at both extremes of the
wage distribution is stronger in the United States than in the typical other country in the OECD
dataset.
       It is encouraging that changes in aggregate productivity result in higher wages not just for
the median worker, but for those at the low and high ends of the wage distribution. It is
important to note however that the distribution of productivity has not merely displaced over
time. As may be captured in the year effect of table 5 for the US, the trend has been for wages to
spread out. Below results are provided that are consistent with the productivity distribution
having spread out over recent decades.


VIII. Has the Middle Class Vanished?
       Before examining the effect of productivity on various parts of the skill distribution, it is
useful to characterize more specifically what has happened to the wage distribution over time so
that it is clear what changes in productivity need to explain.


A. Relative Wages Over Time
       Figure 5 speaks to this most directly. Uncontroversial is that the 90th percentile has moved


                                                  25
away from the median in the US. Over the last 35 years, the 90/50 ratio has risen from just below
2 to 2.4. Also noteworthy is that during the same period, the 50/10 ratio has risen, but to a lesser
extent. The median worker earns 2.1 times that of the 10th percentile. In the early 80s, that ratio
was below 2.
        A closer look reveals that there was a fall in the 50/10 ratio during the late 90s, that
reversed before 2000, with wages of the median rising relative to those of the bottom 10% while
those at the top rose, for the most part, relative to the median. By 2007, before the recession
began, the ratio of the median wage to that of the 10th percentile wage was about back to its
earlier peak and has remained there since, albeit with the standard oscillations that are found in all
time series.


B. Ratios of Wages Actual Changes
        The clearest description of what has occurred with respect to wages is that the top half of
the distribution has moved away from the bottom and the further from the median, the larger the
movement. The bottom has moved almost together and not much at all. That is most easily seen
in figure 8, which is also based on CPS outgoing rotation group data and plots the ratio of the real
wage in 2017 to the real wage in 1990 for full time workers, by percentile.
        For example, the 70th percentile worker earned 16% more in 2017 than the 70th percentile
worker did in 1990. The 90th percentile worker earned 28% more in 2017 than the 90th percentile
worker did in 1990. The curve that connects the points is convex and relatively flat for the lower
half of the distribution, but steeper for the part above the 60th percentile. The lower part of the
income distribution has moved almost in unison at the same time that the top part of the wage
distribution has moved away from the bottom part. This pattern corresponds quite closely to that
shown in figure 1, which illustrates a hypothetical shift in the productivity distribution. Both
variance and skew have increased as the top of the wage distribution has stretched out while the
bottom has not. The question, addressed next, is whether the productivity distribution has moved
in the same way.




                                                  26
IX. Productivity and Wages By Worker Type
       The analysis up to this point and most that has come in earlier papers examines the effect
of average productivity on average wages or on some parts of the income distribution. The
fundamental question, though, is not whether changes in average productivity affect a high wage
worker's wages more than changes in average productivity affect the wages of a low wage
worker. It is whether changes in a high wage worker's productivity affects a high wage worker's
wages and whether changes in a low wage worker's productivity affect the wages of a low wage
worker. Thus, the key issue is what has happened to the productivity of different groups by skill
and what is the link between changes in productivity and the wages of those groups. If skill is
proxied by education, then have wages of the least educated workers lagged behind those of the
most educated because some market imperfection, monopsony or some other non-competitive
force is causing the discrepancy or simply because those with less education have experienced less
of an increase in productivity than those with more education?
       As already mentioned, it is almost impossible to measure productivity comprehensively at
the individual level. Although occasionally data are available on output by worker (e.g., Lazear
(2000), Lazear, Shaw and Stanton (2015)), those data are rare, piecemeal, narrow and even less
frequently combined with information on worker demographics, specifically education. It is
possible, however, to examine productivity by industry and to compare industries that employ
highly educated workers with those that employ less educated workers. That is the approach
taken here.
       As discussed in the data section, the Bureau of Labor Statistics compiles detailed wage
data by industry and demographic characteristics. Additionally, the Bureau of Labor Statistics
collects and computes productivity (value added, hours worked and productivity per hour
worked) by NAICS industry that can be linked to the wage data. Three-digit level industries are
used here. For most of the analysis, the period from 1989 through 2017 is used. The key variables
are described and summarized in appendix C. The statistics shown are the summaries across
industry-year observations.




                                                27
A. Industry-Based Estimates of Productivity Determinants
        The heart of the analysis is an examination of three-digit industry data to infer productivity
growth by skill level in order to explain wage growth by skill level. Education is used as the
primary measure of skill. Note that there is a positive correlation between changes in industry
productivity and changes in average wage in the industry (.13 and significant for the log values of
the two variables), but this says little. Recall that as long as workers can move across industries,
there is no reason to expect that productivity changes within an industry will be reflected in wages
within that industry. An individual's education level is more stable than the industry in which he or
she works. Once education is completed, changes in educational level are rare, but movement
between jobs in different industries and even occupations is common.22 For that reason, it is
reasonable to assume that different education groups cannot substitute perfectly for one another
meaning that high school graduates, with the exception of current graduating cohorts, do not
readily become college graduates even though a college graduate, even one who has worked for a
decade, can move from the automobile industry to the steel industry. Table E1 in appendix E
shows that when education and other demographics (immutable characteristics) are held
constant, wage is not related to industry productivity.
        The most important finding is summarized in figure 9. Forty 3-digit industries for which
complete productivity, wage and education data are available over the period 1989-2017 are split
into two groups. The top and bottom groups are comprised of industries that rank in the highest
and lowest 50% based on average education level in the industry in 1989. The left two bars
compare productivity growth in logs for high and low education industries. Productivity in the top
education industries grew by over .34 log points between 1989 and 2017. Productivity in the
bottom education industries grew only .20 log points during that same 30 year period. The right
two bars compare wage growth in those same industries. The same pattern holds, but not with
the same force. Wages in highly educated industries grew by .26 log points while those in the low


        22
           During the 1989-2017 period, the probability of changing jobs in any one year was .46. Almost half of
those changes (.26 versus .46) were job changes where the individual also changed three-digit industry. Numbers
calculated by Lisa Simon using Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren.
"Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [1976-2018]." Minneapolis, MN:
IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0

                                                      28
education half grew by .24 log points during the 1989-2017 period. The difference in productivity
between the groups is more pronounced than the difference in wages. This simple comparison
suggests that productivity growth differences between groups is more than sufficient to explain
the better wage growth that more educated workers enjoyed as compared with less educated
workers.
        Table 7 examines this in a more detailed manner. As above, a variable that measures
average education in each industry is calculated by matching the CPS-ASEC data with the BLS
productivity data by industry. This variable is continuous as opposed to the discrete version
shown in figure 9.
        The basic fact that productivity is higher in more highly educated industries is
demonstrated by the regression in column (1). There, the dependent variable, log of industry
output per hour measured in dollars is regressed on the average level of education (in years)
within the industry. The regression is estimated across all industries and all years in which
productivity and education levels are available (1353 observations). The coefficient on education
is positive, significant, and large. The standard deviation of industry average levels of education is
about .92 of a year and the range is from 10.4 to 16.0. The regression implies that a one standard
deviation increase in an industry's average level of education would increase productivity by .27
log points, which implies about a 32% increase in productivity at the mean level of productivity.
        Column (2) does the same analysis, but uses the log of real wage as the dependent
variable. The effect of average industry education on the log wage is large and statistically
significant with a coefficient of 0.17. This is substantially larger than the effect of education on
wages that is obtained in the typical individual-based wage analysis as is shown in table 11 later,
but is still within the range of reasonable, especially given that it likely reflects other factors across
industries that are correlated with the average level of education of workers in that industry.
Perhaps the most important comparison is with the effect of education on productivity, shown in
column (1). The effect on productivity if these are taken to be causal would be about twice that
on wages, so productivity differences as captured in education over-explain wage difference in the
levels analysis.
        Of more interest to the fundamental question address in this section are analyses that deal


                                                   29
with changes over time. The goal is to determine whether the increase in the wage ratio of highly
to less educated workers can be explained by changes in productivity that favored more educated
relative to less educated. Columns (3) and (6) of table 7 address changes in productivity by
education group directly. Column (3) reports that three-digit industries with higher levels of
education in 1989 experienced significantly more productivity growth over the last three decades
than those with lower levels of educational, as is shown by the positive and significant coefficient
(.14 in logs). Column (6) performs the same analysis, but uses the industry's level of education at
the end of the period, rather than the beginning. The conclusion is unchanged. Higher education
industries experienced higher productivity growth during the period.
        Columns (4) and (7) examine an industry's wage change as it relates to education. The
same pattern holds, with higher education industry experience higher wage growth, but the
change in wage is significantly correlated only with industry average education when measured at
the end of the period. Data from the CPS outgoing rotation group, used below, provide more
reliable information on wage changes by educational category.
        Columns (5) and (8) show positive coefficients relating changes in an industry's
employment to education level. In this case, it is only education in the first year that has a
statistically significantly relation with employment growth.23 Some of the declining employment
industries, like apparel and rubber manufacture are unsurprising, but the most rapidly growing
industries include building material and garden equipment, miscellaneous retailers, and food and
drinking places, while computer and electronic product manufacturing saw rapidly declining
employment. Because this is manufacturing, the changes in employment may reflect the off-
shoring of some of these production activities.
        The CPS-ASEC data provide demographic detail on gender, race and age in addition to
education and industry information. It is useful to examine how productivity and changes in
productivity over time relate to demographic characteristics. As with education, the demographic
data are merged with the BLS industry productivity data at the industry level. Table 8 reports the
results from that analysis.


        23
           It is somewhat surprising that the choice of year to measure industry education matters so much since
the correlation between start year and end year education for the 40 industries is .78.

                                                        30
       Including additional demographic variables does not alter the conclusions with respect to
education. As in table 7, industries with high levels of education have both high levels of
productivity and productivity that grew more rapidly over the 1989 through 2017 period. The
more inclusive specification suggests that workers in industries with more educated workers also
have higher wage levels, but not higher wage growth through the period. Industries with higher
proportions of male workers have higher productivity and higher wages, but lower wage growth
during the period.


B. Productivity-Based Wage Growth
       The previous section establishes that wages and productivity have both increased over
time more for educated workers, or more precisely, for workers in industries with higher average
levels of education. In what follows, a productivity-based prediction of wage change variation
across educational groups is compared with actual wage change. The goal is to determine if non-
neutral changes in productivity across educational groups are sufficient to explain the observed
spreading out of the wage distribution over time. Figure 9 already suggests that at least by a
rough cut, differential productivity growth is more than sufficient to account the increased skill
differential. Here, that same issue is examined with greater granularity.
       Estimates from column (6) of table 7 are used to forecast changes in productivity by
educational group. The estimate of the educational effect in column (6) does not differ markedly
from that in column (3) and the education used in column (6) is closest to current day levels.
Furthermore, the r-squared of the column (6) specification exceeds that of column (3), but the
choice is little consequence to the conclusions drawn below.
       Table 9 reports the results. Wages are based on the 153,815 individual level observations
from the CPS outgoing rotation groups for 1989 and 2017. Consider an example. In 1989, the
average weekly wage for those with some high school or who graduated high school (but not
beyond) was $735 in 2019 dollars or the average log wage was 6.40 (columns 4 and 5). In 2017,
similarly schooled individuals earned on average $757 or an average log wage of 6.42. The
difference in log wages for that education group was .02 over the 28 year period (column 6). The
average level of education for that group of individuals was 11.79 years in 2017 (column 3). Then


                                                 31
the regression in column (6) of table 7 predicts that individuals with that level of schooling in
2017 would have experienced a change in log productivity of
               -1.894 +(.161)(11.79),
which equals 0.00 (column 7). Productivity slightly under-predicts the actual change in wage for
this education group because that group actually experienced an increase in log wage of .02 over
the period.
       Next, consider those in the group that had some college or graduated college. The actual
change in log wages for this group of individuals, again taken directly from the outgoing rotation
of the CPS in 1989 and 2017, was .01. Productivity for this group, based on the regression of
change in productivity on education in column (6) of table 7, is predicted to have risen by .46 log
points during that period. Thus, the productivity is estimated to have increased substantially more
for the group of some college or college graduates than the actual change in wages. Estimated
productivity changes more than account for the change in wages experienced by this group over
the 1989 to 2017 period.
       Wages have spread out over time, but productivity has spread out even more. Generally,
the least educated workers have experienced the poorest wage growth from 1989 to 2017. The
change in log real wage for those without any high school was -.04 over the period while those
with graduate education enjoyed gains of .07 in logs. The least educated workers have also
experienced the poorest productivity growth, based on the industry based estimates of
productivity by education level. Furthermore, the differential growth in productivity exceeds the
differential growth in wages. This is most easily seen in the columns 8 and 9 of table 9. Column 8
reports the actual difference between wage growth for a given educational group and wage
growth for one lower educational group. For example, wages for those with some graduate
education grew by .07 log points between 1989 and 2017 (column 6). Wages for those with
some college or college graduates grew by .01 log points during the same period. Thus, the
difference between actual growth rates was .06 log points, shown in column 8, last row.
Productivity for those with some college or college graduates was estimated to have grown by .46
log points while the productivity of those with graduate education was estimated to have grown
by 1.00 log points (column 7). The difference between the two, shown in column 9, last row, is


                                                  32
.55 (rounded). The fact that the numbers in the last column of table 9 are all greater than those in
the second to last column of table 9 implies that the education-predicted productivity distribution
has spread out more than the education-based wage distribution between 1989 and 2017. This
also implies that productivity changes more than account for widening of skill wage premiums
over time.
         The main conclusion of this analysis is that productivity has grown more for the highly
educated and has done so by more than enough to account for growing wage inequality. Wages of
more educated workers have grown relative to wages of less educated workers. But productivity
of more educated workers has grown relative to productivity of less educated workers by even
more. Productivity changes more than account for the increased skill differential that is actually
observed. Also, the correlation between the values in column 6 and those in column 7 is almost
perfect, equal to .94, and statistically significant despite having only four observations.
Productivity changes line up with wage changes by educational category.24 The coefficient from
regressing the change in log real wage (column 6) on the change in log real productivity (column
7) yields a coefficient of .05 with a standard error of .01. A 1% increase in productivity is
associated with a .05% increase in wages across education groups.


C. What Has Caused the Spreading Out of the Productivity Distribution?
         The analysis in the last section implies that productivity has grown more rapidly for the
more educated than for the less educated. Unfortunately, the analysis does not speak to the
reason behind this difference. It is tempting to conclude that this reflects skilled-biased
technological change, where the nature of technology is such that education and technology are
complements. It is certainly possible that technology has affected the productivity of the highly
educated by more than the less educated, but that is not the only possibility.
         Trade is another. Changes in value added can be affected by changes in quantities or by
changes in prices. If prices fall more rapidly in one industry than in another, then even absent
technological change, value added will not rise uniformly across industries. Increased


         24
           This result is consistent with that found in table 6 of Lee and Wolpin (2010), which suggests that skill-
biased technological change can account for more than 100% of the differential changes in wages.

                                                         33
globalization during the 1989-2017 period, manifested in increased trade flows across countries,
particularly between developed and developing countries, have surely changed prices in a non-
uniform manner. If goods manufactured by less educated workers have seen a more pronounced
declines in prices than have services produced by more educated workers as a consequence of
increased trade, then productivity valued at the new lower prices will rise by less for the less
educated than for the more educated.
       A third possibility relates specifically to human capital. Suppose that educational
establishments have improved in their ability to create human capital more at the college level than
they have at the high school level. Because of improvements in college education, those who
have completed college more recently will have acquired more human capital than those who
completed college at an earlier time. This shows up as productivity growth for industries with
college educated workers. During the same period, human capital production in high school may
not have increased as rapidly or may have even decreased, meaning that those who completed
only high school more recently will not have acquired more human capital than those who
completed high school at an earlier time. This shows up as low productivity growth in industries
with less educated workers.
       Any of the three explanations are consistent with the results found throughout. The fact
that other OECD countries experienced some of the same patterns in productivity and wages as
found in the US suggests that the more country-specific institutional explanations are less likely.
This also argues against changing quality of education at the college and high school level.


D. Wage Analysis Using Individual Worker Data
       Although the purpose here is not to provide an in-depth analysis of wage changes over
time, the wage results above are derived from industry averages. The logic was to make them
comparable to the productivity estimates, which necessarily are based on industry averages. Of
course, there are extensive studies of wages and trends over time that use data better suited to
studying wages than the aggregated industry averages. Those data are based on individuals,
where the worker is the unit of analysis. As a check on the results above, the CPS outgoing
rotation data are examined in this section.


                                                  34
         Table 10 shows that the return to education has increased over the period between 1989
and 2017. Compare the coefficient in column (1) to column (3). The estimated effect on the log
of real wage (in 2019 dollars) is .102 in 1989 and .121 in column (3). The increase over time in
the effect of about 20% is statistically significant. Columns (2) and (4) estimate the effects for full
time workers only, defined as those who usually work more than 34 hours per week. The
education effects are smaller, but again, the increase over time is substantial (22%) and
statistically significant.25 Over the same period, the effects of age and gender have declined
significantly.
         Individual level data are useful for the wage analysis, but because there is no comparable
data on individual productivity, the industry level comparisons are most informative for the
purposes of determining whether productivity differences are sufficient to explain wage
differences. The conclusion in the last section was that productivity more than explains the rise in
wages for highly educated workers relative to less educated ones. The individual level data on
wages do not contradict that finding. For example, table 9, column 9 reports that productivity for
those with some college or college graduates' productivity rose by .45 log points more than the
productivity gains of those with some high school or high school graduates. The difference in
average education level of those two groups is 14.68-11.65 or 3.03 years in 1989 and 14.6-11.79
or 2.8 years in 2017. The estimate of the education effect in column (1) of table 10 implies that
wages of the more educated group would have been .102 (3.03) = .31 log points higher than
those of the less educated group in 1989. Analogously, using the estimated effect in column (3)
implies that the wages of the more educated group would have been .121 (2.8) = .34 log points
higher than those of the less educated group in 2017. The difference in log wages of the two
groups are predicted to have increased by .03 log points over the period, based on the individual
level wage regressions in table 10. This is much less than the .45 log point difference in estimated
productivity growth that is shown in table 9, column 9. Again, productivity growth differences
more than explain wage differences even when wage differences are estimated using individual

         25
           The 1989-2017 period was one that might have experienced inordinate technological change benefitting
those most educated workers. There is no evidence for this in the individual level data. The difference in education
coefficients across years is about the same even when the sample is restricted to those with college degrees or more.



                                                         35
level data. It is important to note that this particular example is the most relevant one because in
2017, 83% of the population was in one of the two educational groups (some high school or high
school graduate and some college or college graduate) considered in this example.


E. Capital
        Capital has been ignored throughout this investigation. There are a number of reasons,
among them and most important is that the statistics at the country and industry level are
generally for labor productivity rather than total factor productivity. Second, in the context here,
capital is an endogenous choice variable. Third, there is no attempt to estimate a production
function, but rather merely to describe what has happened to labor productivity over time and to
relate it to the wages of labor.
        Still, there is information on capital expenditures by industry in the BLS dataset. When the
regressions of changes in productivity on education in table 7 are augmented with either a capital
expenditure variable at a point in time or with the change in capital expenditures for that industry
over the 1989 to 2017 period, neither enters significantly. The education coefficient is essentially
unaltered and retains its same level of statistical significance. Capital expenditures are associated
with the level of labor productivity (positively and significantly), but they do not speak to the
issue that is at the heart of this analysis, namely whether productivity changes over time are
consistent with the wage changes over time by skill category. The results are shown in appendix
D, table D1.


X. Co-Movement of Employment and Wages


        The theory and evidence presented is consistent with a causal link that runs from
productivity to wages. When productivity rises as a result of technological change, the demand
for labor increases and for any supply curve other than one that is perfectly elastic, some of that
increase in demand is reflected in higher wages. The patterns observed in figures 2 - 4 are
certainly consistent with the view that technological improvements generate increased labor
demand and higher wages, but neither the cross country comparisons nor time series evidence


                                                  36
provides clean evidence of causation running from productivity to wages. To determine causation,
one strategy is to try to find changes in the hypothesized driving variable (in this case,
productivity) that are clearly exogenous. That is not easy in this context, given the aggregate
nature of the data.
       An alternative approach is to consider confounding explanations and rule them out on the
basis of other observable implications of those mechanisms that are refuted by data. That is the
approach taken here. In this case, the alternatives is that an exogenous increases in wages causes
an increase in productivity as well. At first blush, it seems implausible that increasing wages
exogenously would force an increase in productivity, but it is a possibility. Suppose that unions,
legislation or some other factor exogenously raised wages. Firms would respond by moving up
the labor demand curve, using less labor. Additionally, they would opt for a higher average quality
of labor as workers whose productivity fell short of the higher wage were terminated or not hired.
Both responses would result in higher average productivity because the reduction in labor usage
would occur to the point where the marginal product of labor equaled the new, higher wage.
Inframarginal workers would have higher average productivity because the lowest productivity
workers and hours would be cut.
       This implication is testable. With the typical upward sloping supply curve, an increase in
demand for labor causes wage and quantity of labor used to move together. When wages are
raised exogenously or when there is a decrease in the supply of labor, wages and the quantity of
labor move in opposite directions. Evidence on this can be provided both across countries and
over time within countries.
       Figure 10 uses the OECD country observations in 2017 and plots the employment-to-
population ratio (defined as the number of people working divided by the number of people in the
working age population expressed as a percentage) against the log of the country's average wage.
The relation is positive, as is evidenced in column (1) - column (4) of table 11. The first two
columns replicate statistically what is shown in figure 9. Column (1) uses a specification of wages
in levels while column (2) uses the log of wages as the independent variable. Column (2)
corresponds directly to figure 4 because it is the log of country average wage in 2017 that appears
on the horizontal axis. Column (3) uses the entire panel, including all years of data across all


                                                  37
countries, which yields 642 observations. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. The
estimated coefficient in column (3) based on the full panel is quite close to that obtained in column
(2) where only 2017 data are used. Column (4) includes country fixed effects. Perhaps somewhat
surprisingly, the coefficient on log of wages doubles, suggesting that the within-country relation
of employment rate to wages is stronger over time within the typical country than it is across
countries. For the majority of countries, the time period covered is from the late 1990s to 2017.
During this period, the typical country for which data are reported experienced a rise in both the
employment rate (from 64% to 69%) and in the average wage (from about $33,000 to about
$40,000). The fact that employment rates and wages are positively correlated within a country
over time implies that those periods with the most rapid growth in wages also experienced the
most rapid growth in employment. 26 Both the cross-country and within-country time series
patterns imply that wages and employment move together. There is no obvious argument to be
made for wages driving productivity. It does not appear that higher wages induce movements up
the demand curve. If anything, the data support the opposite conclusion. When wages rise,
employment rises, which is consistent with productivity-induced demand increases rather than a
movement up the demand curve in response to decreased supply or institutionally mandated wage
increases.


XI. Conclusion
        There is compelling evidence that productivity and wages are linked. The pattern is clear
in cross-country comparisons and for virtually all individual countries over time. Furthermore, all
parts of the income distribution seem to benefit from increases in aggregate productivity. The
mean wage rises as does the wage of the lowest wage earners and highest wage earners when
productivity increases.
        It is also true that wages have spread out over time in most OECD countries where data
are available. The ratio of wages of the 90th percentile worker to the median worker has risen in


        26
            Note that the employment rate as calculated by the OECD is higher than that from the BLS method
because the definitions of working age population and employment are not identical. Most important, the OECD
does not include the elderly (65+) in the definition of working age population and the BLS does. Going in the other
direction, the BLS defines workers as being 16 and older, while the OECD defines workers as 15 and older.

                                                        38
15 out of 17 countries between 1997 and 2015. In the United States, this is apparent not only in
percentiles, but in returns to education. The education coefficient in log wage regressions is
significantly higher in 2017 than it is in 1989.
        The commonality of the pattern across countries suggests that global rather than
institutional factors are at work. The most obvious candidate is the often discussed biased nature
of technological change that has benefitted disproportionately highly skilled workers.
        It is difficult to observe productivity at the individual level, but industry data on
productivity can be linked with demographic and data on education. This permits an examination
of changes in productivity industries that are dominated by highly educated workers versus those
dominated by less educated ones. By doing this, it is possible to determine whether the
productivity distribution has spread out over time consistent with the changing wage distribution.
        The main conclusion is that changes in productivity at different educational levels are more
than sufficient to account for changes in the wage distribution. The college-high school premium
in wages has increased by much less than the college-high school premium in productivity has
increased over the past almost-three decades. These changes are consistent with a number of
possible causes, which include skill-biased technological change, trade patterns that have altered
prices in a non-neutral fashion, and changes in human capital production technologies that favor
tertiary over primary and secondary education. The analysis cannot address the specific cause,
nor does the fact that non-neutral productivity growth can account for growing skill differences
lessen the problem.




                                                   39
                                              References

Autor, D. H., and Dorn, D. (2013). "The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of
  the US labor market." American Economic Review, 103(5):1553­97.

Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. (2003). "The skill content of recent technological
  change: An empirical exploration." The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(4):1279­1333.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I., and Rasul, I. (2005). "Social preferences and the response to incentives:
  Evidence from personnel data." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):917­962.
Bartel, A. P., Cardiff-Hicks, B., and Shaw, K. (2017). "Incentives for lawyers: Moving away from
  `eat what you kill'". ILR Review, 70(2):336­358.
Benzell, S. G. and Brynjolfsson, E. (2019). "Digital abundance and scarce genius: Implications for
  wages, interest rates, and growth." Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berman, E., Bound, J., and Machin, S. (1998). "Implications of skill-biased technological change:
  international evidence." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4):1245­1279.
Bhaskar, V., Manning, A., and To, T. (2002). "Oligopsony and monopsonistic competition in labor
  markets." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(2):155­174.
Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. (2007). "Measuring and explaining management practices across firms
  and countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1351­1408.
Card, D. and DiNardo, J. E. (2002). "Skill-biased technological change and rising wage inequality:
  Some problems and puzzles." Journal of labor economics, 20(4):733­783.
Domar, E. D. (1946). "Capital expansion, rate of growth, and employment." Econometrica,
  Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 137­147.

Domar, E. D. (1947). "Expansion and employment." The American Economic Review,
 37(1):34­55.

Dunne, T., Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., and Troske, K. R. (2004). "Wage and productivity
 dispersion in United States manufacturing: The role of computer investment." Journal of Labor
 Economics, 22(2):397­ 429.

Eissa, N. and Hoynes, H. W. (2004). "Taxes and the labor market participation of married couples:
  the earned income tax credit." Journal of public Economics, 88(9-10):1931­1958.
Eissa, N. and Liebman, J. B. (1996). "Labor supply response to the earned income tax credit." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):605­637.
Faggio, G., Salvanes, K. G., and Van Reenen, J. (2010). "The evolution of inequality in productivity
  and wages: panel data evidence." Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(6):1919­1951.


                                                   40
Fernie, S. and Metcalf, D. (1999). "It's not what you pay it's the way that you pay it and that's what gets
  results: Jockeys' pay and performance." Labour, 13(2):385­411.
Harrod, R. F. (1939). "An essay in dynamic theory." The economic journal, 49(193):14­33.
Haskel, J. E. and Slaughter, M. J. (2002). "Does the sector bias of skill-biased technical change
  explain changing skill premia?" European Economic Review, 46(10):1757­1783.
Hellerstein, J. K., Neumark, D., and Troske, K. R. (1999). "Wages, productivity, and worker
  characteristics: Evidence from plant-level production functions and wage equations." Journal of labor
  economics, 17(3):409­446.
Hornbeck, R. and Moretti, E. (2018). "Who benefits from productivity growth? direct and indirect
  effects of local TFP growth on wages, rents, and inequality." Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Karabarbounis, L. and Neiman, B. (2013). "The global decline of the labor share." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(1):61­103.
Katz, L. F. and Murphy, K. M. (1992). "Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: supply and demand
  factors." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1):35­78.
Lazear, E. P. (2000). "Performance pay and productivity." American Economic Review,
  90(5):1346­1361.

Lazear, E. P., Shaw, K. L., and Stanton, C. T. (2015). "The value of bosses." Journal of Labor
  Economics, 33(4):823­861.

Lee, Donghoon and Kenneth I. Wolpin. "Intersectoral Labor Mobility and the Growth of the
      Service Sector," Econometrica, 74, 1 (Jan 2006), 1-46.

Lee, Donghoon and Kenneth I. Wolpin. "Accounting for wage and employment changes in the
      US 1968-2000: A dynamic model of labor market equilibrium." Journal of
      Econometrics, 156, (2010) 68-85.

Manning, A. (2003). Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets. Princeton
     University Press.
Matsudaira, J. D. (2014). "Monopsony in the low-wage labor market? Evidence from minimum nurse
 staffing regulations." Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1):92­102.
Meyer, B. D. and Rosenbaum, D. T. (2001). "Welfare, the earned income tax credit, and the labor
 supply of single mothers." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3):1063­1114.

OECD. (2019). "Average annual wages", OECD Employment and Labour Market
 Statistics (database),https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00571-en (accessed on 04 February 2019).


                                                    41
OECD. (2019). "Earnings: Gross earnings: decile ratios", OECD Employment and Labour
 Market Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00302-en (accessed on 04
 February 2019).

OECD. (2019). "Earnings: Minimum wages relative to median wages", OECD Employment
 and Labour Market Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00313-en (accessed
 on 04 February 2019).

OECD. (2019). "Earnings: Real minimum wages", OECD Employment and Labour Market
 Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00656-en (accessed on 04 February 2019).

OECD. (2019). "Employment rate", OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics
 (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/1de68a9b-en (Accessed on 04 February 2019)

OECD. (2019). "GDP per hour worked", OECD Compendium of Productivity Indicators.
 https://doi.org/10.1787/1439e590-en (Accessed on 04 February 2019).

OECD. (2019). "Hours Worked: Average annual hours actually worked", OECD Employment
 and Labour Market Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00303-en (accessed
 on 04 February 2019).

Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
  Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis,
  MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0
Shearer, B. (2004). "Piece rates, fixed wages and incentives: Evidence from a field experiment." The
  Review of Economic Studies, 71(2):513­534.

Solow, R. M. (1956). "A contribution to the theory of economic growth." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 70(1):65­94.

Stansbury, A. M. and Summers, L. H. (2017). "Productivity and pay: Is the link broken?" Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2018). Major Sector Productivity and Costs [Data file].
  Retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/lpc/data.htm

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour
  [COMPRNFB], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis;
  https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/COMPRNFB, July 1, 2019.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All
  Persons [OPHNFB], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis;
  https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/OPHNFB, July 1, 2019.


                                                 42
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2011). "Wages equal productivity. Fact or fiction? Evidence from Sub-
  Saharan Africa." World Development, 39(8):1333­1346.




                                               43
                                                                     Table 1
                                                    Regression Results Wages and Productivity
                                                 OECD Data and Conference Board / World Bank Data
                                       (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)               (7)
                                 Log of Annual      Change in      Change in    Log of Annual      Log of       Log of Annual    Log of Annual
                                 Wage in 2017         Log of        Log of      Wage in year t     Annual       Wage in year t        Wage
                                   (in 2017          Annual         Annual      (in 2017 USD)     Wage in       (in 2018 USD)        in year
                                     USD)           Wage t-5 to    Wage t-20                      year t (in                             t
                                                        t             to t                       2017 USD)                       (in 2018 USD)

Log Annual Productivity in
2017                               1.517***
(Output-per-hour times 1500;         (.169)
OECD)

Change in Log of Annual
                                                      .806***
Productivity between t-5 and t
                                                       (.139)
(OECD)

Change in Log of Annual
                                                                    .765***
Productivity between t-20 and
                                                                     (.183)
t (OECD)

Log Annual Productivity in
year t                                                                            0.819***          1.475***
(Output-per-hour times 1500;                                                      (0.0768)           (0.121)
OECD)

Log Annual Productivity in
                                                                                                                  1.391***         1.017***
year t (Output-per-hour times
                                                                                                                  (0.0462)         (0.0401)
1500; The Conference Board)

Constant                          -6.654***           0.000           .016          1.234           -6.065***     -5.467***        -1.426***
                                    (1.909)           (.010)         (.053)        (0.855)            (1.365)       (0.499)          (0.420)

R-squared                            .715              .377          .534           .991              .728          0.941           0.986

                                                                        44
 N                                 34             699            196              869             869             59            2,391

 Sample                          2017          1990-2017      1990-2017       1990-2017        1990-2017         2017        1970-2018

 Notes:                            One        Clustered at   Clustered at     Clustered at     Clustered at       One        Clustered at
                               observation      country      country level   country level;   country level   observation   country level;
                               per country       level                       country fixed                    per country   country fixed
                                                                                effects                                        effects
                                                                               included                                       included

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses.
Source: The wage data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database. The OECD productivity data are from the OECD
Compendium of Productivity Indicators. The Conference Board productivity data are from the Total Economy Database.




                                                                    45
                                        Table 2
        Regression Results Real Compensation and Productivity in the US 1951-2017
                             Bureau Of Labor Statistics Data
                                         (1)                (2)                (3)
           VARIABLES                Compensation      Change in Four     Change in Four
                                     Index BLS         Year Moving        Year Moving
                                                     Average of Non-      Average Non-
                                                           Farm              Farm of
                                                       Compensation       Compensation
                                                        Index BLS          Index BLS

   Non-Farm Output Index BLS                 0.760***
                                             (0.0213)

   Change in Four Year Moving                                      0.767***               0.637***
   Average of Non-Farm Output                                       (0.116)                (0.141)
           Index BLS

               Constant                      30.00***              -0.00124               -0.00304
                                              (1.374)              (0.00269)              (0.00307)

                Years                        1951-2017            1951-2017              1990-2017
             Observations                       67                   67                     28
              R-squared                        0.952                0.400                  0.441
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses.
Source: The output index is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output
Per Hour of All Persons," and retrieved from FRED (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/OPHNFB). The
compensation index is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation
Per Hour," and retrieved from FRED (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/COMPRNFB).




                                                    46
                                      Table 3
   Summary of Regression Results of Log Wages on Log Productivity Within Country
                              OECD Data 1990-2010
Country              Coefficient on          Number of           R-squared
                     Log Productivity        Observations
Australia            .788***                 28                  .965
                     (.030)
Austria              .544***                 23                  .973
                     (.020)
Belgium              .552***                 28                  .919
                     (.032)
Canada               1.128***                28                  .920
                     (.065)
Chile                .784***                 17                  .765
                     (.112)
Czech Republic       1.039***                23                  .985
                     (.028)
Denmark              .949***                 28                  .900
                     (.062)
Estonia              1.243***                18                  .962
                     (.062)
Finland              .693***                 28                  .901
                     (.045)
France               .865***                 28                  .937
                     (.044)
Germany              .492***                 27                  .868
                     (.038)
Greece               1.127***                23                  .748
                     (.143)
Hungary              .701***                 23                  .828
                     (.070)
Iceland              .638***                 28                  .686
                     (.085)


                                        47
Country           Coefficient on          Number of      R-squared
                  Log Productivity        Observations
Ireland           .580***                 28             .806
                  (.056)
Israel            .273**                  23             .258
                  (.101)
Italy             .219***                 28             .250
                  (.075)
Japan             .052**                  28             .224
                  (.019)
Latvia            1.229***                18             .893
                  (.106)
Lithuania         1.310***                23             .963
                  (.056)
Luxembourg        1.307***                28             .807
                  (.125)
Mexico            1.735***                27             .653
                  (.253)
Netherlands       .508***                 28             .808
                  (.049)
New Zealand       1.15***                 28             .946
                  (.054)
Norway            1.412***                28             .741
                  (.164)
Poland            .522***                 23             .927
                  (.032)
Portugal          .140                    23             .097
                  (.093)
Slovak Republic   .766***                 23             .976
                  (.026)
Slovenia          .815***                 23             .977
                  (.027)


                                     48
 Country                    Coefficient on              Number of                  R-squared
                            Log Productivity            Observations
 Spain                      .470***                     28                         .685
                            (.063)
 Sweden                     .941***                     28                         .954
                            (.040)
 Switzerland                .811***                     28                         .961
                            (.032)
 United Kingdom             .983***                     28                         .959
                            (.040)
 United States              .709***                     28                         .976
                            (.022)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses.
Source: The wage data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database. The productivity
data are from the OECD Compendium of Productivity Indicators.




                                                   49
                                        Table 4
          Changes in 90/50 and 50/10 Wage Ratios Over Time and Across Countries
 Country             90/50 in 90/50 in Difference 50/10 in 50/10 in Difference
                      2015        1997                  2015      1997
 Australia             1.95       1.81      0.13         1.68      1.62        0.06
 Canada                 1.9       1.76      0.14         1.94        2        -0.05
 Czech Republic        1.84       1.71      0.13         1.93      1.79        0.13
 Finland               1.77       1.69      0.08         1.44       1.4        0.03
 Germany                1.9       1.75      0.15         1.84      1.66        0.18
 Hungary               2.26       2.16      0.09         1.63      1.92       -0.28
 Ireland               1.95       2.56       -0.6        2.03      1.53         0.5
 Italy                 1.47       1.57       -0.1         1.5       1.5          0
 Japan                 1.85       1.84        0          1.58      1.62       -0.03
 Korea                 2.38       1.92      0.46         1.92      1.93       -0.01
 New Zealand           1.88        1.7      0.18         1.57      1.58       -0.01
 Norway                1.51        1.4      0.11         1.68      1.38        0.29
 Poland                2.07       1.92      0.15         1.88      1.79        0.09
 Sweden                1.67        1.6      0.06         1.75      1.37        0.37
 Switzerland           1.78       1.67      0.11          1.5      1.52       -0.01
 United Kingdom        1.96       1.89      0.07         1.78      1.85       -0.07
 United States          2.4        2.2      0.19          2.1      2.09          0
Source: The data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database.




                                                  50
                                                                             Table 5
                                                    Relation of Wages to Productivity: 10th and 90th percentiles
                            (1)           (2)                (3)                    (4)                (5)          (6)              (7)                  (8)
VARIABLES                 log 10th      log 10th            th
                                                      log 10 percentile            th
                                                                             log 10 percentile       log 90th     log 90th         th
                                                                                                                              log 90 percentile          th
                                                                                                                                                   log 90 percentile
                         percentile    percentile           wage                   wage             percentile   percentile         wage                 wage
                           wage          wage                                                         wage         wage

     Log Annual         -0.0983***     1.154***           0.691***               0.753***           0.390***     1.023***        0.796***              0.778***
 Productivity in 2017    (0.0353)       (0.248)            (0.0977)               (0.120)           (0.0220)      (0.170)         (0.160)               (0.220)
        USD
 / Log (Output-per-
  hour times 1500)

         year                         -0.0208***                                 -0.00157                        -0.0105***                            -4.45e-06
                                       (0.00409)                                 (0.00245)                        (0.00280)                            (0.00507)

      Constant           11.04***      38.36***             1.788                  4.251            7.035***     20.86***          1.884                 1.184
                          (0.398)       (5.338)            (1.070)                (4.232)           (0.248)       (3.689)         (1.756)               (8.622)

    Observations            45            45                 349                    349                45            45             349                   349
     R-squared             0.153         0.475              0.991                  0.991              0.879        0.910           0.989                 0.989

        Notes              United       United            All non-US        All non-US countries      United       United        All non-US       All non-US countries
                           States       States        countries ­ country       ­ country fixed       States       States        countries ­          ­ country fixed
                                                          fixed effects        effects included,                                country fixed        effects included,
                         1973-2017    1973-2017                                                     1973-2017    1973-2017
                                                      included, clustered    clustered at country                             effects included,    clustered at country
                                                        at country level             level                                       clustered at              level
                                                                                                                                country level
                                                      Unbalanced panel       Unbalanced panel                                                      Unbalanced panel
                                                                                                                              Unbalanced panel

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses.
Source: The decile wage data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database. The productivity data are from the OECD Compendium of Productivity
Indicators.



                                                                                   51
                                              Table 6
              Relation of Wages to Productivity for 10th and 90th Percentiles (Changes)
                                  (1)                      (2)                  (3)                  (4)
  VARIABLES               Annual change in         Annual change in      Annual change       Annual change in
                          log 10th percentile      log 10th percentile      in log 90th      log 90th percentile
                                wage                     wage            percentile wage           wage

                           5 yr moving avg         5 yr moving avg         5 yr moving        5 yr moving avg
                                                                               avg

  Annual change in             0.704**              0.615*** (0.127)           0.919***           0.824***
  log productivity              (0.349)                                       (0.222)             (0.124)

   5 yr moving avg

       Constant               -0.0135**               -0.000117             -0.00901**           -0.00183
                              (0.00585)               (0.00274)              (0.00403)           (0.00207)

     Observations                40                       204                    40                 204
      R-squared                 0.150                    0.177                 0.335               0.333

         Notes          United States using      All countries           United States       All countries
                        data from 1973-          excluding the           using data from     excluding the
                        2017;                    United States           1973-2017           United States

                        clustered at year        Unbalanced Panel                            Unbalanced
                                                                                             Panel
                                                 clustered at
                                                 country-year                                clustered at
                                                                                             country-year
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses.
Source: The decile wage data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database. The productivity
data are from the OECD Compendium of Productivity Indicators.




                                                       52
                                                                    Table 7
                                        Productivity, Wages and Employment United States 3-Digit Industry

                           (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)
 VARIABLES            Log              Log Real     Change in        Change in Log      Change in Log      Change in Log      Change in Log      Change in Log
                      Productivity     Wage in      Log              Real Wage          Employment         Productivity       Real Wage          Employment
                      in 2017          2017         Productivity     (1989-2017)        (1989-2017)        (1989-2017)        (1989-2017)        (1989-2017)
                                                    (1989-2017)
 industry average         0.301**      0.173***
 education current       (0.113)       (0.0321)
 year

 industry average                                     0.141**            0.0155            0.316**
 education in                                         (0.0626)          (0.0400)           (0.127)
 1989

 industry average                                                                                             0.161***           0.0729**         0.111 (0.122)
 education in                                                                                                 (0.0541)           (0.0341)
 2017

 Constant                 0.964        8.417***        -1.461*           0.0574            -4.096**           -1.894**            -0.734              -1.715
                         (1.430)        (0.427)        (0.770)           (0.491)            (1.556)            (0.730)           (0.460)             (1.642)

 Observations             1353           3,036            40                40                40                 40                 40                  40
 R-squared                0.127          0.274          0.118             0.004             0.141              0.189              0.107               0.021
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at industry level in column (1). Unit of analysis is a 3-digit industry. There is
one observation per industry that measures the difference during period, 1989-2017, using merged data from the following two BLS sources: (1) The wage, education,
and employment data are from the CPS-ASEC (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0) (2) The productivity data are from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Major Sector Productivity and Costs data file (https://www.bls.gov/lpc/data.htm).




                                                                                 53
                                                    Table 8
                              Productivity, Wages and Demographic Characteristics
                                                    (1)                  (2)                (3)               (4)
   VARIABLES                                        Log               Change in          Log Wage          Change in
                                                Productivity             Log                               Log Wage
                                                                     Productivity                           (1989-
                                                                     (1989-2017)                             2017)

   industry average education                      0.289**             0.143**            0.200***           0.0174
                                                   (0.116)             (0.0553)           (0.0277)          (0.0215)

   industry average age                            0.0228              0.00337           0.0298***         -0.00133
                                                  (0.0297)             (0.0138)          (0.00624)         (0.00665)

   industry proportion male                        1.125**               0.240            1.092***         -0.333***
                                                   (0.479)              (0.272)            (0.119)          (0.108)

   industry proportion white                        1.599               -1.282*            -0.410            0.522*
                                                   (1.596)              (0.722)            (0.322)           (0.302)

   year                                           -0.00220                              -0.00515***
                                                  (0.0113)                               (0.00148)

   Constant                                         2.596               -0.916            16.89***            -0.145
                                                   (21.60)              (1.022)            (2.789)           (0.423)

   Observations                                     1,353                 40                3,036               70
   R-squared                                        0.266                0.257              0.703             0.168
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, clustered at the industry level, are in parentheses. All variables
in levels regressions are measured in the current year. 2017 values are used for the independent variables in the change
regressions. Unit of analysis is a 3-digit industry. There is one observation per industry that measures the difference
during period, 1989-2017, using merged data from the two following BLS sources. (1) The wage, education, and
demographic data are from the CPS-ASEC (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert
Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN:
IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0) (2) The productivity data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Major Sector Productivity and Costs data file (https://www.bls.gov/lpc/data.htm).




                                                            54
                                                                             Table 9
                                               Actual and Productivity Predicted Changes in Log Wages, 1989-2017
   1                     2                        3             4             5           6             7                            8                         9

year       education group                   education in    mean real     mean log       change in    change in log       difference in           difference in change in
                                             years           wage          real           mean log     real product-       change in mean log      mean log real
                                             (average                      wage           real wage    ivity 1989-         real wage from one      productivity from one
                                             within                                       1989-        2017                lower group             lower group
                                             category)                                    2017
1989       Less than high school             6.48            615.26        6.25
1989       Some high school or hs grad       11.65           735.24        6.40
1989       Some college or college           14.68           1032.01       6.74
           grad
1989       Graduate education                18.00           1500.35       7.15
2017       Less than high school             5.40            572.88        6.21           -0.04        -1.02
2017       Some high school or hs grad       11.79           756.73        6.42           0.02         0.00                0.06                    1.03
2017       Some college or college           14.60           1069.74       6.75           0.01         0.46                -0.01                   0.45
           grad
2017       Graduate education                18.00           1605.51       7.22           0.07         1.00                0.06                    0.55
Source: Actual change in wages are from Bureau of Labor Statistics CPS outgoing rotation group data (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert
Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0). Change
in log productivity is estimated using Bureau of Labor Statistics productivity data matched with Bureau of Labor Statistics ASEC data to obtain estimated productivity change
by education level.




                                                                                     55
                                                    Table 10
                                   Wage Analysis: Individual Level Observations
                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                    (4)
      VARIABLES                 Log Wage           Log Wage           Log Wage               Log Wage
                               (2019 USD)        (2019 USD)          (2019 USD)             (2019 USD)

      education (years)          0.102***            0.0888***            0.121***            0.108***
                                (0.000954)           (0.000814)          (0.000789)          (0.000676)

      age                       0.0111***           0.00961***           0.00872***          0.00816***
                                (0.000207)          (0.000192)           (0.000149)          (0.000137)

      male                      0.467***             0.359***             0.347***            0.261***
                                (0.00512)            (0.00442)            (0.00408)           (0.00352)

      Constant                   3.849***             4.275***            4.412***            4.796***
                                 (0.0155)             (0.0139)            (0.0132)            (0.0118)

      Year                         1989                1989                 2017                2017
      Subgroup                 All Workers           Full Time          All Workers           Full Time
      Observations               53,139               45,013              100,676              86,018
      R-squared                   0.295               0.311                0.245                0.274
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses. Full time is defined in accordance with the BLS'
definition ( https://www.bls.gov/cps/definitions.htm#fullparttime ).

Source: CPS outgoing rotation group data (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren.
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0 ).




                                                          56
                                                 Table 11
                                  Employment-to-Population Ratio and Wages
                              (1)                  (2)                     (3)                        (4)
  VARIABLES            Percent Employed    Percent Employed        Percent Employed           Percent Employed

  wage                    0.000165***
                           (4.36e-05)

  log of wage                                      5.061***                6.666***               13.76***
                                                    (1.579)                 (1.155)                (2.408)

  Constant                  63.34***                 17.20                   -2.220               -75.70***
                             (1.997)                (16.50)                 (11.85)                (24.96)

  Observations                34                    34                        642                     642
  R-squared                 0.309                  0.243                     0.367                   0.887
  Notes               2017 Sample            2017 Sample             Clustered at country   Clustered at country
                                                                     level                  level; country fixed
                                                                                            effects included
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses.
Source: The employment and wage data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database.




                                                        57
Figure 1




  58
                   Figure 2: Cross-Country Comparison of Wages and Productivity in 2017
Horizontal axis is the log of productivity in 2017 USD, annualized (which means times 1500). Vertical axis is the
log of annual wages in 2017 USD.




     Source: The wage data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database. The productivity
     data are from the OECD Compendium of Productivity Indicators.




                                                        59
         Figure 3: Cross-Country Comparison of Productivity Growth and Wage Growth 1997-2017
Horizontal axis is the proportionate change in within-country productivity (annualized in 2017 USD). Vertical axis
is the proportionate change in within-country wage.




    Source: The wage data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database. The productivity
    data are from the OECD Compendium of Productivity Indicators.




                                                        60
                    Figure 4: Compensation and Productity in the United States Over Time




Source: The output index is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output Per
Hour of All Persons," and retrieved from FRED (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/OPHNFB). The compensation index
is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour," and retrieved
from FRED (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/COMPRNFB).




                                                       61
                                              Figure 5
United States




Source: The data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database.




                                                 62
                                               Figure 6
All countries (16 countries included; excludes US)




Source: The data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database.


                                               Figure 7
United States 1997-2015




Source: The data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics database.
                                                     63
                                                        Figure 8




Source: CPS outgoing rotation group data (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert
Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN:
IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030).V6.0




                                                         64
                                                    Figure 9




Sources: (1) The wage data are from the CPS-ASEC (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven
Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0
[dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0) (2) The productivity data are
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Major Sector Productivity and Costs data file
(https://www.bls.gov/lpc/data.htm).



Low and high education in 1989 is defined as follows. Each industry reports an average (mean) level of
education for that industry. Low education in 1989 is then all industries that have average levels of education
below the industry median and conversely for high education in 1989. The bars are the unweighted averages
taken across the relevent industries for wages and productivities.




                                                       65
                                      Figure 10




Source: The wage and employment rate data are from the OECD Employment and Labour Market
Statistics database.




                                          66
                                         Appendix Figures
Figure A1:Cross-Country Comparisons of Wages and Productivity Using Conference Board and World Bank
Data




                                                67
                                                  Appendix A

               There is a before-and-after the scanner technology that is characterized by two different
production functions. Refer to one type of labor as skilled, S, and the other as unskilled, U. Initially, output
is produced according to

          Q0 = LU1/6 LS1/2 K1/3

with revenue equal to the price of the product, P0 Q0. The demand for the product is given by

          Q = 3183 - 3000 P .

There are 100 of each type of labor supplied perfectly inelastically. Capital is purchased in the world capital
market supplied perfectly elastically at a fixed price, set equal to .1. Each factor is paid its marginal product,
which in equilibrium, exhausts total output so that profits are zero. Because of the inelasticity of labor
supply, wages are determined completely by marginal product and are set such that the wage of each type of
worker equals the value of the marginal product or

       WS = P0 ( ½ LU1/6 LS-1/2 K1/3)
and
       Wu = P0 ( 1/6) LU-5/6 LS1/2 K1/3

Because capital's price is fixed, the quantity of capital used is determined by setting the value of the marginal
product equal to its price, .1 or

       .1 = P0 (1/3) LU1/6 LS1/2 K-2/3

The equilibrium given constant returns technology is characterized as follows:

Q0 = 234.6
WS = .913
WU = .300
K= 608.6
P0 = 1
Productivity = Q0 / (LU + LS ) = .913
Profit = 0

The number of firms is both indeterminate and irrelevant since profits are exhausted and returns are constant.

       The scanner is invented. Now, there is no distinction between skilled and unskilled labor. All workers
can operate the scanner equally effectively so total labor is simply equal to 200. The technology takes the
following form

       Q1 =ë[ L1/3 +K2/3] with scanner

                                                       68
          = Q0 without scanner

      As before, workers are paid the value of their marginal products, which in this case is

      Wage = 1/3 ë L-2/3

Also as before, the amount of capital used is determined by

      .1 = 2/3 ë K-1/3

Equilibrium now has firms with u-shaped cost curves because returns are diminishing in K and L, but there is
the fixed cost of the scanner. Let ë=2. The solution is


Q1 = 332.6
W = .019
L=200
K=2032.2
P1 = .95
Productivity = Q1 / L = 1.65
Profit = 0
Price of Scanner = 109

       The producer of the scanner can charge up to 109, which results in zero profit. Over time, if 109
exceeds the cost of producing a scanner, others will enter driving the price down.
       The fact that 332.6 > 234.6 means that output has increased and price of the product falls. All labor is
of now the same type and labor productivity has also increased because the number of workers remains
unchanged. Specifically, productivity increases to 1.65 from .913, but note also that the wage falls
substantially, not only because the skilled category is lost but because the change in technology, coupled with
the fact that skilled and unskilled are alike, reduces the wage of both types of workers.




                                                       69
                                                                   Appendix B

                                                                  Data Sources
Variable or    Source       Dataset title   Description                                                                      Citation
analysis
Average        The          Total           The Total Economy Database, (TED) is a comprehensive database with annual        The Conference Board.
hours          Conference   Economy         data covering GDP, population, employment, hours, labor quality, capital         (2019). Total Economy
worked         Board        Database        services, labor productivity, and total factor productivity for 123 countries.   Database. Retrieved from
across                                      Average hours worked represent the aggregate number of hours actually            https://www.conference-board
countries                                   worked by an employee or a self-employed person during the accounting            .org/data/economydatabase/
                                            period and when their output is within the production boundary. Data are         total-economy-database-
                                            mostly sourced from national accounts and are available for 68 countries.        productivity-growthaccountin
                                                                                                                             g

Adjusted net   The World    DataBank        Adjusted net national income is gross national income minus consumption of       World Bank. (2020, May 19).
national       Bank                         fixed capital and natural resources depletion. The measure is in constant 2010   Adjusted net national income
income per                                  U.S. dollars.                                                                    per capita (constant 2010
capita                                                                                                                       US$). Retrieved from
                                                                                                                             https://data.worldbank.org/
                                                                                                                             indicator/NY.ADJ.NNTY.PC.
                                                                                                                             KD

Average        OECD         Average         This dataset contains data on average annual wages per full-time and full-year   OECD (2019), "Average
wage in US                  annual          equivalent employee in the total economy. Average annual wages per full-         annual wages", OECD
dollars                     wages           time equivalent dependent employee are obtained by dividing the national-        Employment and Labour
                                            accounts-based total wage bill by the average number of employees in the total   Market
                                            economy, which is then multiplied by the ratio of average usual weekly hours     Statistics (database),https://doi
                                            per full-time employee to average usually weekly hours for all employees.        .org/10.1787/data-00571-
                                                                                                                             en (accessed on 04 February
                                                                                                                             2019).
Hours          OECD         Average         The concept used is the total number of hours worked over the year divided by    OECD (2019), "Hours
worked per                  annual hours    the average number of people in employment. The data are intended for            Worked: Average annual
year                        actually        comparisons of trends over time; they are unsuitable for comparisons of the      hours actually
                                                                         70
                               worked          level of average annual hours of work for a given year, because of differences        worked", OECD Employment
                                               in their sources. Part-time workers are covered as well as full-time workers.         and Labour Market
                                                                                                                                     Statistics (database), https://do
                                                                                                                                     i.org/10.1787/data-00303-
                                                                                                                                     en (accessed on 04 February
                                                                                                                                     2019).
 Industry          BLS DIPS    Labor           Employment is a measure that represents the total number of wage and salary           LPC Tables and Charts. (n.d.).
 employment                    Productivity    workers, self-employed workers, and unpaid family workers working at                  Retrieved from
                               and Costs by    various occupations within business establishments. An individual who works           https://www.bls.gov/lpc/tables
                               Industry and    multiple jobs at separate establishments would have each job included in the          .htm
                               Measure         employment measure.

 Industry          BLS DIPS    Labor           The total number of hours worked by wage and salary workers, unincorporated           LPC Tables and Charts. (n.d.).
 hours                         Productivity    self-employed workers, and unpaid family workers to produce output.                   Retrieved from
 worked                        and Costs by                                                                                          https://www.bls.gov/lpc/tables
                               Industry and                                                                                          .htm
                               Measure
 Labor             BLS DIPS    Labor           Labor productivity is a measure that represents the amount of goods and               LPC Tables and Charts. (n.d.).
 productivity                  Productivity    services that can be produced relative to the amount of labor service used.           Retrieved from
                               and Costs by    Labor productivity measures the rate at which labor is used to produce output         https://www.bls.gov/lpc/tables
                               Industry and    of goods and services, typically expressed as output per hour of labor. Indexed       .htm
                               Measure         at 100 in 1987.
 Minimum           OECD        Real           Real hourly and annual minimum wages are statutory minimum wages converted            OECD (2019), "Earnings: Real
 wage in US                    minimum        into a common hourly and annual pay period for the 28 OECD countries and 4 non-       minimum wages", OECD
 dollars                       wages          member countries for which they are available. The resulting estimates are deflated   Employment and Labour Market
                                              by national Consumer Price Indices. The data are then converted into a common         Statistics(database), https://doi.or
                                              currency unit using either US $ current exchange rates or US $ Purchasing Power       g/10.1787/data-00656-
                                              Parities (PPPs) for private consumption expenditures.                                 en (accessed on 04 February
                                              Real hourly and annual minimum wages are calculated first by deflating the series     2019).
                                              using the consumer price index taking 2017 as the base year. The series are then
                                              converted into a common currency unit (USD) using Purchasing Power Parities for
                                              private consumption expenditures in 2017.

Output per hour   The         Total Economy   Labor productivity per hour worked in 2018 US Dollars. GDP growth and levels          The Conference Board. (2019).

                                                                            71
                  Conference   Database   are adjusted for rapidly falling ICT prices. More specifically, GDP deflators for 3    Total Economy Database.
                  Board                   countries with significant ICT production and trade, including China, Japan and        Retrieved from
                                          the United States are adjusted downward using an alternative series of ICT price       https://www.conference-board.or
                                          deflators developed by Byrne and Corrado (2016, updated and revised in 2018).          g/data/economydatabase/
                                                                                                                                 total-economy-database-
                                                                                                                                 productivity-growthaccounting

Percentile-wage   IPUMS USA               OCC1990 is a modified version of the 1990 Census Bureau occupational                   Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood,
charts ­                                  classification scheme. OCC1990 provides researchers with a consistent                  Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover,
occupation                                classification of occupations using the 1990 coding scheme as its starting point. It   Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and
                                          spans the period from 1950 forward. Researchers who want consistent                    Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA:
                                          occupations prior to 1950 should consult OCC1950.                                      Version 8.0 [dataset].
                                          While the 1990 Census occupation classification system is the basis for                Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
                                          OCC1990, we combine several categories to improve the variable's comparability         https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V
                                          over time. Users are encouraged to review the BLS working paper that describes         8.0
                                          the variable and how available categories map to 1960-2000 Census occupation
                                          codes.

                                          OCC1990 was created using a series of technical papers published by the Census
                                          Bureau shortly after each census was administered. These papers provide detailed
                                          analyses of how the occupational coding scheme for each census year differed
                                          from the scheme used during the previous census year. These occupational
                                          "crosswalks" are based on samples of cases that are "double coded" into the
                                          occupational schemes of the current and previous census year. The original
                                          Census Bureau crosswalks are available via links in "Occupation and Industry
                                          Variables" of the IPUMS documentation.
                                          Using the information from the occupational crosswalks, we traced the proportion
                                          of each occupation as it broke out into more specific occupations or as it was
                                          combined with others into a more general occupation. To take one example from
                                          the technical paper produced after the 2000 census: of persons coded as "Gaming
                                          managers" in 2000 (2000 code 33), the Census Bureau determined that 35%
                                          would have been coded as "Managers, service organizations" in 1990 (1990 code
                                          21), while 65% would have been coded as "Managers, food serving and lodging
                                          establishments" (1990 code 17). In OCC1990, we assign original 2000 OCC
                                                                         72
                              values of 33 to 17. We generated the same information for every occupational
                              code in every census year from 1950-2000.
                              Researchers at the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) then used the resulting tables
                              to create aggregated occupational categories that were more useful for long-term
                              analyses; these are the categories that are used in the IPUMS variable OCC1990.
                              More specifics on their methods and a detailed comparison of OCC1950 and
                              OCC1990 can be found in the resulting BLS working paper.
Percentile-wage   IPUMS USA   INCWAGE reports each respondent's total pre-tax wage and salary income - that        Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood,
charts ­ Wage                 is, money received as an employee - for the previous year. The censuses collected    Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover,
and salary                    information on income received from these sources during the previous calendar       Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and
income                        year; for the ACS and the PRCS, the reference period was the past 12 months.         Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA:
                              Sources of income in INCWAGE include wages, salaries, commissions, cash              Version 8.0 [dataset].
                              bonuses, tips, and other money income received from an employer. Payments-in-        Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
                              kind or reimbursements for business expenses are not included. See the               https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V
                              comparability discussion below for further information.                              8.0

                              Amounts are expressed in contemporary dollars, and users studying change over
                              time must adjust for inflation (See INCTOT for Consumer Price Index adjustment
                              factors). The exception is the ACS/PRCS multi-year files, where all dollar
                              amounts have been standardized to dollars as valued in the final year of data
                              included in the file (e.g., 2007 dollars for the 2005-2007 3-year file).
                              Additionally, more detail may be available than exists in the original ACS
                              samples.

Polarization      IPUMS CPS   EARNWEEK reports how much the respondent usually earned per week at their            Sarah Flood, Miriam King,
analysis                      current job, before deductions. Interviewers asked directly about total weekly       Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles,
                              earnings and also collected information about the usual number of hours worked       and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
                              per week and the hourly rate of pay at the current job. The figure given in          Public Use Microdata Series,
                              EARNWEEK is the higher of the values derived from these two sources: 1) the          Current Population Survey:
                              respondent's answer to the question, "How much do you usually earn per week at       Version 6.0 [dataset].
                              this job before deductions?"; or 2) for workers paid by the hour (and coded as "2"   Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
                              in PAIDHOUR), the reported number of hours the respondent usually worked at          https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V
                              the job, multiplied by the hourly wage rate given in HOURWAGE.                       6.0
                              The values in EARNWEEK are in dollars, with no implied decimal places; a

                                                            73
                                               value of 500 means that the respondent earned five hundred dollars per week
                                               before deductions. Amounts are expressed as they were reported to the
                                               interviewer; users must adjust for inflation using Consumer Price
                                               Index adjustment factors. Researchers should use the EARNWT weight with this
                                               variable.
                                               EARNWEEK is one of the Outgoing Rotation/Earner Study questions.
Ratio of          OECD         Minimum          For cross-country comparisons, data on minimum wage levels are further                O E C D           ( 2 0 1 9 ) ,
minimum wage                   relative to      supplemented with another measure of minimum wages relative to average wages,         "Earnings: Minimum wages
to median (used                average wages    that is, the ratio of minimum wages to median earnings of full-time employees.        relative         to    median
to compute                     of full-time     Median rather than mean earnings provide a better basis for international             wages", OECD Employment and
median wage)                   workers          comparisons as it accounts for differences in earnings dispersion across countries.   L a b o u r         M a r k e t
                                                However, while median of basic earnings of full-time workers - i.e. excluding         Statistics (database), https://doi.
                                                overtime and bonus payments - are, ideally, the preferred measure of average wages    or g/10.1787/data-00313-
                                                for international comparisons of minimum-to-median earnings, they are not             en (accessed on 04 February
                                                available for a large number of countries.                                            2019).
                                               Minimum relative to mean earnings of full-time workers are also provided.

Total hours       The          Total           Total annual hours worked (in millions). The measure used in TED is actual             The Conference Board. (2019).
worked in the     Conference   Economy         hours worked, so it includes paid overtime and excludes paid hours that are not        Total Economy Database.
economy           Board        Database        worked due to sickness, vacation and holidays, etc. Series on actual hours             Retrieved from
                                               worked per person are available for 68 countries.                                      https://www.conference-board.o
                                                                                                                                      rg/data/economydatabase/
                                                                                                                                      total-economy-database-
                                                                                                                                      productivity-growthaccounting
Value of          BLS DIPS     Labor           Value of production is a measure that represents the difference between the total      LPC Tables and Charts. (n.d.).
production                     Productivity    output of goods and services produced and both the subtotal of goods and               Retrieved from
                               and Costs by    services shipped among related establishments (intra-industry shipments,               https://www.bls.gov/lpc/tables.h
                               Industry and    intra-sectoral shipments, and resales) and the net changes in inventory levels.        tm
                               Measure




                                                                              74
Wages at 90th,   OECD   Gross           This dataset contains three earnings-dispersion measures - ratio of 9th-to-1st, 9th-to-   OECD (2019), "Earnings: Gross
50th and 10th           earnings:       5th and 5th-to-1st- where ninth, fifth (or median) and first deciles are upper-earnings   earnings: decile ratios", OECD
percentile              decile ratios   decile limits, unless otherwise indicated, of gross earnings of full-time dependent       Employment and Labour Market
                                        employees.                                                                                Statistics (database),
                                                                                                                                  https://doi.or g/10.1787/data-
                                                                                                                                  00302-en (accessed on 04
                                                                                                                                  February 2019).




                                                                       75
                                                           Appendix C
                                                         Summary Statistics


                                                             OECD Data

  Variable                                            Obs             Mean             Std.Dev.                  Min              Max
 Year                                               13963           1987.43               16.25                 1955              2018
 1 year change in log 90th percentile                 358              .014                .038                 -.188             .248
 wageh
 1 year change in log 10th percentile                  358              .013                .043                -.216             .239
 wage
 1 year change in log annualized                     1600               .022                .027                -.155             .188
 productivity
 20 year change in annualized log                      812              .367                .293                -.644            1.315
 productivity
 20 year change in log wage                           215               .265                .199                -.052            1.351
 5 year change in log wage                            737               .072                .095                -.231             .612
 5 year change in annualized log                     1416               .108                .079                -.094               .43
 productivity
 Average annual wage in 2017 USD                      912          36319.14           18807.85               3238.96         90611.52
 Log of 90th percentile annual wage                   436            10.658               .744                  8.63           11.592
 Log annual productivity, 2017 USD                   1646            10.905               .491                 8.479           11.881
 Log hourly productivity, 2017 USD                   1646             3.591               .491                 1.166            4.568
 Log of average annual wage in 2017                   912            10.321               .661                 8.083           11.415
 USD
 Log 10th percentile annual wage                       436             9.367                .819                7.263           10.381
 Percent of working age population                     793             65.97                7.64               45.511           86.525
 employed
 Ratio of 50th to 10th percentile wage                 700             1.715                .221                1.153            2.626
 Ratio of 90th to 50th percentile wage                 700             1.944                .331                1.397            3.558

Sources: OECD. (2019). "Average annual wages", OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics (database),
https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00571-en (accessed on 04 February 2019). OECD. (2019). "Earnings: Gross earnings: decile ratios", OECD
Employment and Labour Market Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00302-en (accessed on 04 February 2019). OECD.
(2019). "Earnings: Minimum wages relative to median wages", OECD Employment and Labour Market
Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00313-en (accessed on 04 February 2019). OECD. (2019). "Earnings: Real minimum
wages", OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00656-en (accessed on 04 February
2019). OECD. (2019). "Employment rate",                        OECD Employment and Labour Market Statistics (database),
https://doi.org/10.1787/1de68a9b-en (Accessed on 04 February 2019) OECD. (2019). "GDP per hour worked", OECD Compendium
of Productivity Indicators. https://doi.org/10.1787/1439e590-en (Accessed on 04 February 2019). OECD. (2019). "Hours
W o r k e d : A v e r a g e a n n u a l h ou r s a ct u a l l y wo r k e d " , O E C D E m p l o y m e n t a n d L a b o u r M a r k e t
Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00303-en (accessed on 04 February 2019).




                                                                  76
                                                   BLS ASEC Data



 Variable                                   Obs           Mean         Std.Dev.                 Min            Max
 Average years of education in the         3009         12.589              .924              10.22          14.641
 industry in 1989
 Average level of education in industry    3036         13.026             1.15               9.151         17.417
 Average industry wage in 2019             3036       46322.25         16209.28            5600.227         135000
 dollars
 Average age in industry                   3036         39.633            3.663                27.6          50.649
 Change in log wage from 1989 to           1022           .271             .212                -.34           1.283
 2017, 2019 USD
 Change in log employment, 1989-              70          -.018             .631             -1.466           1.405
 2017
 Log wage in 2019 dollars                  3036         10.677              .381              8.631           11.81
 Proportion of workers who are white       3036           .843              .071               .517               1
 Proportion of workers who are male        3036           .578              .214               .009               1

Source: CPS-ASEC (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0)




                                                         77
                                             BLS Three Digit Productivity Data



 Variable                                                  Obs           Mean           Std.Dev.           Min          Max
 Log of real value of output per hour                     2104           4.885               .83         2.594          8.285
 One year change in log of real value of                  2023            .007              .068         -.592           .616
 output per hour
 Change in the log of value per hour                        185            .181               .36         -.696         1.283
 between 1989 and 2017

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Major Sector Productivity and Costs data file (https://www.bls.gov/lpc/data.htm).




                                                                  78
                                       BLS Individual Outgoing Rotation Wage Data


 Variable                                               Obs        Mean           Std.Dev.               Min              Max
 Year                                             2,900,906     2003.947              8.27              1989              2019
 Age                                              2,900,906       42.075           12.755                 15                90
 Fulltime dummy (= 1 if fulltime worker)          2,900,906         .847               .36                 0                 1
 Log of real wage                                 2,900,906        6.653              .729             3.689              8.41
 Male dummy (=1 if male)                          2,900,906         .508                .5                 0                 1
 One year change in log real wage                 1,450,453         .029              .526            -4.231             4.262
 Real weekly earnings, 2019 USD                   2,900,906       985.48          691.598             39.998          4492.923
 Years of education completed                     2,900,906       13.636             2.586                 0                18

Source: CPS outgoing rotation group data (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0 ).




                                                                79
                                          BLS Compensation and Output Indices


Variable                                        Obs         Mean      Std.Dev.               Min                                Max
Nonfarm Business Sector: Real                    72         74.13        20.05              36.2                           105.03
Compensation Per Hour, Indexed
2012 = 100
Nonfarm Business Sector: Real                    72         58.97        24.69             23.53                          105.37
Output per hour, Indexed 2012 =
100
Percent change in 4 year moving                  68           .015          .01             -.004                                .04
average of Real Compensation
Per Hour Index
Percent change in 4 year moving                  68           .021         .008             .001                                .037
average of Real Output Per Hour
Index

Source: The output index is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Output Per Hour of All
Persons," and retrieved from FRED (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/OPHNFB). The compensation index is from the U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics, "Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour," and retrieved from FRED
(https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/COMPRNFB).




                                                             80
                                          Conference Board Productivity Data

Variable                                                     Obs         Mean         Std.Dev.                   Min                 Max
Year                                                       2,391       1996.6            13.79                  1970                 2018
Average annual hours worked per worker                     2,391      1927.81          280.99                1360.37               2895.1
Productivity per hour in 2018 dollars                      2,391        31.61            20.71                  1.22               101.04
Productivity per hour in 2018 dollars x 1500               2,391        47409           31064                   1832               151561
Total annual hours worked (millions)                       2,391        50811          118549                 259.45              1111578
Log productivity per year in 2018 dollars                  2,391        10.46             0.90                  7.51                11.93

S ou r c e : T h e C o n f e r e n c e B o a r d , " T o t a l   E c on o m y   Da ta ba se".        h t t p s : / / www. c o n f e r e n c e -
board.org/data/economydatabase/index.cfm?id=27762




                                          World Bank Per Capita Income Data


Variable                                                                Obs       Mean          Std.Dev.                Min             Max
Year                                                                  2,391     1996.6            13.79                1970            2018
Average Annual Per Capita Income 2018 dollars                         2,391      17740            15351             208.02           82834
log of Average Annual Per Capita Income 2018 dollars                  2,391        9.22            1.27                5.34           11.32

Source: World Bank. (2020, May 19). Adjusted net national income per capita (constant 2010 US$).
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.ADJ.NNTY.PC.KD




                                                                 81
                                                             Appendix D

                                                               Table D1

                                                   (1)                     (2)                     (3)                       (4)
VARIABLES                                  Log Productivity        Log Productivity         Change in Log             Change in Log
                                               in 2017                 in 2017               Productivity              Productivity
                                                                                             (1989-2017)               (1989-2017)


capital cost                                     0.657**                  0.460                   0.126                   0.0357
(hundred thousands)                              (0.294)                 (0.304)                 (0.110)                  (0.108)


industry average education                                               0.360*                                           0.170**
                                                                         (0.200)                                          (0.0708)


Constant                                        4.789***                 0.0843                   0.118                  -2.101**
                                                 (0.213)                 (2.635)                (0.0798)                  (0.933)

Observations                                       21                      20                       21                       20
R-squared                                         0.209                  0.325                    0.065                    0.296
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at industry level in column (1). Unit of analysis is a 3-
digit industry. There is one observation per industry that measures the difference during period, 1989-2017, using merged data from the
following two BLS sources: (1) The wage, education, and employment data are from the CPS-ASEC (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae
Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset].
Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0) (2) The productivity data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Major Sector Productivity and Costs data file (https://www.bls.gov/lpc/data.htm).




                                                                    82
                                                       Appendix E

                                                         Table E1

                                               (1)                           (2)                             (3)
VARIABLES                           Log real wage in 2017          Log real wage in 2017           Log real wage in 2017



log productivity in 2017                    0.194***                      0.122**                         0.00910
                                            (0.0541)                      (0.0495)                        (0.0333)

industry average education                                                0.185***                        0.224***
                                                                          (0.0451)                        (0.0290)

industry average age                                                                                     0.0295***
                                                                                                         (0.00760)

industry proportion male                                                                                  0.866***
                                                                                                           (0.145)

Constant                                    9.869***                      7.726***                        5.982***
                                             (0.272)                       (0.572)                         (0.431)

Observations                                  45                             45                              45
R-squared                                    0.231                          0.451                           0.803

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at industry level in column (1). Unit of
analysis is a 3-digit industry. There is one observation per industry that measures the difference during period, 1989-2017,
using merged data from the following two BLS sources: (1) The wage, education, and employment data are from the CPS-
ASEC (Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0) (2) The productivity data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Major Sector
Productivity and Costs data file (https://www.bls.gov/lpc/data.htm).




                                                             83
