                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MONK: MORTGAGES IN A NEW-KEYNESIAN MODEL

                                        Carlos Garriga
                                       Finn E. Kydland
                                        Roman Sustek

                                     Working Paper 26427
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26427


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2019, Revised April 2020




We thank Adrian Auclert, Refet G¨urkaynak, Wouter den Haan, Amir Kermani, Ricardo Reis,
Victor R´ os-Rull, Martin Schneider, and Stanley Zin for valuable comments and suggestions. We
are also grateful to Anton Braun and Andreas Hornstein for their conference discussions (we
thank Andreas for coming up with the MoNK acronym). We have also benefited from comments
by seminar and conference participants at Vienna Macroeconomics Workshop, CERGE-EI,
Economic Growth and Policy Conference in Durham, London School of Economics, GBS
Summer Forum in Barcelona, St. Louis Fed, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Federal Reserve
System Meetings in San Francisco, Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Policy, Bank of
Italy, Stockholm University, Bundesbank, Swiss National Bank, the 6th ECB Conference on
Household Finance and Consumption, and Emory-Atlanta Fed seminar. The views expressed are
those of the authors and not necessarily of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The financial support of the
Czech Science Foundation project No. P402/12/G097 (DYME Dynamic Models in Economics) is
gratefully acknowledged.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Carlos Garriga, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Sustek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
MoNK: Mortgages in a New-Keynesian Model
Carlos Garriga, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Sustek
NBER Working Paper No. 26427
November 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. E52,G21,R21

                                           ABSTRACT

There has been much interest recently in the role of household long-term, mortgage, debt in the
transmission of monetary policy. This paper offers a tractable framework that integrates the long-
term debt channel with the standard New-Keynesian channel, providing a tool for monetary
policy analysis that reflects the recent debates in the literature. As the model includes both short-
and long-term debt, it provides a useful laboratory for the analysis of monetary policy operating
not only through short-term actions, as has been done traditionally in the literature, but also
through expected, persistent, changes in its stance.


Carlos Garriga                                    Roman Sustek
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis                 School of Economics and Finance
P.O. Box 442                                      Queen Mary University of London
St. Louis, MO 63166                               Mile End Road
carlos.garriga@stls.frb.org                       London E1 4NS
                                                  United Kingdom
Finn E. Kydland                                   r.sustek@qmul.ac.uk
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9210
and NBER
kydland@econ.ucsb.edu




Supplementary material is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26427
1         Introduction

When a central bank decides on the next course of monetary policy, the whole machinery
of the monetary transmission mechanism sets in motion (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler, 1995;
Mishkin, 1995). The main lever of the mechanism in the current go-to models for mon-
etary policy analysis is the presence of nominal price rigidities (sticky prices) in product

markets as embedded in the New-Keynesian Phillips curve. Recently, however, the litera-
ture started to pay increasing attention to the part of the mechanism that works through
the exposure of households to long-term debt, typically mortgage debt (among others,
Doepke and Schneider, 2006; Di Magio, Kermani, Keys, Piskorski, Ramcharan, Seru and Yao,

2017; Auclert, 2019; Cloyne, Ferreira and Surico, 2020). While the studies in this recent liter-
ature differ in implementation (e.g., current cash flows vs. the present value of the long-term
debt position), they agree that household long-term debt plays an important role in the
monetary transmission mechanism.1
        This paper integrates both channels--the New-Keynesian and the long-term debt channel­

in a tractable analytical framework to provide a tool for monetary policy analysis that re-
flects the recent debate in the literature. While such endeavor may be interesting in its
own right, it gains particular usefulness in light of other recent developments in macroe-
conomics and finance. A stream of research documents that monetary policy surprises are

more complex than traditional analysis suggested, consisting of not only central bank ac-
tions but also of statements and signals about the likely future course of monetary policy
(e.g., G¨
        urkaynak, Sack and Swanson, 2005a; Campbell, Evans, Fisher and Justiniano, 2012;
Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018).2 Furthermore, a large body of work in finance, starting

with Ang and Piazzesi (2003), suggests that monetary policy contains an important compo-
    1
     We use the term "long-term debt exposure" or "long-term debt channel" to simply mean that house-
holds hold long-term debt either as a liability or an asset, which can potentially transmit monetary policy.
Sometimes the literature refers to this channel as the "household balance sheet channel".
   2
     As an example, in December 2019, the Riksbank surprised markets by both lifting its policy rate and
announcing that the policy rate is likely to remain at the new level for years (a surprise by both action and
statement). In June 2019, after a sequence of policy rate hikes, the Fed surprised markets by a statement
hinting at no further increases in the policy rate, while keeping the current rate, in line with expectations,
unchanged (a surprise only by statement).
nent that persistently affects expectations of future policy rates over time. Both streams of
research thus point to the expectations of future monetary policy as an integral part of the
transmission mechanism. While the current policy rate determines the cost of short-term
debt, expectations about future monetary policy affect the cost of long-term financing (see,

e.g., Hamilton, 2008, for an empirical analysis in the case of mortgages).3
       Figure 1 illustrates, with the help of an episode, the basic concepts that the model intends
to capture. The figure plots movements of the ECB policy rate, together with movements
of nominal mortgage interest rates, in a number of euro area countries around the time of

the ECB monetary policy easing in 2008. Since in the case of long-term debt one needs to
distinguish between new loans (flow) and outstanding debt (stock), each with potentially
different interest rates, we separate the two. Furthermore, the countries are divided into two
groups, those with fixed-rate mortgages (FRM) and those with adjustable-rate mortgages

(ARM), based on the typical contract used. The two basic contracts are characterized by
different pass throughs of the policy rate.4
       Without doubt, the cut in the ECB rate was partly transmitted into the economy through
the standard New-Keynesian channel. The figure, however, shows that the ECB decision

also affected households directly through their exposure to mortgage debt. Furthermore, the
effects were not uniform across mortgage types and across new loans and outstanding debt. In
the case of ARM countries, the interest rate on both new and outstanding debt declined more
or less immediately and nearly by the full amount of the ECB rate cut. In FRM countries,
however, while the interest rate on new loans also declined--though less then the ECB

rate--the interest rate on outstanding debt remained essentially unchanged.5 Furthermore,
   3
     The long-term debt channel is thus also likely to be critical for full assessment of the recently floated
Neo-Fisherian policies arguing for persistent changes in policy rates (e.g., Uribe, 2018; Williamson, 2018).
   4
     In broad sense, FRM has a constant nominal interest rate set at origination, whereas the inter-
est rate of ARM is linked to a short-term nominal interest rate and can change during the life of
the loan whenever the underlying interest rate changes. Typically, one of the two contracts domi-
nates a country's mortgage market (Scanlon and Whitehead, 2004; European Mortgage Federation, 2012;
Badarinza, Campbell and Ramadorai, 2016).
   5
     In principle, mortgages can be pre-paid or refinanced. The extent to which this is legally or econom-
ically feasible, however, varies across countries (Scanlon and Whitehead, 2004; Green and Wachter, 2005;
European Mortgage Federation, 2012; Badarinza et al., 2016). The lack of responses of the interest rates
on FRM outstanding debt in Figure 1 suggests that in the FRM euro area countries little refinancing took


                                                      2
the decline in the FRM rates on new loans was not only due to the cut in the ECB rate
itself, but reflected, at least partially, expectations of its persistence. With the benefit of
historical hindsight, we know the reduction in the ECB rate was very persistent indeed.
Given that mortgage debt is on average around 70% of annual GDP in developed economies

(International Monetary Fund, 2011), just how important is the long-term debt channel,
when compared with the standard New-Keynesian channel, in transmitting monetary policy?
    In the model, long-term debt plays a role by facilitating purchases of housing.6 Specifi-
cally, a fraction of new housing is financed through new long-term nominal mortgages (either

FRM or ARM), which are amortized over time in a way that mimics the payment schedule of
a typical mortgage. There are two types of representative agents: "homeowners", represent-
ing middle-class households, and "capital owners", representing the top quintile of the wealth
distribution (Campbell and Cocco, 2003). Both agent types supply labor. Capital owners

can invest in capital used in production, whereas homeowners cannot. Capital owners also
finance mortgages used by homeowners to purchase housing. Furthermore, the two agent
types trade a noncontingent one-period nominal bond (unsecured credit), albeit homeowners
only at a cost. The key distinction between the two agents is thus their access to capital and

bond markets.7 This has consequences for their valuation of mortgage payments (cash flows)
over the life of a loan and for their marginal propensities to consume. Due to the limited
ability of homeowners to smooth out fluctuations in disposable income, they can be thought
of as the "rich hand-to-mouth" consumers in the spirit of Kaplan and Violante (2014). The
rest of the model has the standard New-Keynesian features: nominal price rigidities in prod-

uct markets and a Taylor rule. The Taylor rule, however, includes shocks affecting expected
future interest rates, in addition to standard policy shocks.8
place.
   6
     The literature typically explores the role of housing debt in New-Keynesian settings by considering only
one-period loans (see Iacoviello, 2010); Calza, Monacelli and Stracca (2013) consider two-period loans. In
Rubio (2011), mortgage interest rates are sticky but the debt itself is still a one-period loan. Ghent (2012)
considers a flexible-price model with multi-period FRMs denominated in real terms.
   7
     This structure has flavor of Guvenen (2009).
   8
     Our focus on expected interest rates, rather than term premia, is grounded in practical considera-
tions. Despite a large body of work, the economic drivers behind movements of term premia are still not
well understood (e.g., a survey chapter by Duffee, 2012). Unsurprisingly, generating sufficiently large and


                                                     3
    When the measure of homeowners is zero, the model boils down to a representative
agent New-Keynesian (RANK) model with capital. When mortgages are removed, the model
becomes akin to a two-agent New-Keynesian (TANK) model, e.g., Debortoli and Gal´
                                                                               i (2018),
with one-period debt. Introducing richer household-level heterogeneity would transform the

model, at a significant computational cost, to a heterogenous-agent (HANK) model, e.g.,
Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018), with mortgages.9
                                                           
    In relation to our previous work (Garriga, Kydland and Sustek, 2017), we extend the
model of that paper to the conventional New-Keynesian setting. At the same time, however,

we simplify the more general mortgage market structure of that paper by abstracting from
optimal refinancing/prepayment and the choice between FRM and ARM. As we have shown
in that paper, if FRM is refinanced every period when interest rates decline (which would
be optimal in the absence of refinancing costs), FRM becomes equivalent to ARM along

such an interest rate path. However, for calibration replicating the frequency of refinancing
observed in US data, it turned out that the equilibrium dynamics of an economy with
refi-FRM were still closer to that with pure FRM than ARM.10 If refinancing also involves
costlessly changing the debt outstanding (cash-in/cash-out), both FRM and ARM boil down

to one-period loans. Again, for realistic calibration, this is not the case.
    In terms of analysis, we add to our previous work in three ways. First, given the growing
interest in the long-term debt channel, we investigate its quantitative importance in the
monetary transmission mechanism relative to the New-Keynesian channel and explore any
potential interactions between the two channels (e.g., do changes in disposable income, due

to changes in mortgage payments, transmit through sticky prices to output?). This ques-
time-varying term premia within structural general equilibrium models has so far proved unsuccessful (e.g.,
Rudebusch and Swanson, 2008; van Binsbergen, Fernandez-Villaverde, Koijen and Rubio-Ramirez, 2012).
    9
      In a RANK model, long-term household debt is a redundant asset.                        That is, it is
priced but does not affect equilibrium outcomes (among others, H¨          ordahl, Tristani and Vestin, 2008;
Bekaert, Cho and Moreno, 2010; Rudebusch and Swanson, 2012). Sheedy (2014) considers a TANK model
while Hedlund, Karahan, Mitman and Ozkan (2017) a HANK model with long-term debt.
   10
      Berger, Milbradt, Tourre and Vavra (2018) make the point that the fraction of US mortgage debt that
is refinanced depends on the historical path of interest rates, while Wong (2018) argues the fraction depends
on demographics. Refinancing is still more frequent in the United States than in many other developed
economies.



                                                     4
tion is also related to the ongoing debate on the channels of monetary policy transmission:
intertemporal substitution vs. household disposable income (e.g., Kaplan et al., 2018).11
Second, we use the framework to contrast, in the case of mortgages, the following concepts
employed by the debt channel literature and discussed in the next section: (i) monetary pol-

icy operating through current cash flows vs. the present value of the long-term debt position
and (ii) the interest rate exposure vs. the Fisher revaluation channel. In the case of ARM
these concepts are particularly subtle and are not well understood. Our model encompasses
all four cases and we explain how they are underpinned by asset market incompleteness.

Finally, we relate the policy shocks in the model closely to the yield curve concepts of slope
vs. level factors and, in the Supplementary material, further to action vs. statement pol-
icy shocks (G¨
             urkaynak et al., 2005a; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018). These mappings help
both with the interpretation of the shocks and calibration of their persistence, which turned

out to be key for the workings of the two channels.12
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the streams of research that motivate
some of our assumptions and computational experiments. Section 3 develops the model,
section 4 describes its calibration, and section 5 reports the findings. Section 6 then explains

the mechanism and connects it with the concepts in the literature. Section 7 summarizes the
main lessons and concludes. A supplementary material contains details of the equilibrium,
secondary derivations, and examples of two rotations of the policy shocks, which offer their
alternative interpretations.
  11
     The two-agent setting makes the analysis of the transmission mechanism particularly tractable and
transparent. However, we expect the key insights to carry over to New-Keynesian models with mortgage
debt and richer household heterogeneity.
  12
     In Garriga et al. (2017) we have cross-validated the model (containing a larger set of shocks than the
two considered here) against various empirical studies and business cycle regularities. Here we therefore do
not repeat such tests.




                                                     5
2        Related literature

2.1       The long-term household debt channel

The literature on the long-term household debt channel of monetary policy transmission can

be split into two main categories, depending on whether the debt channel works through
the present value of the outstanding debt position or the timing of the cash flows. Broadly
speaking, in the first category households maximize their utility subject to their life-time
budget constraint, whereas in the second category they do not. In the most extreme case,

they only face their flow budget constraints (i.e., they are hand-to-mouth consumers).
       The first category includes Doepke and Schneider (2006) and their follow-up papers13 ,
Meh, Rios-Rull and Terajima (2010), Meh and Terajima (2011), Adam and Zhu (2016), and
Auclert (2019). The last two papers focus on changes in the present value of the debt
position brought about by temporary (one-off) changes in inflation and the real interest

rate, as would occur in response to a standard monetary policy shock, whereas the rest
consider effects of persistent shifts in the inflation rate. Auclert (2019) refers to the im-
pact of the real interest rate as the "interest rate exposure channel" and to the impact
of the inflation rate as the "Fisher revaluation channel".14 The second category, high-

lighting the role of cash flows, includes, for instance, Cava, Hughson and Kaplan (2016),
Flod´
    en, Kilstr¨
              om, Sigurdsson and Vestman (2018), Di Magio et al. (2017), and Cloyne et al.
(2020). The main contribution of these papers is to show that, empirically, the timing of
mortgage cash flows affects household spending decisions, in particular in the case of ARMs.15
  13
      Doepke and Schneider (2006b), Doepke and Schneider (2006c), and Doepke, Schneider and Selezneva
(2018).
   14
      The interest rate exposure channel is different from the standard intertemporal substitution channel. The
latter shows up as the substitution effect in the Euler equation for a one-period bond, whereas the former
is a wealth effect in the life-time budget constraint. A household wealth effect, albeit due to revaluation of
government debt, is also at the center of the mechanism explored by Sterk and Tenreyro (2018).
   15
      The    quantitative     model    of     Hedlund      (2019)    and    the   empirical     framework    of
Slacalek, Tristani and Violante (2020) include both the present value and the cash flow channel.




                                                      6
2.2       Monetary policy and nominal interest rates

Incorporating long-term household debt into a model for monetary policy analysis is partic-

ularly pertinent if monetary policy can, in some way, affect the cost of long-term financing.
Two lines of research, while working with data at different frequencies, suggest that this is
the case. Furthermore, that this occurs, at least partially, through expected future policy
rates (see footnote 8 regarding our focus on expected interest rates).

       The first literature concerns the nature of monetary policy surprises. The traditional
analysis, based on structural VARs, e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999), identi-
fies policy surprises as unexpected changes in the current policy rate. A limitation of this
analysis is that it focuses on the actions of the central bank, relative to what the empirical
model or the agents in its theoretical counterpart expected. Such shocks are empirically

found to have a temporary effect on short rates and almost no effect on long-term inter-
est rates (e.g., Evans and Marshall, 1998). The private sector, however, pays attention not
only to what the central bank does but also to what it says, or signals, it may do in the
future. Unexpected changes in policy statements therefore lead to substantial movements

of the entire yield curve.16 This dimension of policy surprises has been established in high-
frequency studies, using daily or intra-day data, around policy meetings (G¨
                                                                           urkaynak et al.,
2005a; Campbell et al., 2012).17
       The second literature concerns the behavior of nominal interest rates over time, rather

than at a point in time. A large body of work uses yield curve data to extract factors
driving nominal interest rates at monthly or quarterly frequencies (e.g., Ang and Piazzesi,
2003; Diebold, Rudebusch and Aruoba, 2006; Rudebusch and Wu, 2008). A robust finding
  16
      During the recent Great Recession such communication became known as "forward guidance". However,
policy communication had been used, and affected financial markets, long before this period.
   17
      Related studies include Cieslak and Schrimpf (2018), Jarocinski and Karadi (2018), and
Nakamura and Steinsson (2018). Responses of long-term interest rates to policy surprises can occur
also due to changes in term premia (e.g., Gertler and Karadi, 2015). Unfortunately, empirical decomposi-
tions into expected interest rates and term premia generally suffer from weak identification, large standard
errors, and a small sample bias (e.g., Joslin, Singleton and Zhu, 2011; Bauer, Rudebusch and Wu, 2012;
Hamilton and Wu, 2012; Kim and Orphanides, 2012). We proceed under the assumption that monetary
policy statements at least partially affect expectations of future interest rates, as suggested by the studies
cited.


                                                      7
in this literature is that interest rates contain a highly persistent, latent, stochastic factor,
with autocorrelation near the unit root, which has an approximately equal effect on both
short and long rates. Importantly, the presence and dynamic properties of this factor are
essentially unaffected by the change of measure from risk-neutral to physical, meaning that

the factor drives predominantly expected future interest rates, as opposed to term premia
(e.g., Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2008; Duffee, 2012; Bauer, 2018).18 While a consensus on the
origins of this factor is yet to be reached, a long list of studies prescribe a chunk of its move-
ments to persistence in monetary policy, due to the factor's strong positive correlation with

inflation (e.g., Kozicki and Tinsley, 2001; Atkeson and Kehoe, 2009; Bekaert et al., 2010).19



3      The model

The model intends to capture, in a parsimonious way, the pass-through effects illustrated
in Figure 1, in addition to the standard New-Keynesian transmission of monetary policy.
The model environment is motivated by some U.S. observations, with the hope that these

apply more broadly, at least in the context of developed economies. In order to present the
framework and its properties in the clearest possible way, we abstract from various features
(habits, labor market frictions, backward indexation of prices, etc.) that are often required
in the New-Keynesian literature to obtain a good fit to the data. Such extensions are left

for future work.
  18
     While the risk of the factor is priced­i.e., there is a risk premium attached to this factor--the risk pre-
mium does not vary with the factor itself and neither do risk premia attached to other factors. For instance,
in a tightly identified decomposition by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2008), movements in term premia are set off
by an almost hidden (unspanned by yields) factor, as in Duffee (2011) and Joslin, Priebsch and Singleton
(2014), which is dynamically correlated with a factor driving the slope of the yield curve.
  19
     See also Ang and Piazzesi (2003),              Diebold et al. (2006),      Dewachter and Lyrio (2006),
H¨ordahl, Tristani and Vestin (2006), Ang, Bekaert and Wei (2008), Rudebusch and Wu (2008), Duffee
(2012), and Haubrich, Pennacchi and Ritchken (2012).




                                                       8
3.1     Environment

There are two types of representative households, "homeowners" and "capital owners", with

measures  and (1 - ), respectively. Both agent types supply labor. Homeowners invest
in housing whereas capital owners invest in productive capital. Capital owners also finance
mortgages used by homeowners to purchase housing and the two agents trade a noncontingent
one-period nominal bond, although homeowners only at a cost.20 The economy is studied

under either only FRM or ARM, the two opposing cases of policy rate pass-through. For
the reasons explained in the Introduction, the loans are held until maturity.
    The production side of the economy has the standard New-Keynesian features and mon-
etary policy follows a Taylor rule. To achieve sensible calibration, labor supply by the
two agent types differs in efficiency units and the model also includes constant tax rates

and government expenditures (and transfers that ensure the government budget constraint
holds). While these features have some quantitative implications, they are unimportant for
understanding the qualitative properties of the model.


3.2     Capital owners

The capital owner (indexed by "1") chooses contingency plans for c1t , n1t , xKt , kt+1 , b1,t+1 ,

and l1t to maximize expected life-time utility

                                         
                                    E0          t u(c1t , n1t ),     (0, 1),
                                         t=0

  20
     This abstraction is motivated by the cross-sectional observations by, e.g., Campbell and Cocco (2003):
the typical homeowner is a middle class household (in the third and fourth quintiles of the wealth distri-
bution), with housing their main asset and mortgages their main liability and almost no corporate equity;
in contrast, households in the top quintile of the wealth distribution own the entire corporate equity in the
economy and housing makes up a small fraction of their assets. The lowest two quintiles in the data are
renters with little assets and little debt and are not included in the model. Our abstraction is also consistent
with Doepke and Schneider (2006) and Meh et al. (2010) who document that the middle classes are the
largest borrowers in nominal debt whereas the top quintile are the biggest holders of nominal debt.




                                                          9
where u(., .) has the standard properties guaranteeing a unique interior solution, subject to
a sequence of budget constraints and laws of motion for capital

                 b1,t+1 l1t                                 b1t m1t
c1t +qKt xKt +         + = [(1 - K )rt + K K ] kt +(1+it-1 ) +      +(1-N ) w wt n1t +1t +t ,
                   pt   pt                                  pt  pt
                                                                                          (1)

                                        kt+1 = (1 - K )kt + xKt .

We index by "1" only those variables of the capital owner that pertain to both agent types.
Here, c1t is consumption, n1t is labor, xKt is investment in capital, qKt is its relative price,

b1,t+1 is holdings of the one-period nominal bond between periods t and t +1, pt is the nominal
price level, l1t is new nominal mortgage lending, K  (0, 1) is a capital income tax rate, rt
is a real capital rental rate, K  (0, 1) is a capital depreciation rate, kt is capital, it-1 is the
nominal interest rate on the one-period bond bought in the previous period, m1t is receipts

of nominal payments from outstanding mortgages, N  (0, 1) is a labor income tax rate,

 w   > 0 is the relative productivity of capital owners, wt is the aggregate real wage rate, 1t is
government transfers, and t is profits of monopolistically competitive producers, assumed
to be owned by the capital owner. The capital owner's endogenous state variables are kt ,
b1t , and m1t . The determination of mortgage payments, m1t , is described after introducing

the homeowner.21


3.3      Homeowners

A representative homeowner (indexed by "2") chooses contingency plans for c2t , n2t , xHt ,
ht+1 , b2,t+1 , and l2t to maximize expected life-time utility

                                              
                                         E0          t v (c2t , ht , n2t ),
                                              t=0

  21
    As capital owners are the sole holders of mortgage debt in the economy, and given that they are identical,
outstanding mortgage debt is not traded in equilibrium. We therefore do not include adjustments in an
individual capital owner's holdings of outstanding mortgage debt in the budget constraint, as doing so would
have no equilibrium consequences.



                                                        10
where v (., ., .) also has the standard properties guaranteeing a unique interior solution, sub-
ject to a sequence of budget and financing constraints and laws of motion for housing

                            b2,t+1                                     b2t l2t m2t
          c2t + qHt xHt +          = (1 - N )wt n2t + (1 + it-1 + t-1 ) +     -    + 2t ,               (2)
                              pt                                       pt  pt   pt

                                             l2t
                                                 = qHt xHt ,                                            (3)
                                             pt

                                       ht+1 = (1 - H )ht + xHt .

The homeowner has the same time discount factor  as the capital owner. We index by
"2" only those variables of the homeowner that pertain to both agent types. Here, c2t is
consumption, ht is the existing stock of housing, n2t is labor, xHt is purchases of new housing,
qHt is the relative price of housing, b2,t+1 is holdings of the one-period nominal bond between

periods t and t+1, l2t is new nominal mortgage borrowing, m2t is nominal mortgage payments
on outstanding debt, 2t is transfers,   [0, 1) is a loan-to-value ratio, and H  (0, 1) is
a housing depreciation rate. t-1 is described below. The homeowner's endogenous state
variables are ht , b2t , and m2t .

       Observe that the financing constraint (3) applies to new housing, which is purchased with
new mortgages. That is, the homeowner purchases new housing with a new mortgage, at the
loan-to-value ratio , and then repays the loan over time according to a given amortization
schedule, described below. In this sense, mortgages in the model are first mortgages, as
opposed to home equity loans, which allow homeowners to draw new credit against the value

of their existing housing stock.22 , 23
       Unlike mortgages, the one-period bond is not tied to housing. However, it entails a
  22
     While widespread in the United States, home equity loans are less common in other countries and, to
keep the model simple, are therefore abstracted from.
  23
     The financing constraint (3) is assumed to hold with equality. This assumption, which simplifies the
model, has some empirical support at both aggregate and micro levels. First, over time there has been little
variation in the aggregate loan-to-value ratio for newly built home first mortgages, despite large changes
in interest rates and other macroeconomic conditions (Federal Housing Finance Agency, Monthly Interest
Rate Survey, Table 10). Second, at the micro level, Greenwald (2018) documents that most newly originated
mortgages are taken out at the maximum loan-to-value ratios. Micro-founded justifications for such findings
may include life-cycle and tax considerations that our model abstracts from.


                                                    11
participation cost t-1 , taking the form of a spread over the short rate. The cost is governed
by a function (-b2t ), where b2t  b2t /pt-1 . The function (.) is assumed to be increasing
and convex and satisfy the following additional properties: (.) = 0 when b2t = 0, (.) > 0
when b2t < 0 (the homeowner is borrowing), and (.) < 0 when b2t > 0 (the homeowner

is saving). We think of (.) > 0 as capturing a premium for unsecured consumer credit,
which is increasing in the amount borrowed; (.) < 0 can be interpreted as intermediation
costs that reduce the homeowner's returns on savings below those of the capital owner. At
a technical level, the function (.) controls the extent to which the homeowner can use the

bond market to smooth out fluctuations in income. In equilibrium, however, the function also
affects the extent to which the capital owner can use the bond market to keep consumption
smooth, as the two agent types are counterparties in bond trades. If t-1 was equal to zero
for all b2t , the homeowner would be a permanent income hypothesis consumer. If t-1 = 

for all b2t , the homeowner would be a complete hand-to-mouth consumer. Our case lies
in-between these two extremes.


3.4    Mortgages
                                                                         
We adopt the representation of mortgages proposed by Kydland, Rupert and Sustek (2016),
which has a recursive form that is convenient in models with infinitely lived agents. Under

this representation, mortgage loans--like the agents--live forever, but their amortization
rates are chosen so as to approximate the amortization schedule, and thus the mortgage
payments, of standard 30-year mortgages. A key characteristic of standard mortgage con-
tracts is that, unless the mortgage rate changes, nominal payments are constant.

   Denoting by d2t the outstanding nominal mortgage debt of the homeowner in period t,
the nominal mortgage payments the homeowner has to make in period t are


                                    m2t = (R2t + 2t )d2t .                                 (4)


Here, R2t and 2t are, respectively, the interest and amortization rates of outstanding debt.

                                             12
The variables determining m2t are state variables evolving as


                                    d2,t+1 = (1 - 2t )d2t + l2t ,                                         (5)


                                    2,t+1 = (1 - 2t ) (2t ) + 2t ,                                        (6)
                                             
                                              (1 - 2t )R2t + 2t iF ,
                                                                 t              if FRM,
                                    R2,t+1 =                                                              (7)
                                              it ,                              if ARM,

       t is the interest rate on new FRM loans and 2t  l2t /d2,t+1 is the fraction of new
where iF
loans in outstanding debt next period. The parameters ,   (0, 1) define the amortization

schedule. Specifically,  is the initial amortization rate of a new loan and  governs the
evolution of the amortization rate of outstanding debt. The amortization rate 2,t+1 thus
evolves as a weighted average of the amortization rates of outstanding and new debt. The
parameters  and  are chosen so that equation (6) satisfies the restriction that a single loan
(i.e., no previous debt and no further loans in the future) gets effectively repaid in 30 years

(120 periods in a quarterly model) and its nominal payments stay approximately constant
during this period, provided the loan's interest rate does not change (see Kydland et al.,
2016, for details).24 The interest rate R2,t+1 evolves in a similar way, as a weighted average
of interest rates on outstanding and new debt. In the FRM case, the interest rates on the

stock and flow are potentially different, whereas in the ARM case they are the same, equal to
the short rate. An ARM, however, is still a long-term loan--the evolution of the amortization
rate is still dictated by the law of motion (6).25
       Notice that as long as xHt is positive, l2t will also be positive due to the financing

constraint (3). As we do not observe negative housing investment in aggregate data, the
  24
     Essentially, the amortization rate needs to increase at a speed that just compensates for the fact that
outstanding debt declines over the life of the loan, thus keeping mortgage payments roughly constant until
the loan if effectively repaid.
  25
     One period loans result under  = 1 and  = 0. The system (5)-(7) has a well-defined steady state
                                         -1
given by: l2 = 2 d2 , (1 - ) = (1 - 2 )2     , and R2 = iF or R2 = i. It is straightforward to show that the
steady-state non-linear equation in 2 has a unique solution in [0, 1]. It is also straightforward to show that
when linearized around the steady state, the highest eigenvalue of the system is less than one in absolute
value, rendering the system stationary.


                                                     13
model will be calibrated so that xHt , and thus l2t , are always positive. This, however, does
not mean that there cannot be deleveraging in the model. Such situation occurs when
0 < l2t < t d2t .
   The receipts of mortgage payments by the capital owner are determined analogously


                                        m1t = (R1t + 1t )d1t ,                                             (8)


                                       d1,t+1 = (1 - 1t )d1t + l1t ,                                       (9)

                                   1,t+1 = (1 - 1t ) (1t ) + 1t ,                                         (10)
                                            
                                             (1 - 1t )R1t + 1t iF ,
                                                                t                   if FRM,
                                   R1,t+1 =                                                               (11)
                                             it ,                                   if ARM,

where 1t  l1t /d1,t+1 . Aggregate consistency requires: (1 - )d1t = d2t  Dt , 1t = 2t 
t , and R1t = R2t  Rt . As a consequence, (1 - )m1t = m2t .
   Why not simply assume a constant amortization rate, jt =  t, j  {1, 2}, as in, for in-
stance, Woodford (2001)? This is because a constant amortization rate implies geometrically
declining mortgage payments, thus (unlike in standard mortgage contracts) concentrating

the nominal payments at the beginning of the life of the loan.


3.5     Production

The production side of the economy has the standard New-Keynesian features resulting in
the prototypical New-Keynesian Phillips Curve. Identical perfectly competitive final good
producers, of which there is a measure one, produce output Yt , using as inputs a continuum

of intermediate goods yt (j ), j  [0, 1]. The representative final good producer solves a static
profit maximization problem

                                   1                                            1                1/
                 max pt Yt -           pt (j )yt (j )dj   subject to Yt =                 
                                                                                    yt (j ) dj        ,
              Yt ,{yt (j )}1
                           0   0                                            0




                                                          14
where pt (j ) is the nominal price of an intermediate good j and   (0, 1]. As the measure of
the producers is equal to one, Yt represents also aggregate output. A first-order condition of
this problem gives a demand function for good j

                                                                           1
                                                                          1-
                                                                 pt
                                                     y t (j ) =                Yt .                             (12)
                                                                pt (j )

       The producer of the intermediate good j is a monopolist in market j . It faces the Calvo

price stickiness, which stipulates that with probability   [0, 1] the producer cannot change
its price in a given period. If allowed to change its price in period t, the producer j chooses
pt (j ), understanding it may not change the price in the future, to solve

                               
                                                     pt (j )
                 max Et              s Q1,t+s                yt+s (j ) - t+s yt+s (j ) -  ,   j  [0, 1],        (13)
                 pt (j )
                             s=0
                                                     pt+s


where Q1,t+s  uc,t+s/uct is the stochastic discount factor of the capital owner, t+s is
the real marginal cost, the expression in the square brackets is the real per-period profit,
and yt+s (j ) is given by the demand function (12), with pt+s (j ) = pt (j ) s.26 Further, 
is a fixed cost, measured in terms of the final good, which is a common feature of New-

Keynesian models with capital, ensuring that profits in steady state are equal to zero.27 The
discounted sum thus pertains to profits in all individual future states in which the producer
cannot change its price.
       The real marginal cost t is given by a linear cost function derived from a static cost

minimization problem of producer j


             t yt (j ) =      min            rt kt (j ) + wt nt (j ) subject to Akt (j ) nt (j )1- = yt (j ).
                           kt (j ),nt (j )



Here, A is total factor productivity,   (0, 1), and kt (j ) and nt (j ) are capital and labor,
  26
     Notation such as uct means the first derivative of the function u with respect to argument c, evaluated
in period t.
  27
     This is relevant only for mapping the parameter  to capital share in National Income and Product
Accounts in a straightforward way.



                                                                 15
respectively, rented by producer j in spot markets. The first-order condition is

                                          wt       1-       k t (j )
                                             =                       .                                  (14)
                                          rt                nt (j )

The value function of the cost minimization problem then yields t  A-1 (rt / ) [wt /(1 -
 )]1- , which is independent of j , as already anticipated in the profit function (13).


3.6     Aggregate expenditures

Aggregate output Yt , less the fixed costs incurred by the intermediate good producers, has
four uses
                                Ct + qKt XKt + qHt XHt + G = Yt - ,                                     (15)

where Ct  (1-)c1t +c2t , XKt  (1-)xKt , XHt  xHt , and G is (constant) government
expenditures.28 Further, qKt is the marginal rate of transformation between consumption
and capital investment and qHt is the marginal rate of transformation between consumption
and housing investment. The rates of transformation are given by strictly increasing convex

functions q K (XKt) and q H (XH ), which make the economy's production possibilities frontier
(PPF) concave. A normalization restriction is imposed on these functions so that the rates
of transformation are equal to one in steady state. This specification of the PPF is akin
to that of Fisher (1997) and Huffman and Wynne (1999). Such a concave PPF could be
derived from, for instance, a multisectoral input-output environment (e.g., construction,

manufacturing, services) with different factor shares or imperfect factor mobility, as in,
e.g., Davis and Heathcote (2005). If the transformation of output into the respective uses is
carried out by perfectly competitive firms, the rates of transformation are equal to the relative
prices of capital and housing investment, as already anticipated in the budget constraints.29
  28
     When we map the model into data, we take Yt -  as the model counterpart to aggregate output in the
data.
  29                                                     H
     Since old and new housing are perfect substitutes, qt represents a house price. As we are not interested
in house prices per se, we abstract from the fact that a house consists of both a structure and a land; a
house in the model is just a structure. It is well known that a fixed plot of land works like an additional
adjustment cost.


                                                     16
    At a technical level, the nonlinear PPF plays a role similar to that of capital adjust-
ment costs, controlling the size of the responses of XKt and XHt to shocks (to a first-order
approximation, the two specifications are equivalent). The more curvature the PPF has,
the more of the aggregate adjustment to shocks occurs through changes in relative prices,

and the less through investment in capital or housing. The curvature of the PPF thus has
implications for the ability of the agents to use capital and housing to keep consumption
smooth in response to shocks.


3.7     Equilibrium

Let us define the following aggregates, in addition to those already defined: Kt  (1 - )kt ,

Ht  ht , and Bt  b2t = -(1 - )b1t . The aggregate state of the economy in period t is
characterized by the following endogenous state variables: Kt , Ht , Bt , Dt , t , Rt , it-1 , pt-1 ,
and the shocks introduced below.30 A (Markov) stochastic process for the shocks is known to
all agents. The capital owner comes into period t with the following individual endogenous

state variables, summarizing his balance sheet: kt , b1t , d1t , 1t , and R1t . The homeowner
comes into the period with these individual endogenous state variables, summarizing her
balance sheet: ht , b2t , d2t , 2t , and R2t . The economy operates under either FRM or ARM.
    In equilibrium, the following conditions hold: (i) the capital owner and the homeowner

solve their respective maximization problems, choosing contingency plans for c1t , n1t , xKt ,
b1,t+1 , and l1t (capital owner) and c2t , n2t , xHt , b2,t+1 , and l2t (homeowner); (ii) the interme-
diate good producers choose kt (j ) and nt (j ) to solve their cost minimization problem and, if
allowed, choose pt (j ) to maximize the discounted profits, subject to their demand function;

(iii) the relative prices qKt and qHt are given by the respective marginal rates of transforma-
tion; (iv) monetary policy follows a Taylor rule, specified in the next section; and (v) the
  30
     The variables it-1 and pt-1 can be eliminated from the set of endogenous state variables if the budget
constraints are written in terms of the price of the one-period bond, rather than its interest rate, and the
model is rewritten in terms of the inflation rate, rather than the price level.




                                                    17
mortgage, bond, labor, capital, and goods markets clear


                                                  (1 - )l1t = l2t ,


                                       -(1 - )b1,t+1 = b2,t+1 ,
                                              1
                                                  nt (j ) =       w N1t   + N2t ,
                                          0

                                                        1
                                                            k t ( j ) = Kt ,
                                                    0

                                Ct + qKt XKt + qHt XHt + G = Yt - ,

                                                                                             1/
                                                                            1
where N1t  (1 - )n1t , N2t  n2t , and Yt =                                 0
                                                                                yt (j ) dj        . As capital owners' and

homeowners' labor inputs are perfect substitutes, capital owners' wage rate is                               w wt ,   whereas
homeowners' wage rate is wt , as already anticipated in the respective budget constraints.
       In the FRM case, the stochastic sequences of prices clearing these five markets are for
iF
 t , it , wt , rt , and pt . In the ARM case, as discussed below, the capital owner is indifferent

between the one-period bond and a new ARM loan at any sequence for it and supplies

mortgages in the amount demanded by the homeowner. Under ARM, therefore, any sequence
of it that clears the bond market also clears the mortgage market. A complete list of the
equations characterizing the equilibrium is contained in the supplementary material. For the
reasons explained in the Introduction, we are not concerned with risk premia. The model is

therefore solved under certainty equivalence, in its log-linear form.31
  31
     The government budget constraint holds by Walras' law and is given by G + (1 - )1t +  2 =
K (rt - K )Kt + N wt ( w N1t + N2t ). In the government budget constraint, 1t adjusts so as to ensure
that the budget constraint is satisfied state-by-state. The transfer to the homeowner, 2t , is given by
2t =  2 - (b2t /pt-1 )t-1 , where  2 , the `genuine' transfer, is constant. The bond market participation cost
is rebated back to the homeowner as a part of 2t in order not to affect the definition of aggregate output.
In steady state, b2t = 0 and the participation cost is equal to zero.




                                                               18
3.8       Policy shocks and the Taylor rule

The motivation for the specification of the shocks and the policy rule requires some dis-

cussion. The two strands of research reviewed in Section 2.2 suggest monetary policy has
a dimension affecting expected future interest rates. Our specification of the Taylor rule
therefore reflects the lessons from that literature.
       In broad sense, the short-term nominal interest rate it is typically considered in these

lines of research to (linearly) depend on a number of factors, which can be both latent and
observable. A standard formulation is


                                         it = i + f1t + . . . + fJt ,


where (without the loss of generality) the `loadings' of all the factors on the short-term
interest rate are normalized to equal to one and i is the unconditional mean of the short rate
(the factors are normalized to have an unconditional mean equal to zero). While the factors

can be mutually correlated, a natural restriction typically imposed in the literature is that
they are orthogonal to each other. Interest rates on bonds of longer maturities also depend
on the J factors, though potentially with different loadings. For a bond of maturity s


                                   (s)            (s)                   (s)
                                  it = i(s) + A1 f1t + . . . + AJ fJt ,


                                                              (s)             (s)
where i(s) is the unconditional mean. The loadings, A1 , . . . , AJ , can come from a purely sta-

tistical relationship, such as a principal component decomposition of the yield curve, or from
no-arbitrage restrictions on bond prices. Duffee (2012) and Diebold, Piazzesi and Rudebusch
(2005) provide brief overviews.32
       Given the factor loadings, the S yields can be used at any point in time to back out the J
  32                                                                                          (s)
    In the case of the popular no-arbitrage affine term structure models, a given coefficient Aj is a sum of
two parts. One captures the effect of the factor j on yield s working through expected future short rates and
is purely determined by the factor's persistence. The other captures the effect of the factor working through
a term premium. For the reasons stated in the Introduction and Section 2.2, we are only concerned with the
expectations part.


                                                        19
factors (J  S ). The high-frequency studies carry this out using data from a window around
monetary policy meetings. The lower-frequency studies do so using monthly or quarterly
data. A robust finding from both literatures is that two factors alone capture about 95% of
the movements of yields across maturities. A parsimonious representation of nominal interest
                                             (s)             (s)         (s)
rates is thus: it = i + f1t + f2t and it = i(s) + A1 f1t + A2 f2t . The first factor turns out
to affect all yields more or less equally (the loadings are close to one for all maturities) and
is therefore commonly referred to as the `level' factor. Its time series has high persistence,
close to random walk, implying near one-for-one effects on expected future interest rates.

The second factor affects the long-short spread and is therefore generally referred to as the
`slope' factor. Its time series is also less persistent, implying a small effect on expected
future interest rates at the long end.33 While various macroeconomic shocks affect interest
rates, the yield curve decomposition suggests that by far and large these shocks manifest

themselves in the term structure by moving only its slope and/or its level. Monetary policy
shocks that affect expected future interest rates at the long end are therefore reflected in the
level factor (the studies reviewed in Section 2.2), whereas temporary policy shocks show up
in the slope factor (Wu, 2001; Piazzesi, 2005; Diebold et al., 2006).

       The two policy shocks are modeled here as independent AR(1) processes. One shock is
temporary and the other close to random walk. Following much of both macro and macro-
finance literatures, the highly persistent shock is modeled as a shock to an inflation target
(the central bank's tolerance for inflation).34 The benchmark Taylor rule, which closes the
  33
     As noted in Section 2.2, the level factor is largely unrelated to movements in term premia
(Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2008; Duffee, 2012; Bauer, 2018), whereas the slope factor and term premia are
strongly correlated (a long list of studies, starting with Fama and Bliss, 1987).
  34
     Technically, the inflation target shock is just a label for a `standard' but very persistent policy shock,
as the Taylor rule can always be rewritten in such a way. Specifying the shock as an inflation target shock
leads to a convenient characterization of equilibrium interest and inflation rates derived in the next section.
G¨urkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005b) provide reasons why a central bank's tolerance for inflation may be
time-varying. Ireland (2007) contains a long list of references in the macro literature, including the celebrated
Smets and Wouters (2003) model, that employ Taylor rules with inflation target shocks. A number of the
studies listed in Section 2.2 employ inflation target shocks in the macro-finance literature.




                                                       20
model, is therefore specified as


                           it = i + t -  +  (t - t ) + t ,           > 1.                          (16)


Here, t  pt /pt-1 - 1 is the inflation rate between periods t and t - 1,  is its steady-state
value, and  is a weight on deviations of the inflation rate from a stochastic inflation target
t . The inflation target has an unconditional mean equal to  and follows a stationary,

though highly persistent, process t+1 = (1 -  ) +  t + ,t+1 , where ,t+1 is a mean-
zero innovation and  is close to but less than one. The other shock, t , is a temporary
shock. It has an unconditional mean equal to zero and follows a less persistent process
t+1 =  t + ,t+1 , where ,t+1 is a mean-zero innovation. The two innovations, t and

t , are assumed to be orthogonal to each other. Observe that when t is equal to its
unconditional mean  , the Taylor rule is standard.
       The present assumption of modeling the shocks as two independent AR(1) processes has
two useful implications. First, as shown in the next section, it allows a straightforward

mapping from the equilibrium effects of the two shocks on interest rates into the orthogonal
level and slope factors, thus connecting the model to the lessons from the aforementioned
literatures. Second, as shown in Section 6, it allows a simple exposition of the inner workings
of the model. As demonstrated by G¨
                                  urkaynak et al. (2005a), and as we also show in the

Supplementary material, various rotations of these basic shocks provide different economic
interpretations of the shocks, including as action shocks vs. statement shocks about the
expected future path of policy rates.35
       As a final remark, one may think that including interest rate smoothing into the Taylor
rule (dependence on it-1 ), as is common in the macro literature, may affect the equilibrium

persistence of nominal interest rates. While this is true to some extent, a number of studies
demonstrate that without highly persistent policy shocks, Taylor rules are unable to generate
  35
    Statement shocks can be both pure statements shocks (G¨  urkaynak et al., 2005a) as well as informa-
tion shocks about the future state of the economy (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018). In the Supplementary
material we consider both cases.


                                                  21
in equilibrium as persistent nominal interest rates as in the data.36 Another common element
of Taylor rules, the output gap, is dropped from our specification for an easier exposition
of the transmission mechanism in the model. Experimentation with an output gap did not
change the main findings in any significant way.


3.9       Equilibrium interest, mortgage, and inflation rates

This section prepares the ground for our discussion of the inner workings of the model later
on by explaining how the short- and long-term nominal interest rates, and the inflation rate,
are determined in equilibrium.
       The capital owner invests in all three assets in the economy. His optimality conditions

thus have to exclude arbitrage opportunities across capital, the nominal one-period bond, and
the nominal long-term mortgage (without the loss of generality, it is useful in the following
discussion to abstract from the capital income tax to simplify notation). His Euler equation
for the one-period nominal bond, together with the Euler equation for capital and the Taylor

rule, provide a convenient characterization of the equilibrium short rate. The first-order
conditions for b1,t+1 and xKt , respectively, are

                            1 + it                              rt+1 qK,t+1 (1 - K )
           1 = Et Q1,t+1               and 1 = Et Q1,t+1            +                       ,
                           1 + t+1                              qKt        qKt

where Q1,t+s  uc,t+s/uct is the real pricing kernel of the capital owner. Once log-linearized
around a deterministic steady state (for convenience of the exposition), the two equations

yield the Fisher equation


                                                                        
                       it - Et t+1  Et [rt+1 + (1 - K )qK,t+1 - qKt ]  rt ,                      (17)


       
where rt is the ex-ante real interest rate and (abusing notation) all variables are in percentage
  36
    E.g., G¨
           urkaynak et al. (2005b), H¨
                                     ordahl et al. (2006), Rudebusch and Wu (2008), and Bekaert et al.
(2010).




                                                 22
point deviations from steady state.37 Combining equation (17) with the policy rule (16),
assuming  is close to one and excluding explosive paths for inflation, yields

                                                       s
                                                  1                     
                             it  t +                       Et rt+s -       t ,                             (18)
                                           s=0
                                                                        - 

where t is the effect of monetary policy on the level factor and the expression inside the
square brackets is the effect on the slope factor. In the notation of the conceptual framework
of the preceding section, equation (18) can be written as it  f1t + f2t .38 This is how it
works: Observe that unless the effect of t is sufficiently offset by an endogenous response
of the expected future path of the real rate, the t shock generates highly persistent, one-

for-one, changes in it . It thus affects not only the short rate but also the long rate (the
FRM rate derived below) and, thus, works like a level factor. The t shock represents
the standard temporary monetary policy shock, calibrated to generate the standard New-
Keynesian responses. That is, through the New-Keynesian channel (discussed in Section 6),

a positive t shock increases the ex-ante real interest rate to the extent that it increases as
well. Because the t shock and this New-Keynesian effect are only temporary, it responds
only temporarily, leaving the long rate unaffected.39 The t shock thus triggers a movement
in the slope factor. Furthermore, as long as the persistent shock t leaves the real rate

relatively unaffected, the movements in the level and slope factors due to the two monetary
policy shocks are approximately orthogonal to each other. The numerical findings in Section
5 confirm this to be the case.
       The capital owner's first-order condition for l1t in the FRM case determines the long-term
nominal interest rate on a new FRM loan. Recall that according to equation (8) mortgage

payments are determined by three state variables as m1t = (R1t + 1t )d1t , where the state
  37
     As we are not concerned with term premia, we can work with log-linear expressions, in which certainty
equivalence holds.
  38
     As noted earlier, other shocks can affect the level and slope factors but our focus is only on monetary
policy shocks.
  39
     In principle, in a richer model, the t shock could affect the long rate by generating an increase or a
decline in the risk premium. In the conceptual framework of the preceding section, the risk premium effect on
yield s would show up as the part of the loading As j , j =  , that is not purely due to the shock's persistence.




                                                       23
variables follow the laws of motion (9)-(11). In this representation, the first-order condition
for l1t consists of the marginal effects of l1t on the capital owner's expected life-time utility,
working through the three state variables

                          Ud,t+1   U,t+1               UR,t+1
               1 = Et            +       1t ( - 1
                                                
                                                 t) +              t - R1t ) .
                                                              1t (iF
                           uct      uct                 uct

Here, Ud,t+1 , U,t+1 , and UR,t+1 are the derivatives of the capital owner's value function U in

a recursive formulation of the problem and

                                            1-1t
                                                 d
                                            1+t 1t
                                    1t                     2    (0, 1),                      (19)
                                          1-1t
                                               d
                                          1+t 1t
                                                   + l1t


where d1t  dt1 /pt-1 and l1t  l1t /pt . The Supplementary material provides the recursive
formulation of the capital owner's problem.

   An insight into the first-order condition is gained when there is no previous debt and no
further loans beyond period t. In this case 1t = 0 and the first-order condition simplifies to

                         Ud,t+1                        iF
                                                        t + 1t   1 - 1t
               1 = Et           ,    where Udt = uct           +        Et Ud,t+1
                          uct                           1 + t    1 + t

is obtained by the Benveniste-Scheinkman condition. Successive substitutions then yield an
intuitive expression

                          iF
                           t + 1,t+1                            iF
                                                                 t + 1,t+2
          1 = Et Q1,t+1              + Q1,t+2 (1 - 1,t+1 )                      + ... ,      (20)
                            1 + t+1                        (1 + t+1 )(1 + t+2 )

where 1t evolves in a deterministic way according to the law of motion (10); specifically, as
          
1,t+s+1 = 1,t+s , starting with 1,t+1 = . According to condition (20), the real mortgage

payments on a loan of one unit of consumption have to be worth in present value terms
one unit of consumption, when discounted by the capital owner's pricing kernel. The FRM
interest rate iF
               t has to be such that condition (20) holds. Using the first-order condition




                                                24
for the one-period nominal bond, and the law of iterated expectations, the FRM pricing
equation (20) can also be written in terms of future short-term nominal interest rates as

                             iF
                              t + 1,t+1                   iF
                                                           t + 1,t+2
                   1 = Et               + (1 - 1,t+1 )                      + ... + t ,                        (21)
                                1 + it                 (1 + it )(1 + it+1 )

where t soaks up all the covariance terms between the pricing kernel and interest rates,
and thus term premia. Using the property of the amortization rate that lims 1,t+s = 1

(i.e., the loan is eventually repaid), it is then straightforward to show that to a first-order
effect, if all future short rates, it , it+1 ,..., increase by  percentage points, due to an increase
of the t shock by , the FRM rate also increases by  percentage points.40 The persistent
policy shock thus affects the short and long rates equally, as claimed above. In terms of

the conceptual framework of the preceding section, t has loadings close to one on both the
short and long rates. Changes in the short rate that are less persistent are also priced in iF
                                                                                             t ,

but their impact is smaller.
       In the ARM case, again using the property lims 1,t+s = 1, it is straightforward to

verify that the discounted mortgage payment condition (again derived from the first-order
condition for l1t ) always holds. That is,

                                  it + 1,t+1                   it+1 + 1,t+2
                       1 = Et                + (1 - 1,t+1 )                      + ...
                                     1 + it                 (1 + it )(1 + it+1 )

for any sequence of nominal interest rates. The capital owner is thus indifferent between the
one period bond and a new ARM loan at any sequence for it , as claimed earlier.

       Finally, substituting the expression for the short rate (18) into the policy rule (16) gives
  40
    A first-order Taylor-series expansion of equation (21) with respect to interest rates around a deterministic
                         1     F                1-      F
steady state yields 0 = 1+ i (it - Et it+1 ) + (1+i)2 (it - Et it+2 ) + ..., where variables without a time subscript
represent steady state and (abusing notation) variables with time subscript are in percentage point deviations
from steady state (the first-order approximation essentially gets rid off nonlinearities arising due to Jensen's
inequality).




                                                         25
an expression for the equilibrium inflation rate

                                                   s
                              1              1                      1
                       t  t +                          Et rt+s -       t .                  (22)
                                       s=0
                                                                    - 

As long as t leaves the real rate more or less unaffected and t has only a temporary effect
on the real rate, the inflation rate (22) is a sum of a near random walk and a temporary
component, as in the model of inflation studied by Stock and Watson (2007). Furthermore,

observe that t moves the inflation rate approximately one-for-one with the short and long
rates. The persistent shock thus makes the level factor positively correlated with inflation,
as documented by the studies in the macro-finance literature noted in Section 2.2.


3.10     Demand for new mortgage loans

The preceding section explained how new mortgages are priced by no-arbitrage. Demand

for new mortgages, l2t , is determined by demand for new housing, xht , through the financing
constraint (3). In our representation of mortgages, a new mortgage affects the homeowner's
expected life-time utility through the three state variables that make up mortgage payments.
The first-order condition for xht thus takes the form

                           Vd,t+1 V,t+1              VR,t+1                       Vh,t+1
 (1 - )qHt + qHt Et -            -      2t ( - 2
                                               
                                                t) -             t+1 - R2t ) = Et
                                                            2t (iM                       ,
                            vct    vct                vct                          vct

where Vd,t+1 , V,t+1 , VR,t+1 , and Vh,t+1 are the derivatives of the homeowner's value function
V in a recursive formulation of the problem (the first three have a negative sign) and iM
                                                                                        t+1 is

equal to either iF
                 t or it , depending on whether the contract is FRM or ARM, respectively.

Further, 2t has the same form as in (19), except that the variables pertain to the homeowner.

The first-order condition for xht states that the marginal cost of new housing has to be equal
to its marginal benefit. Further, the marginal cost on the left-hand side is a sum of the current
marginal cost of downpayment, the first expression, and the expected life-time marginal cost
of debt financing, the second expression. The first-order condition can be conveniently re-


                                               26
written in terms of an implicit wedge Ht between the relative price of new housing and the
marginal rate of substitution between housing and non-housing consumption

                                                              Vh,t+1
                                       qHt (1 + Ht ) = Et            .
                                                               vct

The wedge works like a tax/subsidy on new housing and the product qHt (1 + Ht ) represents
the effective price of new housing from the perspective of the homeowner.

       An insight into the wedge is gained when, again, there is no previous debt and no further
loans beyond period t. In this case 2t = 0 and the wedge becomes

                                iM
                                 t+1 + 2,t+1         (iM  + 2,t+2 )(1 - 2,t+1 )
         Ht   = - 1 - Et Q2,t+1              + Q2,t+2 t+2                       + ...                ,
                                  1 + t+1              (1 + t+1 )(1 + t+2 )

where Q2,t+s  vc,t+s /vct is the stochastic discount factor of the homeowner and 2t evolves
in a deterministic way according to the law of motion (6). Observe that the expression

inside the square brackets is the present value of future real mortgage payments, either on
FRM or ARM, when discounted with the homeowner's stochastic discount factor. If the
stochastic discount factor of the homeowner is different from that of the capital owner (i.e.,
Q2,t+s = Q1,t+s ), then the present value is in general different from one and the wedge is

nonzero, its value being determined by the cash-flows of mortgage payments over the life of
the loan. For instance, redistributing real cash flows from periods/states with low Q2,t+s to
those with high Q2,t+s increases the wedge. Holding income of the homeowner constant, when
the wedge increases (declines), demand for mortgages declines (increases). In Garriga et al.

(2017) we refer to this effect as the price effect of long-term mortgage debt, as it affects the
effective price of new mortgages and, thus, housing investment.41
  41
    In the ARM case, the wedge would always be equal to zero if the homeowner, like the capital owner,
could trade the one-period nominal bond at zero cost. In the FRM case, the wedge would always be equal
to zero if the agents could trade zero coupon bonds of all maturities at no cost. Under both contracts, a
complete set of Arrow securities ensures a zero wedge. In these cases, mortgage finance would have no effect
on the price of housing investment. Our assumption that the homeowner can trade the nominal bond only
at a cost guarantees that the wedge is in general nonzero, except in the deterministic steady state (in which
the bond market participation cost is equal to zero).



                                                     27
4       Calibration

While the goal of the paper is to propose a framework for monetary policy analysis, without
any specific country in mind, to demonstrate the quantitative properties of the model, we
rely on U.S. calibration. Most of the parameter values are based on the New-Keynesian
literature (e.g., Gal´
                     i, 2015) and U.S. calibration targets described in detail in Garriga et al.

(2017). One period in the model corresponds to one quarter. Given that the model has cross-
sectional implications (even though the split of the population is coarse), the calibration of
the model deserves some detailed discussion.


4.1       Functional forms

We consider utility functions that are standard in the New-Keynesian literature: u(c1 , n1 ) =
                         (1+)                                                               (1+)
log c1 - [1 /(1 +  )]n1         and u(c2 , h, n2 ) = log c2 + (1 - ) log h - [2 /(1 +  )]n2        , where
1 > 0, 2 > 0,   0, and                (0, 1). The production function has already been specified
as Cobb-Douglas, with technology level A and capital share  . The functions governing the
curvature of PPF are qH (XHt ) = exp( (XHt - XH )) and qK (XKt) = exp( (XKt - XK )),

where  > 0 and XH and XK are, respectively, the steady-state ratios of housing and capital
investment to output (output, Y - , is normalized to be equal to one in steady state).42
Finally, (-Bt ) = exp(-Bt ) - 1, where  > 0 and in steady state B = 0 (p is normalized
to be equal to one, so there is no need to distinguish between real and nominal quantities in
steady state). All functional forms conform to the assumptions made in the description of

the model.


4.2       Parameter values

The parameter values are listed in Table 1, organized into eight categories. Population: .
Preferences:  ,  , 1 , 2 , . Technology: ,  , K , H ,              w,    . Fiscal: G, N , K ,  2 . Price
setting: ,  . Mortgages: , , . Bond market: . And monetary policy:  ,  ,  ,  .
 42
      For our calibration, A = 1.3712 ensures Y -  = 1 in steady state.

                                                    28
Most parameters can be assigned values independently, without solving a system of steady-
state equations. Six parameters (1 , 2 , ,         w,   K ,  2 ) have to be obtained jointly from such
steady-state relations. The parameters  and  are calibrated on the basis of the dynamic
properties of the model, given all other parameter values.

       We start by describing, in the order of the above categories, those parameters that are
calibrated individually. The population parameter  is set equal to 2/3, so that homeowners
correspond to the 3rd and 4th quintiles of the wealth distribution and capital owners to the
5th quintile. As is typical in the New-Keynesian literature,  = 1. The discount factor

is constrained by Euler equations. Data averages for the FRM and inflation rates imply
 = 0.9883.43 Setting  = 0.2048 implies zero steady-state profits, for the value of  noted
below. The parameter  then corresponds to the NIPA share of capital and is set equal to
0.283. The depreciation rates K and H are set equal to 0.02225 and 0.01021, respectively,

on the basis of the average flow-stock ratios for capital and housing. Based on NIPA, G is set
equal to 0.138 and N to 0.235. The price-setting parameters take on uncontroversial values,
 = 0.83 and  = 0.75.44 The loan-to-value ratio for new loans  is set equal to 0.6, the long-
run cross-sectional average for conventional newly-built home mortgages. The amortization

parameters are taken from Kydland et al. (2016):  = 0.00162 and  = 0.9946.45 In the
Taylor rule,  = 0.0113, the same value used in the calibration of  and  = 1.5, a typical
value in the New-Keynesian literature. Finally,  = 0.99 and  = 0.3. The persistent shock
is thus close to random walk and the temporary shock has autocorrelation in the range of
values typically found in the literature.

       Given the above parameter values, six parameters (1 , 2 , ,             w , K ,  2 )   are calibrated
jointly by minimizing, in steady state, equally weighted distance between six targets in the
  43
      In a deterministic steady state, FRM and ARM rates are equal. As a consequence, the steady-state
ARM rate implied by the above value of  is somewhat higher than its data average. The model dynamics,
however, are quantitatively almost the same regardless of whether FRM or ARM rate (or return on capital)
is used to calibrate  .
   44
      The average price duration is thus (1 -  )-1 = 4 quarters.
   45
      These parameters, together with the loan-to-value ratio, the depreciation rate for housing, and the
steady-state housing stock imply a steady-state mortgage debt to quarterly GDP ratio equal to 1.61. This
is somewhat lower than in the data, likely due to the fact that the model speaks only to first mortgages and
does not include second mortgages and other forms of housing credit.


                                                    29
data and the model: the observed average capital-to-output ratio (K ); the housing stock-
to-output ratio (H ); the aggregate hours worked (N ); the ratio of mortgage payments to
homeowner's income (m2 /income2 ); homeowner's income share from transfers (¯
                                                                            2 /income2 );
and capital owner's income share from labor ( w wn1 /income1 ). Here, income1 = (rk +

m1 ) +    w wn1   + 1 and income2 = wn2 +  2 , which are constructed to be consistent with
the way income is defined in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). In particular, the
capital owner's income includes income from all assets, including those backed by mortgage
payments. The steady-state relations between the six parameters and targets consist of

four optimality conditions (for capital, housing, and labor supply by the two agents) and
the model counterparts to individual incomes (the above variables income1 and income2 ).
While the six parameters and targets are interdependent, they are loosely related as follows.
K identifies K , H identifies , and the homeowner's income share from transfers identifies

 2 . Further, the labor supply parameters 1 ,         w,   and 2 are identified from the three labor-
related variables: aggregate hours worked, capital owner's income share from labor, and
the ratio of mortgage payments to homeowner's income, most of which is labor income.
The values of the six targets are provided in Table 2 and the resulting parameter values in

Table 1. Table 2 also reports the model's implications for steady-state moments of the two
agents not targeted in calibration, as well as some additional aggregate ratios. Although the
model's cross-section is coarse, we see that the model is consistent with the corresponding
cross-sectional facts, alongside the standard aggregate ratios.
       Given all other parameter values, the PPF curvature parameter  and the parameter

 governing the bond market participation cost are calibrated on the basis of dynamics.
In particular, the model is required to generate the standard New-Keynesian responses to
the temporary policy shock.46 The logic behind this calibration is that there is much more
information in the literature on the responses of key variables to temporary than persistent
  46
    As noted earlier, we prefer to keep the model relatively simple to highlight its mechanism. As a result,
the model does not reproduce the exact timing and shape of the New-Keynesian responses, for which various
additional frictions are necessary. We simply aim to achieve the right direction and magnitude of the
responses. Further research can fine tune their shape and timing.



                                                    30
policy shocks (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 2005, among many others). Thus,
 is calibrated so that in response to the temporary policy shock the model generates an
increase in the short-term nominal interest rate, accompanied by a decline in both output
and inflation of a smaller magnitude in absolute value than the increase in the short rate.

Setting  = 3.2 achieves this outcome.47 Further, , which controls consumption smoothing
by homeowners, is set equal to 0.15 so that, as in the data, aggregate consumption declines
in response to the temporary shock by a little over half as much as output. Observed
consumption smoothing in response to the temporary policy shock thus dictates the value

of this parameter. (Essentially the same values of  and  are obtained regardless of which
mortgage contract is used in the model to calibrate these parameters.)
    As a final remark, we explain the role of the fiscal parameters (G, N , K ,  2 ). Government
expenditures ensure that tax revenues can be sensibly distributed across the agents, without

counterfactually distorting the composition of their incomes. The tax on capital ensures
that, given the calibrated  , the observed capital-to-output ratio is consistent with the
Euler equation for k . The transfer represents a fixed part of homeowners' income and thus
determines the extent to which their income is subject to fluctuations in labor income. The

labor income tax achieves realistic net income and thus a realistic ratio of mortgage payments
to net income.



5     Findings

In this section we simply report the findings, highlighting the main lessons, and defer the
explanation of the mechanism to the next section. Figure 2 demonstrates the presence of the

debt channel in the model. This is the model counterpart to Figure 1, conditional on shock
persistence (here we consider an increase, rather than a cut, in the policy rate). The figure
shows the differences in the pass through of the policy rate to mortgage interest rates across
  47             
     Rupert and Sustek  (2019) discuss why a parameter restricting capital adjustment is critical, in models
with capital, for generating the standard New-Keynesian impulse responses.



                                                    31
the two mortgage contracts and across new and outstanding debt, for a given persistence of
the policy shock, with the two calibrated values 0.3 and 0.99.


5.1       The experiments

The next four figures, Figures 3-6, present the findings for some key variables, distinguishing

between the two shocks (temporary and persistent) and contracts (ARM and FRM). Each
figure contains responses of three versions of the model: with both mortgages and sticky
prices (MoNK), with mortgages only (Mo), and with sticky prices only (NK). Specifically,
Mo has  = 0 whereas NK has  = 0, implying Dt =0 and mjt = 0. All other parameter
values are kept as in Table 1 (setting  = 0 affects the steady state, but the differences in

all variables except debt are minuscule). The purpose of the alternative specifications is to
isolate the effects of the two frictions, as well as their interaction.48
       For both contracts and shock types, the size of the shock is normalized such that on
impact, in MoNK, the short-term nominal interest rate increases by one percentage point

(annualized). The same shock size is then used in the decomposition into Mo and NK. In the
figures, the inflation rate is expressed as annualized percentage point deviations; quantities
are expressed as percentage deviations.


5.2       Temporary policy shock

Figures 3 and 4 pertain to the temporary policy shock. Recall that the responses of the nom-

inal interest rate, inflation, output, and aggregate consumption are engineered by the pa-
rameterization of  and  to be consistent with the standard responses of the New-Keynesian
channel.
       There are two main, related, takeaways from Figures 3 and 4. First, the responses of all

variables in MoNK (with the trivial exception of mortgage payments) are almost the same
regardless of the contract used. Second, the responses of MoNK are similar to those of NK,
  48
    Because the equilibrium needs to be recomputed when the specification changes, the below impulse
responses from Mo and NK do not necessarily sum up to the one in MoNK.


                                                32
with the exception of consumption of homeowners and, to a lesser extent, consumption of
capital owners. Thus, except individual consumption, the debt channel is largely irrelevant
for the transmission of the temporary shock and this shock transmits mainly through sticky
prices.

   With regard to individual consumption, there are two features to note: (i) the differences
in the responses across the agents and (ii) between MoNK and NK. Regarding the first fea-
ture, the model possesses the attractive property that consumption of homeowners declines
more than consumption of capital owners. In MoNK, about twice as much under ARM and

by two thirds more under FRM. The decline in homeowners' consumption is also substan-
tially more persistent. These properties of the model are consistent with empirical evidence
that homeowners are constrained in their ability to smooth out fluctuations in income (e.g.,
Kaplan and Violante, 2014). Regarding the second point, individual consumption is visibly

sensitive to the presence of the debt channel. This is particularly the case under ARM, where
the decline in homeowners' consumption in MoNK is by a third as large as in NK, due to the
temporary sharp increase in real mortgage payments, which provides an additional channel
of monetary policy transmission interacting with sticky prices. The decline in homeowners'

consumption under ARM is also clearly more persistent in MoNK than in NK.
   In sum, while the theory is consistent with the lessons of the empirical studies noted in
Section 2.1 that consumption expenditures of indebted homeowners (especially those with
ARM) are highly sensitive to monetary policy shocks, it also cautions against extrapolating
this lesson to the effect of mortgage debt on the economy as a whole, at least if the New-

Keynesian channel is the dominating channel of monetary policy transmission: in Figures
3-4, the responses of aggregate output are effectively the same across the two contracts, as
well as across MoNK and NK, despite differences in the response of individual consumption.




                                             33
5.3    Persistent policy shock

Figures 5 and 6 pertain to the persistent policy shock. Due to higher persistence, the

responses are plotted for 40 periods, instead of 20 as in the case of the temporary shock.
Observe that in line with equations (18) and (22) the short rate and the inflation rate both
increase by the same magnitude, leaving the ex-ante real interest rate essentially unaffected.
Furthermore, as already observed in Figure 2, and in line with our earlier discussion, the

FRM interest rate on new loans also increases by about the same magnitude as the short
rate. The persistent shock thus manifests itself in the level factor.
   There are four main takeaways from Figures 5 and 6. First, the differences between
MoNK and Mo are small, meaning that most of the transmission of the shock works through
the debt channel, with sticky prices playing secondary role. Second, most of the effects

are redistributive, between consumption of the two agents and the two types of investment,
with only small effects on aggregates. The lack of sizable aggregate responses occurs despite
the fact that there are technological costs (nonlinear PPF) of changing the composition of
aggregate expenditures, affected by the redistribution. Third, there are marked differences

between ARM and FRM, with the responses quantitatively larger under ARM. And fourth,
the real effects of monetary policy are present despite the fact that the real interest rate is
essentially unaffected. In particular, the responses of individual consumption are not result-
ing from intertemporal substitution, a channel of monetary policy transmission critiqued by

Kaplan et al. (2018) and other studies cited therein.
   As in the case of the temporary shock, there are significant differences in the magnitude of
the responses of consumption of the two agents. Here again, in absolute value, consumption
of homeowners responds more than consumption of capital owners. This is particularly
visible under ARM, where the decline in consumption of homeowners is immediate, due

to the sharp persistent increase in real mortgage payments, which is costly to smooth out.
Instead, under FRM, consumption of homeowners increases, due to the gradual decline in
real mortgage payments. But in contrast to the immediate decline of their consumption


                                              34
under ARM, the increase under FRM is gradual. This again reflects the costly consumption
smoothing of homeowners. Homeowners would like to increase consumption immediately
by borrowing against the future savings on their mortgage payments on outstanding debt
(deflated by persistent inflation), but this is costly due to the bond market participation cost.

As a result, consumption under FRM increases only gradually and homeowners substitute
on impact towards housing consumption, which can be financed through mortgages without
incurring the participation cost. This substitution occurs even though the FRM rate on new
loans increases, as we have seen in Figure 2.

   While there is ample evidence on the responses of macro variables to temporary policy
shocks (which the model is designed to replicate), information on responses to persistent
policy shocks is so far, at best, scattered, due to difficulties with identification. Nonetheless,
a couple of studies that attempted such analysis give some support to the responses generated

by the model. Diebold et al. (2006) estimate a bi-directional (macro to yields, yields to
macro) term structure model. A level factor shock in their model increases the short and
long rates, inflation, and to a smaller extent aggregate economic activity. A similar result is
obtained also by Rudebusch and Wu (2008). Using a standard VAR empirical framework,

but with novel identification, Uribe (2018) finds that a permanent nominal interest rate
shock increases inflation nearly one-for-one, accompanied by a modest increase in output.
The responses of interest rates, inflation, and output from these studies are consistent with
the properties of the model.
   As in the case of the temporary shock, the theory again cautiones against drawing conclu-

sions for the economy as a whole from strong responses of indebted homeowners to monetary
policy shocks. Here, under ARM, aggregate output increases despite the sharp and sizable
decline in homeowners consumption. And to the extent that the model is consistent with
the empirical findings noted in the preceding paragraph, an increase in output and a decline

in homeowners consumption (resulting from an increase in ARM payments) can coincide, if
the policy shock hitting the economy resembles our persistent shock.



                                                35
6     The mechanism

This section explains the mechanism behind the findings reported above. Specifically, it
explains why in the above experiments the temporary shock in MoNK propagates mainly
through the New-Keynesian channel, whereas the persistent shock propagates mainly through
the long-term debt channel. This is again done by considering each channel in isolation. We

subsequently discuss their (limited) interaction. Further, we connect the long-term debt
channel in the model with the following concepts in the literature: (i) cash flow effects vs.
the present value effects and (ii) the interest rate exposure channel vs. the Fisher revaluation
channel.


6.1    New-Keynesian channel

While the New-Keynesian monetary transmission mechanism may be well understood, for
completeness we briefly explain how it operates in our two-agent setting with capital and
housing. As in the above experiments, when considering the role of the New-Keynesian
mechanism in MoNK, we remove mortgages from the model (the NK specification:  = 0,

implying Dt = 0 and mjt = 0). In this case, the two agents still trade the one-period bond,
with homeowners at a cost, but there is no long-term debt in the economy. The model is
thus akin to a TANK model, albeit with capital and housing, two assets that can be used to
smooth out consumption in the aggregate.
    The nominal rigidity in the New-Keynesian mechanism is the price stickiness contained

in the optimization problem (13). As demonstrated by numerous texts (e.g., Gal´
                                                                              i, 2015),
the log-linearized version of the first-order condition for this problem, once aggregation is
imposed, yields the New-Keynesian Phillips curve (NKPC)

                                   (1 -  )(1 -  )
                             t =                  t + Et t+1 ,                             (23)
                                          

where t is a deviation of the real marginal cost from steady state, or equivalently from the


                                              36
flexible-price level (like in steady-state, under flexible prices the marginal cost is constant).49
For  close to one, the NKPC provides a negative relationship between an expected change
in the inflation rate, Et t+1 - t , and the real marginal cost, t . For a highly persistent
inflation rate, Et t+1 - t is close to zero, implying t  0. This results in the case of the

persistent policy shock and monetary policy has almost no real effects (in the quantitative
experiment the expected change in inflation is slightly negative, as inflation declines slowly
back to its steady state following the shock, leading to small positive real effects). If, in
contrast, the inflation rate is not very persistent, then Et t+1 - t = 0 and t = 0. This

results under the temporary policy shock, in which case monetary policy has real effects.
       In the supplementary material we establish that percentage deviations in the real marginal
cost are positively related to percentage deviations in aggregate output, Yt .50 Equation (23)
thus provides a negative relationship between Et t+1 - t and Yt . As a result, the policy

shock that temporarily reduces inflation, thus generating Et t+1 - t > 0, produces a de-
cline in output, Yt < 0. As both agents' incomes represent a claim on aggregate output
(in the form of labor and capital income), the temporary decline in output translates into a
temporary decline in income, which the agents would like to smooth out. As a result, both

capital and housing investment drop. However, as investment is costly to adjust, due to the
nonlinear PPF, full consumption smoothing cannot be achieved and the declines in incomes
must be partly reflected also in temporary declines in consumption.
       Further, because consumption smoothing is costlier for the homeowner than the capital
owner, C2t declines by more than C1t . There are two reasons for this. First, housing is

costlier to adjust than capital as it involves a direct utility loss, in addition to the nonlinear
PPF. And second, the homeowner cannot easily tap (indirectly) into using capital to keep
consumption smooth as borrowing from the capital owner through the bond market involves a
  49
     Equation (23) is derived under the common assumption that the steady-state inflation rate is equal to
zero, which leads to a more elegant expression for the linearized NKPC than would otherwise be the case.
The model is computed under the calibrated non-zero steady-state inflation rate.
  50
     A positive relationship between t and Yt is easier to establish in the textbook New-Keynesian model,
in which Ct = Yt .




                                                   37
cost in the form of the premium over the short rate.51 Homeowners nonetheless use the bond
market to some extent, which explains the persistence in the decline in their consumption,
as borrowing to mitigate the impact of the shock results in debt repayments, and thus
lower consumption, over time. Finally, the fall in capital investment leads to a decline in

qKt and thus positive expected capital gains, Et (1 - K )qK,t+1 - qt > 0, generating the
                                                                            
typical New-Keynesian temporary increase in the ex-ante real interest rate rt (see equation
(17)), following a monetary tightening. Effectively, the increase in the real interest rate
ensures that, in equilibrium, capital owners are content with the temporary decline in their

consumption, as required by their Euler equation.
       In sum, the New-Keynesian channel is the strongest for temporary policy shocks and
its power declines with the persistence of the shock. In the limit, as the shock persistence
approaches random walk, the New-Keynesian channel shuts down completely. A temporary

shock temporarily reduces the inflation rate, output and all its expenditure components, and
temporarily increases the real interest rate.


6.2       Long-term debt channel

Next, consider the case when housing is financed by mortgages but there are no New-
Keynesian frictions (the Mo specification:  = 0, meaning flexible prices). In this case,

the NKPC (23) implies t = 0. The marginal cost is constant and rt and wt are equal to
their respective marginal products, subject to a constant markup. Section 3.10 explained
how demand for new mortgages is determined and that it depends on the distribution of
real mortgage payments over the life of the loan, showing up as a wedge in the first-order

condition for housing. We referred to that effect as the price effect. In this section we focus
on how the equilibrium is affected by the outstanding stock of mortgage debt, referring to
  51
    An additional reasons for a stronger response of homeowners' consumption is that capital owners are
partially hedged against the drop in aggregate output by an increase in monopoly profits, which are well
known to be counter-cyclical in New-Keynesian models. This partially compensates them for the decline in
labor and capital income. On the other hand, in our calibration, a larger fraction of homeowners' income,
than capital owners' income, is derived from fixed transfers, which provide a buffer against fluctuations in
income from production factors.


                                                    38
this effect as the income effect, as it affects disposable income. Outstanding debt is the focus
of the literature reviewed in Section 2.1
   In the case of outstanding debt, what matters are the payments over the remaining term
of existing loans. It is convenient to write these payments in real terms: mj,t+s  mj,t+s /pt+s ,

with j  {1, 2} denoting the agent and s = 0, 1, 2, .... denoting the time period ahead. To
focus squarely on outstanding debt, let us assume that lj,t+s = 0, for s = 0, 1, 2, . . .. That is,
there are no new loans originated after and including the current period t. The sequence of
real payments on outstanding debt, following and including period t, is thus

                                                 Rjt + jt
                                         mjt =            djt                                 (24)
                                                  1 + t

                                          Rj,t+1 + j,t+1
                             mj,t+1 =                      (1 - jt )djt,                      (25)
                                        (1 + t+1 )(1 + t )
                                Rj,t+2 + j,t+2
               mj,t+2 =                                (1 - j,t+1 )(1 - jt )djt ,   etc.      (26)
                          (1 + t+2 )(1 + t+1 )(1 + t )

Here, djt  djt /pt-1 is the stock of outstanding debt, as of period t, in real terms. Recall

that in period t the variables Rjt , jt , and djt are pre-determined state variables, which in
subsequent periods evolve according to the laws of motion (5)-(7), for the homeowner, and
(9)-(11), for the capital owner (pt-1 is also pre-determined). Further, the evolution of the
interest rate Rj,t+s depends on whether loans are FRM or ARM.

   In the following subsections, we specialize the general expressions for mortgage payments
(24)-(26) to FRM and ARM contracts. After describing the payments in each case, we
explain their impact on households in two extreme cases: a hand-to-mouth consumer and
a permanent income hypothesis consumer. The quantitative findings reported above lie in-
between these two boundaries. Recall that the position between the two boundaries was

calibrated on the basis of replicating the response of consumption, relative to output, to
the standard temporary policy shock. Finally, we discuss how the effects of the inflation
rate and the real interest rate on mortgage payments in the model are related to the Fisher
revaluation channel and the interest rate exposure channel noted in Section 2.1.

                                                  39
6.2.1    FRM

Under FRM, Rj,t+s is constant for all s = 0, 1, 2, .... As a result, monetary policy affects the

remaining sequence of real mortgage payments on outstanding debt only through inflation.
An increase in inflation reduces the real value of the payments. What matters quantitatively,
however, is the accumulated effect of the inflation rate. As is apparent from equations (24)-
(26), the size of the real effects on the payments gradually increases over time in line with

inflation persistence: a temporary change in inflation has a much smaller effect on the real
value of mortgage payments in the later periods of the remaining term than a persistent
change.52


Hand-to-mouth homeowner

A hand-to-mouth homeowner, which in our setup results if the cost of adjusting the one-
period bond is infinite, takes the real payments as they come and, in the absence of new

loans and housing investment (and the labor supply margin), adjusts consumption one-for-
one with the real payments, m2,t+s , s = 0, 1, 2, .... This effect is in the literature (see Section
2.1) generally referred to as the cash flow effect, since it is the period payments--cash flows--
that determine consumption through a sequence of independent period budget constraints

(i.e., constraint (2) with b2,t+1 = b2t = 0 for all t, in addition to the absence of l2t and xHt ).53
Due to the accumulated effect of inflation in equations (24)-(26), the cash flow effects under
FRM get stronger over time with inflation persistence.


Permanent income hypothesis homeowner

A permanent income hypothesis homeowner, which results in our setup if the cost of adjusting

the one-period bond is zero, faces a life-time budget constraint, rather then a sequence of
independent period constraints. The life-time budget constraint can be derived from equation
  52
      Observe from equations (24)-(26) that if mortgages were one-period loans (jt = 1), the inflation effect
would occur only in period t and inflation persistence would be irrelevant.
  53
      In the full model, homeowners can use the housing investment margin, xHt , and the labor supply margin,
n2t , to mitigate the cash flow effects, even if the cost of accessing the bond market is infinite.


                                                     40
(2) by forward substitution for b2,t+s , s = 1, 2, ..., with t = 0 for all t. Putting again aside
new loans and housing investment, the life-time budget constraint is

                                                         T   s -1
                               1 + it-1                                1
                     Ct = Wt +          b2t - m2t +                          m2,t+s ,                  (27)
                                1 + t                    s=1 i=0
                                                                    1 + rt+i

                       T     s -1  1                                 T     s -1  1                     
where Ct  c2t +        s=1   i=0 1+rt+i c2,t+s   and Wt  w2t+        s=1   i=0 1+rt+i w2,t+s ,   with w2,t+s

denoting post-tax labor income plus transfers, and where the real mortgage payments are
given by equations (24)-(26) for FRM. To simplify exposition, we have abstracted from
uncertainty in deriving the life-time budget constraint and use rt here for the real interest

rate, between t and t + 1, in the Fisher equation: 1 + rt = (1 + it )/(1 + t+1 ). With infinite
horizon, T = . As is apparent from equation (27), in the case of a permanent income
hypothesis homeowner, consumption depends only on the present value of the long-term
debt position--the term in the square brackets--not individual cash flows.

       Inflation affects the present value of the long-term debt position by determining the se-
quence of real mortgage payments, as described above. The inflation effect on the present
value is in the literature referred to as the Fisher revaluation channel. In Doepke and Schneider
(2006), and their follow-up papers, as well as in Meh et al. (2010) and Meh and Terajima

(2011), changes in inflation are persistent, similar to those resulting from our persistent
shock. In contrast, in Adam and Zhu (2016), and Auclert (2019) changes in inflation are
only temporary (these authors only consider changes in the current t ), similar to those
resulting from our temporary shock. Given the above discussion on the determination of
real mortgage payments, persistent changes in inflation have clearly a stronger effect on the

present value of the debt position than temporary changes.54
       Changes in the real interest rate also affect the present value of the long-term debt
position. Auclert (2019) refers to this effect as the interest rate exposure channel. As is
apparent from equation (27), persistent changes in the real interest rate have a stronger
  54
  Campbell and Cocco (2003) refer to the Fisher revaluation channel as "the real capital value risk of
FRM".



                                                    41
effect on the present value than temporary changes. As we have seen in the computational
experiments, and as explained in Section 3.9, the shocks and frictions in the model generate
in equilibrium only short-lived changes in the real rate: the temporary shock has a sort-lived
effect on the real rate, in the presence of sticky prices, while the persistent shock leaves

the real rate unaffected, both with and without sticky prices. The short-lived changes in
the real rate in the model are close to a scenario considered by Auclert (2019), who shows
that in the case of a change only in the current rt , the present value of total wealth (net
financial wealth plus discounted future earnings) changes by the amount equal to, using our
               1+it-1
notation, w2t + 1+t b2t - m2t - c2t , where m2t is given by (24). He refers to this expression as

the "unhedged interest rate exposure". Clearly, this concept, increasingly used in empirical
studies (see, e.g., Tzamourani, 2019; Slacalek et al., 2020), rests on the presence of the life-
time budget constraint and thus applies only in cases in which households have sufficiently

unconstrained access to financial markets.


The calibrated homeowner

As noted above, in our model, homeowners are in-between the two extreme cases, hand-to-
mouth and permanent income hypothesis households. Which of the two types they resemble
more can be inferred from how closely their consumption tracks real mortgage payments.
The comovement between these two variables can be easily read off Figure 6, which considers

the persistent shock, resulting in a persistent increase in inflation, with sizable gradual
effects on real mortgage payments. As consumption of homeowners grows gradually in line
with the gradual decline in real mortgage payments, the cash flow effects in the model are
fairly strong (recall the real rate in this experiment is approximately constant and so the

increase in consumption does not result from an intertemporal substitution effect). On this
basis, the homeowners in the model are closer to hand-to-mouth households than permanent
income hypothesis households. The calibrated model is thus closer to the world of, e.g.,




                                               42
Di Magio et al. (2017) than that of Doepke and Schneider (2006) or Auclert (2019).55 ,                      56




6.2.2      ARM

Under ARM, the income effect is dramatically different. In this case, the interest rate in the
current period t, Rjt , is predetermined, equal to it-1 , but subsequent interest rates are reset
in line with the short rate: Rj,t+1 = it , Rj,t+2 = it+1 , etc. (recall from Section 3.9 that this

guarantees the absence of arbitrage on the part of capital owners between ARM and rolling
over the one-period bond). After the current period t, monetary policy thus affects both the
denominator and the numerator in the expressions for real mortgage payments (24)-(26). To
highlight the combined effect, let us focus on the first period in which a re-set applies (i.e.,

period t + 1). The ratio in equation (25) can be approximately written as57

                   it + j,t+1        it + j,t+1
                                                 it + j,t+1 = rt + t+1 + j,t+1 .
               (1 + t+1 )(1 + t )  1 + t+1 + t

Similar expressions can be derived for real payments in other periods, at least as long as the
effect of accumulated inflation in the denominator can be safely ignored (discussed below).
       The key insight here is that an increase in the short-term nominal interest rate has

the same effect on real mortgage payments regardless of whether the increase is due to an
increase in the real rate, rt , or the inflation rate, t+1 . Thus, in contrast to the FRM case,
  55
      The shock has the opposite effect on capital owners, leaving aggregate consumption fairly unaffected.
This is despite the fact that homeowners are more constrained in consumption smoothing, as reflected in
the stronger responses of their consumption, than capital owners. The reason for the lack of a quantitatively
interesting response of aggregate consumption is that the steady-state consumption of capital owners is
higher than that of homeowners.
   56
      Observe that consumption of capital owners also follows the path of the cash flows, even though less
strongly than consumption of homeowners. This is because, as discussed earlier, if homeowners are con-
strained in the use of the bond market, in equilibrium, so are capital owners, as they are the only counterparty
to bond trades. And while capital owners can use capital investment to achieve consumption smoothing, this
involves a cost in the form of the nonlinear PPF. A factor that also somewhat insulates their consumption
from fluctuations in mortgage payments is that relative to their income, the receipts from mortgage payments
are small (see Table 2).
   57
      In this derivation, the first approximation step holds for sufficiently small inflation rates and the second
step holds again for sufficiently small inflation rates and for j,t+1 sufficiently smaller than one, which is
generally the case, unless the stock is close to maturity. Further, in the final step, we have utilized the Fisher
equation, assuming perfect foresight for easier exposition.




                                                       43
an increase in t+1 under ARM increases the real value of mortgage payments. Monetary
policy can thus engineer the same effect on real payments regardless of whether the effect
comes from its ability to increase the real rate or expected inflation. All that matters is
the increase in the short-term nominal interest rate. But while its ability to affect the real

rate is only temporary (under sticky prices and the temporary shock), expected inflation
can be increased persistently in line with the persistent policy shock. After sufficiently long
time, however, the effect of accumulated inflation in the denominator starts to dominate
the inflation effect in the numerator and the overall effect of the persistent shock on real

mortgage payments under ARM starts to resemble that under FRM. This is why, in Figure
5, after period 30 (7.5 years), the real value of mortgage payments falls below the initial
level.


Hand-to-mouth homeowner

A hand-to-mouth homeowner takes the mortgage payments (cash flows) as they come. Thus,

in the first period in which the mortgage rate is reset upwards, his consumption sharply drops
in line with the increase in real mortgage payments. Clearly, from equation (25), if mortgage
loans were one-period loans (2t = 1), the cash-flow effects coming from the reset of the
mortgage rate would be absent.


Permanent income hypothesis homeowner

A permanent income hypothesis homeowner faces again the life-time budget constraint (27)--

recall this constraint holds for a generic sequence of m2,t+s --but now with the mortgage
payments (24)-(26) applicable to ARM. In particular, the present value of the long-term
debt position in the life-time budget constraint becomes




                                              44
                                                T   s -1
                                                              1
                                       m2t +                        m2,t+s
                                               s=1 i=0
                                                           1 + rt+i

     (it-1 + 2t )d2t       it + 2,t+1            (it+1 + 2,t+2 )(1 - 2,t+1 )              (1 - 2t )d2t
=                    +                    +                                         + ...              ,
         1 + t         (1 + rt )(1 + t+1 ) (1 + rt )(1 + t+1 )(1 + rt+1 )(1 + t+2 )          1 + t

where the last term is the unamortized real debt at the end of period t. Without loss of
generality consider T = 2. That is, there are mortgage payments in the current period t and

two further periods, t + 1 and t + 2. In this case, 2,t+2 = 1, as t + 2 is the final period of
the life of the loan. Then, working backwards from period t + 2, using the Fisher equation
1 + it+s = (1 + rt+s )(1 + t+s+1 ), the expression in the square brackets becomes equal to one
and the present value of the long-term debt position becomes [(1 + it-1 )/(1 + t )]d2t . This
is equivalent to a one-period debt position.

         Effectively, the ability to costlessly trade the one-period bond, which is used to price
ARM by capital owners, allows the homeowner to offset any changes in the real mortgage
payments resulting from changes in the short-term nominal interest rate. In other words,
the one-period nominal bond completes the market in the dimension of nominal interest rate

re-sets under ARM.58 The important point here is that under ARM and the assumption
of a permanent income hypothesis homeowner, the Fisher revaluation channel matters only
to the extent that it works through current inflation, t , while the interest rate exposure
channel is absent.


The calibrated homeowner

Again, the position of homeowners in the model between the two extremes can be inferred
from the comovement between their consumption and real mortgage payments. It is appar-
ent from Figure 5 that, although there is some consumption smoothing around the sharp
    58
    While, for easy exposition, we have abstracted from considering uncertainty explicitly, the above deriva-
tion holds also with uncertainty. In that case, all that is needed is to replace the simple Fisher equation
with its general form, (1 + it )-1 = Et [Q2,t+1 /(1 + t+1 )], and to replace the real rate in the discounted sums
with the inverse of the homeowner's pricing kernel Q2,t+s . Working backwards, exploiting the law of iterated
expectations, gives the discounted sum in the square brackets again equal to one.



                                                       45
increase in real mortgage payments at the time of the first re-set (consumption is smoother
than real mortgage payments at that point and falls ahead of the re-set), overall, homeowners
consumption tracks real mortgage payments fairly closely (in the opposite direction); again
recall there is no change in the real rate and thus no intertemporal substitution effect. Home-

owners in the model are thus closer to hand-to-mouth homeowners than permanent income
hypothesis homeowners. For the same reasons discussed in the FRM case, consumption of
capital owners responds less (and in the same direction as the re-sets), but still tracks the
real mortgage payments over time.

   Finally, compare the real mortgage payments in Figures 3 and 5 (under MoNK). In both
figures, at the time of the first re-set (period 2), real mortgage payments increase by 6
percent. This is because the short-term nominal interest rate in both cases increases by the
same magnitude. In Figure 3, the increase in the nominal rate is due to an increase in the

real rate, whereas in Figure 5 it is due to an increase in expected inflation. This confirms the
point made above that all that matters for real mortgage payments under ARM (at least in
short to medium run) is the nominal rate.


6.3    Interactions under ARM and the temporary shock

Although there is much separation between the potency of the two channels to transmit

monetary policy, one place where they interact in a quantitatively nontrivial way is in the
response of homeowners consumption under the temporary shock, especially under ARM
(Figure 3). In the Mo case, there is almost no response of C2t on the impact of the shock but
this variable responds substantially more strongly in MoNK than in NK. The combination of

the two nominal rigidities thus has a bigger impact than the sum of their individual effects.
   The reason for this outcome is the following. Under both MoNK and NK, the temporary
monetary policy tightening leads to a temporary decline in output, resulting in a decline
in income of both agents and an increase in the ex-ante real rate. Both agents are trying
to borrow in order to smooth out the temporary decline in income, driving the real rate


                                              46
up. Under MoNK, in addition, homeowners face a temporary increase in real mortgage
payments, which they would also like to smooth out. However, they find it very costly to
do so when all agents are trying to borrow. Effectively, in MoNK, homeowners are hit by a
double whammy: an increase in real mortgage payments at the time of an aggregate decline

in output. Or in other words, their mortgage payments go up at the time when the cost
of unsecured credit also goes up. Therefore, their consumption under MoNK has to adjust
more than under NK.



7     Conclusions

In recent years, there has been much interest in the role of household long-term, mortgage,

debt in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. This paper offers a tractable frame-
work that integrates the long-term debt channel with the standard New-Keynesian channel,
providing a tool for monetary policy analysis that reflects the recent debates in the literature.
In line with much empirical evidence, an important feature of the model is a limited ability of

homeowners to smooth out fluctuations in disposable income. We have shown how the model
can be calibrated to be consistent with both basic aggregate and cross-sectional moments
and carried out computational experiments to get a sense of the relative importance of the
two channels, as well as of their interaction. The nature of the computational experiments

was guided by recent lessons from both the macroeconomic and finance literatures regarding
the effects of monetary policy on nominal interest rates. We have explained at length the
inner workings of the model and related it to key concepts employed in the literature on the
long-term debt channel.

    The key findings from our computational experiments can be summarized as follows.
First, there is much decoupling between the two channels. The New-Keynesian channel
transmits temporary deviations from the Taylor rule, whereas the long-term debt channel
transmits persistent changes in the course of monetary policy. Put differently, for most
key variables, mortgage debt is largely irrelevant for the transmission of temporary policy

                                               47
shocks, while sticky prices are largely irrelevant for the transmission of persistent policy
shocks. The New-Keynesian channel generates short-lived aggregate effects whereas the
long-term debt channel generates persistent distributional effects. The distributional effects
are quantitatively comparable with the aggregate effects, holding the initial change in the

policy rate the same. Second, under both channels, consumption of homeowners is more
sensitive to monetary policy than consumption of capital owners, who represent in the model
the richest quintile of the population. Furthermore, consumption of homeowners is the
only variable significantly affected by the presence of long-term debt in the New-Keynesian

channel, especially under ARM. Monetary tightening in this case is a double whammy for
homeowners: their real mortgage payments increase at the time when the cost of unsecured
credit also goes up. Third, although the effect of mortgage debt on homeowners consumption
in the model is consistent with empirical evidence on the strong effects of monetary policy

on this segment of the population, the model calls for caution when extrapolating from such
observations to the economy as a whole.
   There are two extreme cases of the debt channel considered in the literature: one based
on the present value of the debt position and the other on the timing of cash flows. The

homeowners in the model operate in-between these boundaries, but our calibration based
on VAR evidence implies that they are closer to the cash flow channel. This is crucial for
the debt channel in the case of ARM. We have shown that if only the present value of the
debt position mattered, then only surprises in current inflation (not its persistence) would
matter for the workings of the long-term debt channel while changes in the real interest

rate would be irrelevant. This is because frictionless trade in a one-period nominal bond,
which underpins the present value of the debt position as the relevant variable, effectively
completes the market in the dimension of ARM re-sets.
   For analytical purposes, we have imposed orthogonality on the two types of shocks.

In practice both policy shocks likely occur at the same time, making the two channels
operate concurrently. Furthermore, the two basic shocks can be intertwined by various



                                             48
rotations, forming shocks with interesting economic interpretations, such as statement and
action shocks.
   There are various ways in which the present model could be extended in future work.
First, a natural extension is to incorporate various bells and whistles in order to obtain a

closer fit to the data along the dimensions well established in empirical studies, such as the
responses to the temporary shock. Next, while we have listed a few reduced-form studies
that give some support to the responses in the model to the persistent shock, this area clearly
requires further empirical research. In some sense, the theory is ahead of measurement and

more empirical work is needed to establish widely accepted `facts'. Third, long-term nominal
debt adds an extra nominal rigidity to the standard sticky-price framework, with nontrivial
implications for optimal monetary policy. What makes the design of optimal policy even
more interesting is that both ARM and FRM loans may exist in different parts of a single

monetary area, such as the eurozone. Finally, the big open question regards the role of term
premia in the transmission mechanism. Existing research suggests that the persistent shock,
as reflected in the level factor, is an unlikely source of time variation in term premia. It
is, however, feasible that the present framework underestimates the role of the temporary

shock if temporary shocks cause movements in term premia, and thus in the cost of long-term
loans.




                                              49
References
Adam, K. and J. Zhu, "Price-Level Changes and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth
 Across the Euro Area," Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (2016), 871­906.

Ang, A., G. Bekaert and M. Wei, "The Term Structure of Real Rates and Expected
 Inflation," Journal of Finance 63 (2008), 797­849.

Ang, A. and M. Piazzesi, "A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Structure
 Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables," Journal of Monetary Economics
 50 (2003), 745­87.

Atkeson, A. and P. J. Kehoe, "On the Need for a New Approach to Analyzing Monetary
 Policy," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 23 (National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc., 2009).

Auclert, A., "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel," American Economic
 Review 109 (2019), 2333­67.

Badarinza, C., J. Campbell and T. Ramadorai, "International Comparative House-
 hold Finance," NBER Working Paper No. 22066, 2016.

Bauer, M. D., "Restrictions on Risk Prices in Dynamic Term Structure Models," Journal
 of Business and Economic Statistics 36:2 (2018), 196­211.

Bauer, M. D., G. D. Rudebusch and J. C. Wu, "Correcting Estimation Bias in
 Dynamic Term Structure Models," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 30 (2012),
 454­467.

Bekaert, G., S. Cho and A. Moreno, "New-Keynesian Macroeconomics and the Term
 Structure," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42 (2010), 33­62.

Berger, D. W., K. Milbradt, F. Tourre and J. Vavra, "Mortgage Prepayment and
 Path-Dependent Effects of Monetary Policy," Working Paper 25157, NBER, 2018.

Bernanke, B. S. and M. Gertler, "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
 Monetary Transmission," Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (1995), 27­48.

Calza, A., T. Monacelli and L. Stracca, "Housing Finance and Monetary Policy,"
 Journal of the European Economic Association 11 (2013), 101­122.

Campbell, J. R., C. L. Evans, J. D. M. Fisher and A. Justiniano, "Macroeconomic
 Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
 Spring (2012), 1­80.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. F. Cocco, "Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage
 Choice," Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2003), 1449­94.

Cava, G. L., H. Hughson and G. Kaplan, "The Household Cash Flow Channel of
 Monetary Policy," Research Discussion Paper 2016-12, Reserve Bank of Australia, 2016.

                                          50
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum and C. L. Evans, "Monetary Policy Shocks: What
 Have We Learned and to What End?," in J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of
 Macroeconomics (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999).
------, "Nominal rigidities and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy," Journal
  of Political Economy 113 (2005), 1­45.
Cieslak, A. and A. Schrimpf, "Non-Monetary News in Central Bank Communication,"
  Mimeo, 2018.
Cloyne, J., C. Ferreira and P. Surico, "Monetary Policy when Households Have
 Debt: New Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism," Review of Economic Studies 87
 (2020), 102­129.
Cochrane, J. H. and M. Piazzesi, "Decomposing the Yield Curve," Mimeo, 2008.
Davis, M. A. and J. Heathcote, "Housing and the Business Cycle," International Eco-
 nomic Review 46 (2005), 751­84.
                        i, "Monetary Policy with Heterogeneous Agents: Insights from
Debortoli, D. and J. Gal´
 TANK Models," mimeo, 2018.
Dewachter, H. and M. Lyrio, "Macro Factors and the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 (2006), 119­40.
Di Magio, M., A. Kermani, B. J. Keys, T. Piskorski, R. Ramcharan, A. Seru
  and V. Yao, "Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates, Household Consumption,
  and Voluntary Deleveraging," American Economic Review 107 (2017), 3550­88.
Diebold, F. X., M. Piazzesi and G. D. Rudebusch, "Modelling Bond Yields in Finance
  and Macroeconomics," American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 95 (2005),
  415­420.
Diebold, F. X., G. D. Rudebusch and S. B. Aruoba, "The Macroeconomy and the
  Yield Curve: A Dynamic Latent Factor Approach," Journal of Econometrics 131 (2006),
  309­338.
Doepke, M. and M. Schneider, "Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth,"
 Journal of Political Economy 114 (2006), 1069­97.
------, "Aggregate Implications of Wealth and Redistribution: The case of Inflation," Jour-
  nal of the European Economic Association 4 (2006b), 493­502.
------, "Inflation as a Redistribution Shock: Effects on Aggregates and Welfare," Working
  Paper 12319, NBER, 2006c.
Doepke, M., M. Schneider and V. Selezneva, "Distributional Effects of Monetary
 Policy," Mimeo, 2018.
Duffee, G. R., "Information in (and not in) the Term Structure," Review of Financial
 Studies 29 (2011), 2895­934.

                                            51
------, "Forecasting Interest Rates," in A. Timmermann and G. Elliot, eds., Handbook of
  Economic Forecasting (Elsevier, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2012).
European Mortgage Federation, "Study on Mortgage Interest Rates in the EU,"
 Brussels (2012).
Evans, C. L. and D. A. Marshall, "Monetary Policy and the Term Structure of Nominal
 Interest Rates: Evidence and Theory," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
 Policy 49 (1998), 53­111.
Fama, E. F. and R. R. Bliss, "The Information in Long-Maturity Forward Rates,"
  American Economic Review 77 (1987), 680­99.
Fisher, J., "Relative prices, complementarities and comovement among components of
  aggregate expenditures," Journal of Monetary Economics 39 (1997), 449­74.
    ´n, M., M. Kilstro
Flode                    ¨ m, J. Sigurdsson and R. Vestman, "Household Debt and
  Monetary Policy: Revealing the Cash-Flow Channel," Mimeo, 2018.
   i, J., Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
Gal´
 Keynesian Framework and Its Applications, third edition (Princeton University Press,
 Princeton, 2015).
                                       
Garriga, C., F. E. Kydland and R. Sustek  , "Mortgages and Monetary Policy," Review
 of Financial Studies 30 (2017), 3337­75.
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi, "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic
 Activity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (2015), 44­76.
Ghent, A., "Infrequent Housing Adjustment, Limited Participation, and Monetary Policy,"
 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44 (2012), 931­55.
Green, R. K. and S. M. Wachter, "The American Mortgage in Historical and Interna-
 tional Context," Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (2005), 93­114.
Greenwald, D., "The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission," Mimeo,
 2018.
 ¨ rkaynak, R., B. Sack and E. Swanson, "Do Actions Speak Louder that Words?
Gu
 The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements," International
 Jousnal of Central Banking 1 (2005a), 55­93.
------, "The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and
  Implications for Macroeconomic Models," American Economic Review 95 (2005b), 425­
  36.
Guvenen, F., "A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model For Asset Pricing," Econometrica
 77 (2009), 1711­50.
Hamilton, J. and J. C. Wu, "Identification and Estimation of Gaussian Affine Term
 Structure Models," Journal of Econometrics 168 (2012), 315­31.

                                          52
Hamilton, J. D., "Daily Monetary Policy Shocks and New Home Sales," Journal of Mon-
 etary Economics 55 (2008), 1171­1190.

Haubrich, J., G. Pennacchi and P. Ritchken, "Inflation Expectations, Real Rates,
 and Risk Premia: Evidence from Inflation Swaps," Review of Financial Studies 25 (2012),
 1588­1629.

Hedlund, A., "Failure to Launch: Housing, Debt Overhang, and Inflation Option During
 the Great Recession," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (2019), 228­74.

Hedlund, A., F. Karahan, K. Mitman and S. Ozkan, "Monetary Policy, Heterogene-
 ity and the Housing Channel," Mimeo, 2017.
 ¨ rdahl, P., O. Tristani and D. Vestin, "A Joint Econometric Model of Macroeco-
Ho
 nomics and Term-Structure Dynamics," Journal of Econometrics 131 (2006), 405­44.

------, "The Yield Curve and Macroeconomic Dynamics," Economic Journal 118 (2008),
  1937­70.

Huffman, G. W. and M. A. Wynne, "The Role of Intratemporal Adjustment Costs in
 a Multisector Economy," Journal of Monetary Economics 43 (1999), 317­50.

Iacoviello, M., "Housing in DSGE Models: Findings and New Directions," in
  O. de Bandt, T. Knetsch, J. Penalosa and F. Zollino, eds., Housing Markets in Europe: A
  Macroeconomic Perspective (Springer-Verlag Berlin, 2010).

International Monetary Fund, "Housing Finance and Financial Stability--Back to
  Basics?," in Global Financial Stability Report, April 2011: Durable Financial Stability--
  Getting There from Here (International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, 2011).

Ireland, P. N., "Changes in the Federal Reserve's Inflation Target: Causes and conce-
  quences," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39 (2007), 1851­82.

Jarocinski, M. and P. Karadi, "Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises: The Role
  of Information Shocks," Working Paper 2133, European Central Bank, 2018.

Joslin, S., M. Priebsch and K. J. Singleton, "Risk Premiums in Dynamic Term
  Structure Models with Unspanned Macro Factors," Journal of Finance LXIX (2014),
  1197­1233.

Joslin, S., K. J. Singleton and H. Zhu, "A New Perspective on Gaussian Dynamic
  Term Structure Models," Review of Financial Studies 24 (2011), 926­970.

Kaplan, G., B. Moll and G. L. Violante, "Monetary Policy According to HANK,"
 American Economic Review 108 (2018), 697­743.

Kaplan, G. and G. L. Violante, "A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
 Stimulus Payments," Econometrica 82 (2014), 1199­1239.



                                            53
Kim, D. H. and A. Orphanides, "Term Structure Estimation with Survey Data on
 Interest Rate Forecasts," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47 (2012), 241­
 272.

Kozicki, S. and P. A. Tinsley, "Shifting Endpoints in the Term Structure of Interest
 Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (2001), 613­52.

Kydland, F. E., P. Rupert and R. Sustek        , "Housing Dynamics over the Business
 Cycle," International Economic Review 57 (2016), 1149­77.

Meh, C. A., J. V. Rios-Rull and Y. Terajima, "Aggregate and Welfare Effects of
 Redistribution of Wealth under Inflation and Price-Level Targeting," Journal of Monetary
 Economics 57 (2010), 637­52.

Meh, C. A. and Y. Terajima, "Inflation, Nominal Portfolios, and Wealth Redistribution
 in Canada," Canadian Journal of Economics 44 (2011), 1369­1402.

Mishkin, F. S., "Symposium on the Monetary Transmission Mechanism," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives 9 (1995), 3­10.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson, "High-Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
 Neutrality: The Information Effect," Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2018), 1283­
 1330.

Piazzesi, M., "Bond Yields and the Federal Reserve," Journal of Political Economy 113
  (2005), 311­44.

Rubio, M., "Fixed- And Variable-Rate Mortgages, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy,"
 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 43 (2011), 657­88.

Rudebusch, G. D. and E. T. Swanson, "Examining the Bond Premium Puzzle with
 DSGE Model," Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (2008), 111­26.

------, "The Bond Premium in a DSGE Model with Long-Run Real and Nominal Risks,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (2012), 105­143.

Rudebusch, G. D. and T. Wu, "A Macro-finance Model of the Term Structure, Monetary
 Policy and the Economy," Economic Journal July (2008), 906­926.
                   
Rupert, P. and R. Sustek  , "On the Mechanics of New Kynesian models," Journal of
 Monetary Economics 102 (2019), 53­69.

Scanlon, K. and C. Whitehead, "International Trends in Housing Tenure and Mort-
  gage Finance," Special report for the Council of Mortgage Lenders, London School of
  Economics, 2004.

Sheedy, K., "Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for Nominal GDP Target-
  ing," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring (2014), 301­61.



                                           54
Slacalek, J., O. Tristani and G. L. Violante, "Household Balance Sheet Channels of
  Monetary Policy: A Back of the Envelope Calculation for the Euro Area," NBER Working
  Paper 26630, 2020.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters, "An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
 Model of the Euro Area," Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (2003), 1123­
 75.

Sterk, V. and S. Tenreyro, "The Transmission of Monetary Policy through Redistri-
  butions and Durable Purchases," Journal of Monetary Economics 99 (2018), 124­37.

Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson, "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?,"
  Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39 (2007), 3­34.

Tzamourani, P., "The Interest Rate Exposure of Euro Area Households," Discussion Paper
 01/2019, Deutche Bundesbank, 2019.

Uribe, M., "The Neo-Fisher Effect in the United States and Japan," mimeo, 2018.

van Binsbergen, J. H., J. Fernandez-Villaverde, R. S. J. Koijen and J. Rubio-
  Ramirez, "The term structure of interest rates in a DSGE model with recursive prefer-
  ences," Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (2012), 634­48.

Williamson, S. D., "Inflation Control: Do Central Bankers Have it Right?," Federal
 Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review Second Quarter (2018), 127­150.

Wong, A., "Population Aging and the Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumption,"
 mimeo, 2018.

Woodford, M., "Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability," Journal of Money, Credit, and
 Banking 33 (2001), 669­728.

Wu, T., "Monetary Policy and the Slope Factor in Empirical Term Structure Estimations,"
 Working Paper 2002-07, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2001.




                                          55
                                           New mortgage loans (flow)
                             FRM countries                                                      ARM countries
          8                                                                  8
                                                        DE                                                                 IT
                                                        FR                                                                 ES
                                                        NL                                                                 IE
          6                                                                  6
                                                        BE                                                                 FI
                                                        ECB rate                                                           ECB rate
Percent




                                                                   Percent
          4                                                                  4



          2                                                                  2



          0                                                                  0
              2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014      2016                  2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014      2016



                                     Outstanding mortgage debt (stock)
                             FRM countries                                                      ARM countries
          8                                                                  8
                                                        DE                                                                 IT
                                                        FR                                                                 ES
                                                        NL                                                                 IE
          6                                                                  6
                                                        BE                                                                 FI
                                                        ECB rate                                                           ECB rate
Percent




                                                                   Percent




          4                                                                  4



          2                                                                  2



          0                                                                  0
              2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014      2016                  2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014      2016

          Figure 1: Illustration of the debt channel. ECB policy rate and nominal interest
          rates on mortgages in the euro area (aggregate averages for each country). Data
          source: European Central Bank.




                                                                   56
                  Table 1: Parameter values


Symbol            Value     Description
Population
                  2/3       Share of homeowners
Preferences
                  0.9883    Discount factor
                  1.0       Frisch elasticity
1                 8.4226    Disutility from labor (capital owner)
2                 12.818    Disutility from labor (homeowner)
                  0.6258    Weight on consumption (homeowner)
Technology
                  0.2048    Fixed cost
                  0.283     Capital share of output
K                 0.02225   Depreciation rate of capital
H                 0.01021   Depreciation rate of housing
w                 2.3564    Rel. productivity of cap. owners
                  3.2       Curvature of PPF
Fiscal
G                 0.138     Government expenditures
N                 0.235     Labor income tax rate
K                 0.3361    Capital income tax rate
2                 0.05853   Transfer to homeowner
Price setting
                  0.83      Elasticity of substitution
                  0.75      Fraction not adjusting prices
Mortgages
                  0.6       Loan-to-value ratio
                  0.00162   Initial amortization rate
                  0.9946    Amortization adjustment factor
Bond market
                  0.15      Participation cost function
Monetary policy
                  0.0113    Steady-state inflation rate
                  1.5       Weight on inflation
                  0.99      Autocorr. of persistent shock
                  0.3       Autocorr. of temporary shock




                             57
             Table 2: Nonstochastic steady state vs. long-run averages of U.S. data


Symbol                                    Model    Data     Description
Targeted in calibration:
K                                         7.06     7.06     Capital stock
H                                         5.28     5.28     Housing stock
N                                         0.255    0.255    Aggregate hours worked
m2 /(wn2 +  2 )                           0.15     0.15     Mortgage payments to income
 2 /(wn2 +  2 )                           0.12     0.12     Transfers in homeowner's income
 w wn1 /income1                           0.53     0.53     Labor income in cap. owner's income
Not targeted:
A. Capital owner's variables
(rk + m1 )/income1                        0.42     0.39§    Income from assets in total income
1 /income1                                0.05     0.08     Transfers in total income
m1 /netincome1                            0.07     N/A      Mortg. income to post-tax income

B. Homeowner's variables
wn2 /(wn2 + 2 )                           0.88     0.82     Labor income in total income
m2 /[(1 - N )wn2 + 2 ]                    0.18     N/A      Mortgage payments to post-tax income

C. Earnings distribution
 w wN1 /( w wN1 + wN2 )                   0.59     0.54     Capital owners' share
wN2 /( w wN1 + wN2 )                      0.41     0.46     Homeowners' share

D. Income distribution
Income1 /[Income1 + (wN2 + 2 )]           0.70     0.61     Capital owners' share
(wN2 + 2 )/[Income1 + (wN2 + 2 )]         0.30     0.39     Homeowners' share

E. Aggregate housing consumption
(rH + H )H/[C 1 + C 2 + (rH + H )H ]      0.15     0.17§§   Housing services in aggr. consumption

Notes
Normalizations in steady state: Y -  = 1 and p = 1.
Income and earnings data come from SCF. The model counterparts are constructed to be consistent
with SEF definitions.
income1 = (rk + m1 ) + w wn1 + 1 (capital owner's income).
Income1 = (1 - )income1 (aggregate income of capital owners).
netincome1 = [(1 - K )rk + K K k + m1 ] + (1 - N ) w wn1 + 1 (after tax income of capital owners).
§ The sum of capital and business income in SCF, where capital income is income from all financial

assets.
§§ NIPA-based estimate; the model counterpart is defined in line with NIPA (the numerator =

imputed rents, where rH = 1/ - 1 is the net rate of return on housing).




                                                  58
        Temporary policy shock                           Persistent policy shock

                   Policy rate (i)                             Policy rate (i)
   1                                                1

                                                   0.8
  0.5
                                                   0.6


   0                                               0.4

                               ARM economy         0.2                     ARM economy
 -0.5                          FRM economy                                 FRM economy
                                                    0
    0          5         10          15       20     0    10         20          30          40



           Nominal ARM rates                              Nominal ARM rates
   1                                                1

                                                   0.8
  0.5
                                                   0.6


   0                                               0.4

                               R (on the stock)    0.2                    R (on the stock)
                               i (on new loans)                           i (on new loans)
 -0.5
                                                    0
    0          5         10          15       20     0    10         20          30          40




 0.05
               Nominal FRM rates                    1
                                                          Nominal FRM rates
                              R (on the stock)
 0.04                         iF (on new loans)
                                                   0.8
 0.03

 0.02                                              0.6

 0.01                                              0.4
   0
                                                   0.2
-0.01                                                                     R (on the stock)
                                                                          iF (on new loans)
-0.02                                               0
           5            10           15       20         10         20           30          40

Figure 2: The debt channel in the model. Policy and mortgage interest
rates, expressed as percentage point (annualized) deviations from steady
state.




                                                    59
          Nominal interest rate (i)                              Inflation rate (pi)            8
                                                                                                     Real mortgage payments (m/p)
                                   MoNK           0
  1                                Mo                                                           6
                                   NK
                                               -0.5
                                                                                                4
 0.5

                                                 -1                                             2

  0                                                                                             0
                                               -1.5
                                                                                               -2
-0.5
                                                 -2                                            -4
   0         5       10       15          20       0         5           10        15   20       0        5       10       15       20



          Housing investment (XH)                         Capital investment (XK)                             Output (Y)
  0                                             0.2                                           0.2

                                                 0                                             0
 -1
                                               -0.2                                          -0.2

 -2                                            -0.4                                          -0.4

                                               -0.6                                          -0.6
 -3
                                               -0.8                                          -0.8

 -4                                             -1                                            -1
   0         5       10       15          20      0          5          10         15   20      0         5       10       15    20



       Consumption, homeowners (C )                    Consumption, cap. owners (C1)                 Aggregate consumption (C)
                                      2
  0                                                                                            0
                                                 0

-0.2                                                                                         -0.2
                                               -0.2

-0.4                                           -0.4                                          -0.4

-0.6                                           -0.6                                          -0.6

-0.8                                           -0.8                                          -0.8

 -1                                             -1                                            -1
   0         5       10       15          20      0          5          10         15   20      0         5       10       15    20


       Figure 3: Temporary monetary policy shock: ARM. Interest rates and the inflation
       rate are expressed as percentage point (annualized) deviations from steady state,
       quantities are in percentage deviations. One period = one quarter. Output is Y - .




                                                                              60
          Nominal interest rate (i)                         Inflation rate (pi)                8    Real mortgage payments (m/p)
                                   MoNK       0
  1                                Mo                                                          6
                                   NK
                                           -0.5
                                                                                               4
 0.5

                                             -1                                                2

  0                                                                                            0
                                           -1.5
                                                                                              -2
-0.5
                                             -2                                               -4
   0         5       10       15      20       0         5          10        15       20       0        5        10      15       20



          Housing investment (XH)                     Capital investment (XK)                                Output (Y)
  0                                         0.2                                              0.2

                                             0                                                0
 -1
                                           -0.2                                             -0.2

 -2                                        -0.4                                             -0.4

                                           -0.6                                             -0.6
 -3
                                           -0.8                                             -0.8

 -4                                         -1                                               -1
   0         5       10       15      20      0         5          10         15       20      0         5       10       15    20



       Consumption, homeowners (C2)               Consumption, cap. owners (C )                     Aggregate consumption (C)
                                                                                   1
  0                                                                                           0
                                             0

-0.2                                                                                        -0.2
                                           -0.2

-0.4                                       -0.4                                             -0.4

-0.6                                       -0.6                                             -0.6

-0.8                                       -0.8                                             -0.8

 -1                                         -1                                               -1
   0         5       10       15      20      0         5          10         15       20      0         5       10       15    20


       Figure 4: Temporary monetary policy shock: FRM. Interest rates and the inflation
       rate are expressed as percentage point (annualized) deviations from steady state,
       quantities are in percentage deviations. One period = one quarter. Output is Y - .




                                                                         61
            Nominal interest rate (i)                          Inflation rate (pi)            8
                                                                                                   Real mortgage payments (m/p)
  1                                             1
                                                                                              6
 0.8                                           0.8
                                                                                              4
 0.6                                           0.6
                                                                                              2
 0.4                                           0.4
                                                                                              0

 0.2                                MoNK       0.2
                                    Mo                                                       -2
                                    NK
  0                                             0                                            -4
   0          10      20       30       40       0         10          20        30   40       0        10        20      30   40




           Housing investment (XH)                      Capital investment (XK)                              Output (Y)
 0.6                                          0.4                                           0.4

 0.4
                                              0.3                                           0.3
 0.2

  0
                                              0.2                                           0.2
-0.2

-0.4
                                              0.1                                           0.1
-0.6

-0.8                                           0                                             0
    0         10      20       30       40      0         10          20         30   40      0        10        20       30   40



        Consumption, homeowners (C2)                 Consumption, cap. owners (C1)                 Aggregate consumption (C)
 0.2                                          0.2                                           0.2


  0                                            0                                             0


-0.2                                         -0.2                                          -0.2


-0.4                                         -0.4                                          -0.4


-0.6                                         -0.6                                          -0.6
    0         10      20       30       40       0        10          20         30   40       0       10        20       30   40


        Figure 5: Persistent monetary policy shock: ARM. Interest rates and the inflation
        rate are expressed as percentage point (annualized) deviations from steady state,
        quantities are in percentage deviations. One period = one quarter. Output is Y - .
        All responses eventually converge back to zero.




                                                                            62
            Nominal interest rate (i)                          Inflation rate (pi)            8
                                                                                                   Real mortgage payments (m/p)
  1                                             1
                                                                                              6
 0.8                                           0.8
                                                                                              4
 0.6                                           0.6
                                                                                              2
 0.4                                           0.4
                                                                                              0

 0.2                                 MoNK      0.2
                                     Mo                                                      -2
                                     NK
  0                                             0                                            -4
   0          10       20       30      40       0         10          20        30   40       0       10       20       30    40



           Housing investment (XH)                      Capital investment (XK)                             Output (Y)
                                                                                            0.4

 0.5                                          0.5
                                                                                            0.3
 0.4                                          0.4

 0.3                                          0.3
                                                                                            0.2
 0.2                                          0.2

 0.1                                          0.1
                                                                                            0.1
  0                                            0

-0.1                                         -0.1                                            0
    0         10       20       30      40       0        10          20         30   40      0        10      20        30    40



        Consumption, homeowners (C2)                 Consumption, cap. owners (C1)                 Aggregate consumption (C)
 0.2                                          0.2                                           0.2


  0                                            0                                             0


-0.2                                         -0.2                                          -0.2


-0.4                                         -0.4                                          -0.4


-0.6                                         -0.6                                          -0.6
    0         10       20       30      40       0        10          20         30   40       0       10      20        30    40


        Figure 6: Persistent monetary policy shock: FRM. Interest rates and the inflation
        rate are expressed as percentage point (annualized) deviations from steady state,
        quantities are in percentage deviations. One period = one quarter. Output is Y - .
        All responses eventually converge back to zero.




                                                                            63
