                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DON'T TAKE THEIR WORD FOR IT:
                  THE MISCLASSIFICATION OF BOND MUTUAL FUNDS

                                          Huaizhi Chen
                                          Lauren Cohen
                                           Umit Gurun

                                       Working Paper 26423
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26423


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2019, Revised August 2020



We would like to thank Robert Battalio, Nick Bollen, Robert Burn, Geoffrey Booth, John
Campbell, Bruce Carlin, Tom Chang, Christine Cuny, Alex Dontoh, Mark Egan, Ilan Guttman,
Yael Hochberg, Samuel Hartzmark, Alan Isenberg, Robert Jackson, Christian Julliard, Oguzhan
Karakas, Craig Lewis, Dong Lou, Tim Loughran, Chris Malloy, Bill McDonald, Rabih
Moussawi, Bugra Ozel, Jeff Pontiff, Joshua Ronen, Nick Roussanov, Stephen Ryan, David
Solomon, Tarik Umar, Ingrid Werner, Bob Whaley, Paul Wildermuth, Paul Zarowin and seminar
participants at Drexel University, the London School of Economics, New York University, the
University of Notre Dame, Rice University, Vanderbilt University, the 2020 Conference on the
Experimental and Behavioral Aspects of Financial Markets, the 2020 Consortium for Asset
Management Conference, and the 2020 Review of Asset Pricing Studies Winter Conference for
helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank James Ng for providing valuable research
assistance. We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation, SciSIP 1535813.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Huaizhi Chen, Lauren Cohen, and Umit Gurun. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Don't Take Their Word For It: The Misclassification of Bond Mutual Funds
Huaizhi Chen, Lauren Cohen, and Umit Gurun
NBER Working Paper No. 26423
November 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. G11,G12,G23,G24,G4,K0

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide evidence that bond fund managers misclassify their holdings, and that these
misclassifications have a real and significant impact on investor capital flows. In particular, many
funds report more investment grade assets than are actually held in their portfolios to important
information intermediaries, making these funds appear significantly less risky. This results in
pervasive misclassification across the universe of US fixed income mutual funds. The problem is
widespread - resulting in up to 31.4%of funds being misclassified with safer profiles, when
compared against their true, publicly reported holdings. "Misclassified funds" ­ i.e., those that
hold risky bonds, but claim to hold safer bonds ­appear to on-average outperform the low-risk
funds in their peer groups. Within category groups, "Misclassified funds" moreover receive
higher Morningstar Ratings (significantly more Morningstar Stars) and higher investor flows due
to this perceived on-average outperformance. However, when we correctly classify them based
on their actual risk, these funds are mediocre performers. These Misclassified funds also
significantly underperform precisely when junk-bonds crash in returns. Misreporting is stronger
following several quarters of large negative returns.

Huaizhi Chen                                     Umit Gurun
University of Notre Dame                         University of Texas at Dallas
238 Mendoza College of Business                  School of Management
hchen11@nd.edu                                   800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
                                                 75080 Richardson, TX
Lauren Cohen                                     umit.gurun@utdallas.edu
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu
I.     Introduction

       Information acquisition is costly. However, the exact cost of collecting any piece

of information depends on timing, location, a person's private information set, etc. This

is in addition to the idiosyncratic characteristics and complexities of the information signal

and of the asset itself. External agents ­ both public and private - have emerged to fill

this role and reduce the cost of information acquisition. However, the value of these

agents depends on how much additional information provision is needed. To this end,

delegated portfolio management is the predominant way in which investors are being

exposed to both equity and fixed income assets. With over 16 trillion dollars invested,

the US mutual fund market, for instance, is made up of over 5,000 delegated funds and

growing. While the SEC has mandated disclosure of many aspects of mutual fund pricing

and attributes, different asset classes are better (and worse) served by this current

disclosure level. Investors have thus turned to private information intermediaries to help

fill these gaps.

       In this paper, we show that for one of the largest markets in the world, US fixed

income debt securities, this has led to large information gaps that have been filled by

strategic-response information provision by funds. In particular, we show that the reliance

on (and by) the information intermediary has resulted in systematic misreporting by

funds. This misreporting has been persistent, widespread, and appears strategic ­ casting

misreporting funds in a significantly more positive position than is actually the case.

Moreover, the misreporting has a real impact on investor behavior and mutual fund

success.

       Specifically, we focus on the fixed income mutual fund market. The entirety of the

fixed income market is similarly sized to equites (e.g., 40 trillion dollars compared with

                                              1
30 trillion dollars in equity assets worldwide). However, bonds are both fundamentally

different as an asset cash-flow claim, along with having different attributes in delegated

portfolios.   While equity funds hold predominantly the same security type (e.g., the

common stock of IBM, Apple, Tesla, etc.), each of a fixed income funds' issues differ in

yield, duration, covenants, etc. ­ even across issues of the same underlying firm - making

them more bespoke and unique. Moreover, the average active equity fund holds roughly

100 positions, while the average active fixed income fund holds over 600 issues. For

example, in Figure 1, we include an excerpt from the AZL Enhanced Bond Index Fund's

N-Q Schedule of Investments from September 30, 2018.1 The fund held over 700 issues,

including 7 different bonds of McDonald's Corp ­ each with differing yields, durations,

and callable features. Thus, while the SEC mandates equivalent disclosure of portfolio

constituents for equity and bond mutual funds, this data is more complex in both

processing and aggregating to fund-level measures for fixed income.

       This has led information intermediaries to bridge this gap, providing a level of

aggregation and summary on the general riskiness, duration, etc. of fixed income funds

upon which investors rely. We focus on the largest of such intermediaries that provides

data on categorization and riskiness at the fund level ­ Morningstar, Inc. In particular,

we compare fund profiles provided by the intermediary (Morningstar) to investors against

the funds' actual portfolio holdings. We find significant misclassification across the

universe of all bond funds. This results in up to 31.4% of all funds in recent years, and

is pervasive across the funds being reported as overly safe by Morningstar.




1
   The   full    filing, including   all  eleven   pages   of   holdings,  is   available   here:
https:www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1091439/000119312518338086/d615188dnq.htm.

                                               2
        How do these misclassifications occur? Morningstar "rates" each fixed income

mutual fund into style boxes based their assessment of credit quality and interest rate

sensitivity. For instance, a bond portfolio could be designated as a high credit quality

fund with limited interest rate sensitivity. In addition, Morningstar places each fund into

a category such as "Multisector Bond," or "Intermediate Core Bond." Within each of

these fund categories, through a fund's realized returns and volatility Morningstar then

ranks and gives an aggregate rating in the form of "Morningstar Stars."2

        These Morningstar Star summaries of mutual funds have been shown throughout

the literature to have a strong and significant impact on investor flow from both retail

and institutional investors (Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004), Del Guercio and Tkac

(2008), Evans and Sun (2018), Reuter and Zitzewitz (2015), Ben-David et al. (2019)).3 In

addition, the data releases provided by Morningstar are used ubiquitously throughout the

industry.

        The central problem that we show empirically, however, is that Morningstar itself

has become overly reliant on summary metrics, leading to significant misclassification

across the fund universe. In particular, Morningstar requires data provision from each

fund it rates (and categorizes) on the breakdown of the bonds the fund holds by risk

rating classification. Specifically, what percentage of the fund's current holdings are in




2
 The ratings methodology and proprietary adjustments and assumptions (e.g., tax burden) are described
here:
https://www.morningstar.com/content/dam/marketing/shared/research/methodology/771945_Morningst
ar_Rating_for_Funds_Methodology.pdf, but to a first-order approximation, the rating is determined by
their risk and net return categorization (with high expenses detracting from net returns), within official
Morningstar Category (included in Appendix D).
3
 Investors also respond to other attention grabbing and easy to process external ranking signals, such as
Wall Street Journal (Kaniel and Parham, 2017) and sustainability rankings (Hartzmark and Sussman,
2018).

                                                    3
AAA bonds, AA bonds, BBB bonds, etc. One might think that Morningstar uses these

self-reported "Summary Report," data sent to it by funds to augment the detailed

holdings it acquires from the SEC filings on the fund's holdings. However, Morningstar

makes credit risk-summaries solely based on this self-reported data.

        Now this would be no issue if funds were accurately passing on a realistic view of

the fund's actual holdings to Morningstar. Unfortunately, we show that this is not the

case.    We provide robust and systematic evidence that funds on average report

significantly safer portfolios than they actually (verifiably) hold. In particular, funds

report holding significantly higher percentages of AAA bonds, AA bonds, and all

investment grade issues than they actually do.        For some funds, this discrepancy is

egregious ­ demonstrably with large holdings of non-investment grade bonds, despite

being rated AAA portfolios. Due to this misreporting, funds are then misclassified by

Morningstar into safer categories than they otherwise should be.

        We define "Misclassified Funds" in a straightforward way: namely as those funds

that are classified into a different category than they should be if their actual holdings

were used as opposed to the self-reported Summary Report percentages that are used to

classify them.   We show that misclassification is widespread, and continues through

present-day, rising up to 31.4% of high and medium credit quality funds in 2018.

Moreover, as mentioned above misclassifications are overwhelmingly one-sided: very few

misstatements push funds toward a higher risk category ­ while the vast majority of

misstatements push to a "safer" risk category.

        So, what are the characteristics of these "Misclassified Funds?" First, Misclassified

Funds have higher average risk - and accompanying yields on their holdings - than its

category peers. This is not completely surprising, as again Misclassified Funds are holding

                                              4
riskier bonds than the correctly classified peers in their risk category. Importantly, this

translates into significantly higher returns earned on-average by these Misclassified Funds

relative to peer funds. They earn 3.04 basis points (t=3.47) per month more, implying a

16% higher return than peers.

       In order to estimate what portion of this seeming return outperformance of

Misclassified Funds comes from skill versus what comes from the unfair comparison to

safer funds, we turn to the funds' actual holdings reported in their quarterly filings to the

SEC. We use these actual holdings to calculate the correct risk category that the fund

should be classified into were it to have truthfully reported the percentage of holdings in

each risk category. When we re-run the same performance regression specification, but

using proper peer-comparisons, we find that Misclassified Funds no longer exhibit any

outperformance. In point estimate they even underperform by 0.558 basis points per

month (t=0.65).     Thus, it appears that 100% of the apparent outperformance of

Misclassified Funds is coming from being misclassified to a less risky comparison group of

funds than they should be.

       However, the Misclassified Funds still reap significant real benefits from this

incorrectly ascribed outperformance. Even after controlling for Morningstar category and

risk classification, Morningstar rewards these Misclassified Funds with significantly more

Morningstar Stars. In particular, these Misclassified Funds receive an additional 0.38 stars

(t=5.97), or a 12.3% increase in the number of stars. Armed with higher returns relative

to (incorrect) peers and higher Morningstar Ratings, Misclassified Funds then are able to

charge significantly higher expenses. In particular, they charge expense ratios that are

11.4 basis points higher than peers (t=6.36).



                                             5
        So what are the drivers of misclassifications? Morningstar has posited that it is

due nearly entirely to their classification formula's dealing with non-rated bonds.4 We

show in the Appendix, however, that even kicking out all funds that have any non-rated

bonds, all of the results remain large and significant (in fact larger in point-estimate in

some cases). Looking more closely at the characteristics and behaviors of the non-rated

bonds themselves, and the Misclassified Funds that hold them, we find: i.) that the yields

of non-rated bonds look incredibly similar to junk bond yields (and very little like the

higher rated bonds that they are proposed to be by fund managers, and at which

Morningstar takes their word); and ii.) that the Misclassified funds that hold these non-

rated bonds curiously underperform precisely when the junk bond market crashes, along

with experiencing their greatest fund outperformance when the junk bond market surges

(even though they are supposedly holding predominantly highly rated, safe securities).

        Importantly, we then estimate to what extent misclassification impacts investor

behavior. Namely, we examine whether Misclassified Funds ­ even with higher fees ­

might attract more investor flows, presumably due to the favorable comparison benefits

of being misclassified. We find this to be strongly true in the data ­ Misclassified Funds

have an increased probability of positive flows of 12% (t=4.95). The reason is two-fold.

First, Misclassified Funds get a boost in realized returns (on average) given the more

aggressive positions taken in their portfolios. Second, importantly they get this risk for

"free" in the sense that investors believe them to be low-risk, given Morningstar's incorrect

Risk Classification of the funds (we show that investors do empirically invest significantly



4
  In Section IV, we detail our ongoing conversations regarding these large Misclassifications. We have been
in contact with Morningstar since we first began the project. Included are their proposed causes of the
discrepancies, along with our replies, and evidence on their proposed causes.


                                                    6
less in funds that they perceive to be riskier, conditional on the same Morningstar Star

Rating).

           Lastly, we explore the characteristics of Misclassifying Funds. In particular, we

find that younger managers who are earlier in their careers tend to misclassify more often.

Moreover, the more separate share classes a fund services, along with funds that are the

only taxable income fund in their family are more likely to be misclassifiers. Lastly, in

predicting when a fund will begin misclassifying, it appears to be when these younger fund

managers of funds with numerous share classes realize a string of especially negative recent

returns. In terms of the investor type that appears to respond to misclassification, we find

a significant and widespread flow-response across individual and institutional investors.

While in point estimate retail investors (and in particular retirement investors) appear

even more swayed by misclassification, institutional investors alike invest significantly

more in these funds misclassified as overly safe given their actual holdings.

       The behaviors and results we document fit within a number of literature streams.

First, the findings on the association between misclassification and performance are

related to studies on deviations from stated investment policies by equity funds. For

example, Wermers (2012), Budiono and Martens (2009) and Swinkels and Tjong-A-Tjoe

(2007) show that equity mutual funds that drift from the stated investment objective do

better than counterparts. Brown, Harlow and Zhang (2009) and Chan, Chen, and

Lakonishok (2002) show that funds that exhibit discipline in following a consistent

investment mandate outperform less consistent funds. More recently, Bams, Otten, and

Ramezanifer (2017) study performance and characteristics of funds that deviate from

stated objectives in the prospectuses. In the equity space, Sensoy (2009) shows that a



                                              7
fraction of size and value/growth benchmark indices disclosed in the prospectuses of U.S.

equity mutual funds do not match the fund's actual style.

        Second, our paper is related to the growing literature on reaching for yield of

investors. Stein (2013) and Rajan (2013) note that an extended period of low interest

rates can create incentives for investors to undertake greater duration risk and this could

potentially create incentives for "fixed income investors with minimum nominal return

needs then migrate to riskier instruments." Along these lines, Becker and Ivashina (2015)

study the holdings of insurance companies and show that these firms prefer to hold higher

rated bonds because of higher capital requirement constraints, but, conditional on credit

ratings, their portfolios are systematically biased toward higher yield bonds. Similarly,

Choi and Kronlund (2017) show the U.S. corporate bond mutual funds that tilt portfolios

toward bonds with yields higher and are able to attract fund flows, especially during

periods of low-interest rates.5

        Moreover, our evidence is related to studies on the implications of accuracy and

completeness of data sources. Along these lines, Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2009)

show that I/B/E/S analyst stock recommendations have various changes across vintages

and these changes (alterations of recommendations, additions and deletions of records,

and removal of analyst names) are non-random and likely to affect profitability of trading

signals, e.g. profitability of consensus recommendation, among others. Other examples



5
  Another group of papers in this literature investigates whether financial intermediaries' institutional
frictions matter when they respond to the interest rates. See Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2018) and
Acharya and Naqvi (2019) which present models to study the conditions under which banks reach for yield
by taking deposits from risk averse investors. Similar mechanisms are investigated for life insurance
companies (Ozdagli and Wang (2019), pension funds holdings (Andanov, Bauer, and Cremers (2017)), and
households (Lian, Ma, and Wang (2019)).


                                                   8
include Rosenberg and Houglet (1974), Bennin (1980), Shumway (1997), Canina et al.

(1998), Shumway and Warther (1999), and Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2001). The asset

management literature also documents biases in reporting. In the hedge fund setting,

Bollen and Poole (2009, 2012) exploit a discontinuity at 0% for reported returns by fund

managers (i.e., investors view 0% as a natural benchmark for evaluating hedge fund

performance) and document a discontinuous jump in capital flows to hedge funds around

this zero-return cut-off. There is also recent work that shows the mutual funds also

exhibit considerable variation in their month-end valuations of identical corporate bonds

(Cici, Gibson and Merrick, 2011). Similar biases have been shown for valuation of private

companies by mutual funds (Agarwal, et al. 2019). Likewise, Choi, Kronland and Oh

(2018) show that zero returns are prevalent in fixed income funds and that zero-return

reporting is essentially driven high illiquidity of fund holdings.

       Lastly, our study contributes to the literatures on style investment. Barberis and

Shleifer (2003) argue that investors tend to group assets into a small number of categories,

causing correlated capital flows and correlated asset price movements. Vijh (1994) and

Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) provide examples using S&P 500 Index membership

changes. Other examples in the empirical literature include Froot and Dabora (1999),

Cooper, Gulen, and Rau (2005), Boyer (2011), and Kruger, Landier, and Thesmar (2012),

who find that mutual fund styles, industries, and countries all appear to be categories

that have a substantial impact on investor behavior (and asset price movements). Our

work complements these studies by showing that investors categorize bond funds along

the credit risk dimension as provided by the mutual fund industry's primary data source,

Morningstar.



                                              9
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data, and

methodology that Morningstar uses to classify funds into categories. Section III then

presents our main results on the misreporting of funds, and misclassification of these funds

by Morningstar based on these faulty reports. Section III also documents the return

implications, along with the real benefits for funds in terms of expenses, Morningstar

Stars, investor flows, and exploring in more depth the characteristics of Misclassified

Funds. Section IV then explores non-rated securities, and more of the details of the

holdings and behavior of Misclassified Funds, along with discussing Morningstar's

response and proposed causes. Section V concludes.




II.    Data

       In this section, we describe in detail the three major databases used in this paper.

Specifically, we combine (1) the Morningstar Direct database of mutual funds and their

characteristics, (2) the Morningstar database of Open-Ended Mutual Fund Holdings, and

(3) our assembled collection of credit rating histories to document the substantial gap

between the reported and the true portfolio compositions in fixed income funds.

II.1   The Morningstar Direct Database

       Morningstar Direct contains our collection of fixed income mutual funds. These are

the U.S. domiciled, dollar denominated, mutual funds that belong to the "U.S. Fixed

Income" global category. We filter out the U.S. government, agency, and municipal bond

funds using lagged Morningstar sub-categories. The full collection is 2,029 unique fixed

income mutual funds from Q1 2003 to Q2 2018. After applying filters to maintain that 1)

more than 85% of each portfolio's total holdings are observable; 2) the long side of each


                                            10
portfolio is no greater than 115% of its total value; 3) the TNA of each fund is over $10

million dollars in value and 4) each fund has no more than 35% in holdings on which we

have no ratings information, we have 675 unique funds. Information on these funds also

come from Morningstar Direct. This data service contains detailed characteristics that

originate both from the regulatory open-ended mutual fund filings and from direct fund

surveys.

        A key element of our study is the self-reported asset compositions from mutual

fund companies. Figure 2 displays the survey used by Morningstar to collect this

information from managers. The date of the survey ("Survey As Of Date") is clearly

communicated to the funds to be a month-end, which we then check against the month-

ends corresponding to the exact quarter-end dates of holding period reporting dates to

the SEC. Since the first quarter of 2017, Morningstar began calculating percent asset

compositions directly from holdings, but as of March 2020, still use the self-reported,

surveyed compositions to place fixed income funds in Risk Classification Styles. Notably,

we also obtain historical returns, share-level investor flow, and fixed income fund styles

from this dataset. For a full list of variables used in this study, refer to Appendix A.

II.2.   Open-Ended Mutual Fund Holdings

        Our open-ended mutual fund holdings come directly from Morningstar. This service

provides us with linkages of portfolio holdings to the Morningstar Direct funds. The fixed

income portfolio positions are identified by FundID, Security Name, CUSIP, and Portfolio

Date. Along with the identity of these positions, we use portfolio weight, long/short

profile, and asset type from this data. We focus on positions that are listed as "Bond"

broad-types, and we exclude assets that are listed as swaps, futures, or options.

II.3.   Credit Rating Histories

                                             11
       Our analysis centers on the presentation of credit risk in reports heavily used by

investors, therefore we collect credit rating histories from a large variety of data sources

in order to achieve comprehensive coverage. Due to Dodd-Frank, credit rating agencies

are required to post their rating histories within a year of each ratings announcement as

XBRL releases. These releases enable us to achieve coverage by Standard & Poor's,

Moody's, and Fitch of all CUSIP-linked securities after June 2012. In addition to these

three main NRSROs, we also have coverage of Ambest, DBRS, Egan-Jones, Kroll, and

Morningstar credit rating services covering all of the designated US domicile NRSROs

during our sample period. We obtain credit ratings for pre-June 2012 from the Capital IQ

and the Mergent FISD databases. Capital IQ contains credit rating histories from

Standard & Poor's for all of our sample history. In addition, Mergent FISD provides

coverage of credit ratings from Moody's, Standard & Poor's, and Fitch on corporates,

supranational, agency, and treasury bonds. Table 1 Panel A lists these data sources, the

rating agencies reported in these sources, and the time span of their respective coverage.

Panel B and Panel C tabulates the actual (as calculated using our credit rating histories)

and the reported percentage holding compositions of fixed income mutual funds in the

various credit rating categories from Q1 2003 to the end of each respective samples.




III.   Main Results


III.1. Diagnostics Analysis

       We start our analysis by examining histograms of fund reported percentage of

holdings minus the calculated percentage holdings in various bond credit rating categories


                                            12
between Q1 2017 and Q2 2018 (Figure 3). The start of this diagnostic sample is dictated

by the time that Morningstar began calculating the percent holdings of assets in each

credit risk category per each fixed income fund. Ideally, if Morningstar and the bond funds

in its database kept the same reporting standards in credit ratings, the fund reported

percent should be almost same as the calculated percent holdings. Therefore, these

histograms should report a sharp spike around zero (e.g., no discrepancies), and exhibit

no significant variation. This simple diagnostic shows that, on the contrary, there is a

wide dispersion of discrepancies between the records of asset compositions. Most notably,

for assets above investment grade (above BBB), the percentage of assets reported by

funds is markedly higher than the percentage of assets calculated by Morningstar. When

we check the same gap for below investment grade and especially in unrated assets, we

see an opposite pattern; i.e., the percentage of assets reported by funds is significantly

lower than the percentage of assets calculated by Morningstar.


III.2. Implications of Composition Disagreement - Misclassification

       In this subsection, we examine at the major implication of the difference between

reported   and   actual   holding   implied   composition    of   fund   portfolios:   namely

misclassification of these funds.    Figure 4 plots this main result graphically. More

specifically, we plot the credit risk distribution of fund-quarter observations between first

quarter of 2017 and the end of the second quarter of 2018. The dashed lines represent

breaks in the fixed income fund style-box. AAA and AA credit quality funds are high

credit quality; A and BBB credit quality funds are medium credit quality; and BB and B

are low credit quality as deemed by Morningstar.




                                              13
       The first (blue) bar depicts the distribution of the Morningstar Assigned Credit

Risk Category of the fixed income fund. In other words, the blue bar is what mutual fund

investors observe if they use Morningstar as a data provider. The second (orange) bar

then depicts the same category distribution, however calculated using the fund's self-

reported percentage of holdings in the various credit risk categories (from Figure 2).

Specifically, using Morningstar's published methodology, this credit risk categorization is

calculated as a function of a nonlinear score assigned to each category by Morningstar

(see Appendix B) multiplied by the fund's self-reported percentage of holdings in AAA

assets, AA assets, etc. Finally, the third (gray) bar is calculated using the fund's actual

holdings and their ratings (multiplied by the same scores assigned to each rating type as

in the orange bar).

       If Morningstar relied on the actual holdings compositions of the funds themselves,

the blue bar should track with the gray bar. If, instead, it simply "takes the funds' word

for it," - simply multiplying the appropriate risk score times the self-reported percentages

by the funds - the blue bar would track more closely the orange bar. From Figure 4, the

blue bar tracks almost exactly the orange bar. As a result of this, many fixed income

mutual funds that would have fallen into a higher credit risk bucket, are classified into

safer categories.

       More closely comparing these three distributions indicates that using fund self-

reported credit risk composition has widely skewed the fund-level credit categorization in

favor of lower perceived credit risk. For example, almost half of funds that are marked as

A should not be in this category if the fund-level credit rating was assigned based on the

actual holdings-implied, rather than self-reported, compositions. Likewise, half of the AAA

rated funds should have received a riskier categorization according to the actual calculated

                                            14
holdings. Collectively, the evidence in this subsection suggests that when a fund reports

high levels of investment grade assets, it will get classified as an investment grade fund

regardless of its actual holdings.


III.3. Misclassification in Detail

       In this section, we explain how systematic patterns of over/under reporting vary

with respect to various assumptions regarding (1) how we select our sample and (2) how

we match credit ratings to securities. We discuss the baseline analysis in detail and also

provide a set of scenarios in Appendix C that numerates the degree of the misclassification

ratio in each scenario.

       We combine the credit rating history on each fixed income asset in every bond

fund portfolio in order to calculate the actual percentage of assets held in each credit risk

category. In other words, we match the bond positions of mutual fund portfolios to their

respective ratings to calculate their average credit risk classification. These are positions

that are listed as "Bond" broad-types in the Morningstar Holdings database. In our

baseline analysis, we exclude assets that are listed as swaps, futures, or options, i.e. we

don't assign these assets as a specific rated type or as unrated. When multiple credit

rating agencies rate a single asset, we aggregate using the Bloomberg/Barclays method as

prescribed by Morningstar's own methodology document. According to this method, if a

security is rated by only one agency, then that rating used as the composite. If a security

is rated by two agencies, then the more conservative rating is used. If all three rating

agencies are present, then the median rating is assigned. Additionally, government backed

securities such as Agency Pass-thru's, Agency CMO's, and Agency ARMs are

automatically designated as AAA-rated assets. We also search for treasuries and


                                             15
potentially missed government backed securities by searching keywords such as "FNMA",

"U.S. Treasuries", "REFCORP", etc. ­ assigning them each AAA-rating. We then use

these holdings calculated compositions to calculate the implied average credit risk.

According to this method, roughly 24.1% of bond funds receive counter-factual credit risk

categorizations that are riskier than their official credit risk categorizations in the post

2016 sample. In Appendix C, we list the potential assumptions one can make and its

corresponding misclassified bond ratio.

       In Table 2, we tabulate the time series of fund-quarter observations in each

Morningstar Credit Quality Category using the longest time series we can obtain (2003-

2018). Morningstar's fund level credit ratings are calculated by weighing the fund

reported % of AUM in the different credit rating categories using static scores and then

assigning credit risk ratings using cutoffs in the score. Morningstar changed its scoring

weights and cutoffs for classifying funds in Q3 2010. Prior to the change, assets were

weighed by assigning categorical scores that corresponded linearly to their credit ratings.

AAA bonds weighed at 2 points, AA at 3, A at 4, and etc. The final portfolio designations

were then determined at specific ranges of scores- portfolios scoring less than 2.5 were

marked AAA, between 2.5 and 3.5 marked AA, and so on.

       On and after Q3 2010 (through the present), nonlinear scores that correspond to

default probabilities were assigned to each rating category. At the low risk end, AAA

bonds began receiving a weight of 0, with AA bonds weighted at 0.56; while at the higher

risk end, BB bonds receive a weight of 17.78, B and unrated bonds a weighted of 49.44,

and B minus bonds receive a weight of 100. The classification cutoffs then were changed

to correspond to the new scores of the respective bonds classes. This effectively means

that any reporting of low-credit quality bond assets would likely move a portfolio toward

                                            16
a higher risk category. In effect, the methodology change made it very difficult for

portfolios to have high yield bonds while still maintaining a low credit risk classification.

         In Table 2, the final column # Misclassified is then the number of observations per

year that have riskier counter-factual ratings than their official ratings. These numbers

suggest that number of misclassified funds increased dramatically over the years but most

notably post-August 2010 - the year Morningstar changed the way it calculated average

credit risk. We reproduce the weighting scheme in accordance to Morningstar's published

methodology in Appendix B. The result of this change in methodology (as seen in

Appendix B and described above) was a much higher relative penalty placed on lower-

rated bonds vs. higher-rated bonds. This resulted in a much more composition dependent

categorization of fixed income funds (given the drastic ratings penalty-spreads). For our

main regression analysis, we focus on the sample of funds that are misclassified from Q3

2010, on which Morningstar began its new bond credit risk classification system, to Q2

2018.


III.4.   Fund Performance and Misclassification

         A natural follow-up question is whether these misclassified funds are, in fact,

different than their risk-category peers, given that they hold a larger percentage of lower

credit-quality assets than their risk category peers (and lower credit-quality assets than

their classifications suggest they should be).        We explore both the risk and return

characteristics of these misclassified funds vs. their correctly classified peers in this section.

         In Table 3, we first regress the yield metrics of a fund on our metric of

misclassification. Specifically, we define a Misclassified dummy variable which takes a

value of one if the Morningstar credit quality (High or Medium) is higher than the


                                               17
counterfactual (true) credit quality calculated using the actual underlying holdings, and

zero otherwise. We use three different types of yield metrics. In the first column, we use

yields reported to Morningstar by the funds themselves. These yields are voluntarily

reported. In the second column, we use the yields calculated by Morningstar. The sample

size in this second column is limited because calculated holding yields were only available

after 2017. In the third column, we use twelve-month yield which combines total interest,

coupon, and dividend payments. We also include a credit score variable (the reported

compositions score that is used to classify fund credit risks) ­ with increasing values

signifying greater credit risk; and the duration of the bonds (as reported by the funds) as

a control variable to capture the interest rate risk of the bond portfolio. In addition, we

include a (Time x Morningstar Category) fixed effect to control for common variation in

returns and risk due to category-time specific variation (Appendix D lists the official

Morningstar Categories). In Columns 1-3, we also include a (Time x Morningstar Reported

Risk Style) fixed effect to our specification which absorbs the mean yield of each funds

corresponding Morningstar fund calculated risk classification in the given year. Doing so

allows us to address the concern that a group of funds in a particular year systematically

misclassify their riskiness and that misclassified dummy essentially captures this fund

style related reporting choice. We cluster the standard errors by time and fund to address

the time series cross-sectional and individual variation in risk.

       From Table 3, all three yield columns point to the same empirical regularity.

Namely, that there is a strong relation between misclassification and yields: Misclassified

funds have significantly higher yields. The annualized reported yield to maturity is 27.7

basis points higher (t = 5.49), whereas the calculated yield from the holdings (second



                                             18
column) and the payout yield are 23.7 and 19.0 basis points higher, respectively, for

misclassified funds over their official peers.

         In Columns 4-6, we then explore how these misclassified funds would compare were

we to compare them against their correctly classified risk peers. In particular, for each

fund, we use its underlying holdings to calculate its Correct Fund Risk Style ­ note that

for already correctly classified funds, this will be the same as Columns 1-3, and only will

now be changed, and correctly reflect the risk of the underlying holdings, for misclassified

funds.

         Columns 4-6 of Table 3 then conduct the identical tests as Columns 1-3, but replace

the Time x Morningstar Reported Risk Style fixed effect with Time x Correct Fund Risk

Style fixed effect. From Columns 4-6, the Misclassified dummy variable drops in

magnitude to near zero and is statistically insignificant. What this means is that when

you properly account for the true risk of these underlying funds' holdings (based on their

actual holdings, as opposed to what they self-report to Morningstar, and that Morningstar

classifies risk classification based-upon), they have identical yields to their correct peer

funds.

         Next, we examine the performance of these misclassified funds vs. their correctly

risk-classified peer funds. In Table 4, we regress actual fund returns on the Misclassified

dummy, along with the same controls and fixed effects from Table 3. In the Columns 1-

2, we include Time x Morningstar Reported Risk Style fixed effects as we do in the

previous table. From these columns, misclassified funds significantly outperform their Risk

Style and Morningstar Fund Category peers, controlling for other determinants of returns.

In particular, Column 2 implies that these funds outperform by 3.04 basis points per

month (t=3.42), which represents a 16% higher return than peers.

                                                 19
       In Columns 3-4, we then replace this Morningstar Reported Risk Style fixed effect

with Time x Correct Fund Risk Style fixed effect. The idea is to estimate the percentage

of this seeming return outperformance of Misclassified Funds that comes from skill versus

what percentage comes from the unfair comparison to safer funds. From Columns 3-4,

once we compare Misclassified funds against their correctly classified peers, they exhibit

no outperformance. In fact, in point estimate, from Column 4, once compared against

their correct risk peers, Misclassified funds actually slightly underperform in point

estimate by 0.558 basis points per month (t=0.65), though insignificantly so. The sum of

the results in Table 4 suggests that Misclassified funds appear to outperform, but that

100% of that outperformance comes from being compared against an incorrect (overly

safe) set of category peers.


III.5. Incentives to Misclassify

       In our next analysis, we test whether misclassified funds obtain various benefits

from being classified in less-riskier groups of funds. From Table 4, Misclassified funds do

appear to generate outperformance to their incorrectly classified risk peers (which

disappears when comparing against the correct risk-peer funds). The first benefit we

explore in this section is the awarding of Morningstar Stars by the Morningstar, Inc. itself.

As referenced above, Morningstar uses their Star rating system to reward funds for "true

outperformance" in their designated Morningstar Category (which are listed in Appendix

D). These Morningstar Stars have been shown by a vast literature to have a strong

relationship to investor fund flows (for instance, Del Guercio and Tkac (2008), Evans and

Sun (2018), Reuter and Zitzewitz (2015), Ben-David et al. (2019)), and by revealed




                                             20
preference are used by many fund companies as an explicit part of their marketing

strategy.

       We explore this relationship by regressing various Morningstar rating metrics on

the Misclassified dummy, the reported credit rating score, reported duration, average

expense ratio, Time x Morningstar Reported Risk Style fixed effects, and importantly the

Time x Morningstar Category fixed effect (as this is the peer group against which

Morningstar asserts to make its risk and net return comparison). Because the ratings and

expenses are reported at the share class level, the fund level Morningstar Ratings and the

Average Expense ratio are calculated as the value weighted average of their respective

share-class level values.

       The results are reported in Table 5. Table 5 shows that there are economically

large increase in Morningstar Stars awarded to Misclassified funds. Misclassified funds

receive 0.17 (t=3.77) to 0.38 (t=5.97) more Morningstar Stars compared to their peer

funds. This level of higher rating corresponds to 18% to 41% of a standard deviation in

Morningstar Stars ratings, or up to a 12.3% increase in the number of stars.

       In Table 6, we then investigate whether misclassified funds are able to charge

higher expense ratios than their peers. Perhaps intuitively, we explore whether

Misclassified funds charge higher expenses to their investors because their "reported" (but

not actual) performance is better and relatedly that they are able to be rewarded higher

Morningstar Star ratings.

       Prior research has explored in depth whether equity mutual funds are able to

consistently earn positive risk-adjusted returns, and if so, whether funds are able to




                                            21
charge, in equilibrium, higher fees for this outperformance.6 The line of argument often

suggests that there be a positive relation between before-fee risk-adjusted expected returns

and fees. On the other hand, Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2009) argue funds often engage

in strategic feesetting in the presence of investors with different degrees of sensitivity to

performance and this could lead to an ambiguous ­ or even negative - relation between

fund performance and fee.

        Table 6 contains the results exploring fees of Misclassified funds. From Column 3

in Table 6, we find that, on average, the misclassified funds have 7.6 basis point higher (t

= 4.17) average annual expenses than funds within the same style-category, which implies

they are able to charge 10.8% higher fees than peers.7

        In Table 7, we then investigate the fund flows to Misclassified funds. There are

several reasons why misclassification might be related to bond fund flows. First, Barberis

and Shleifer (2003) argue that investors tend to group assets into a small number of

categories, causing correlated capital flows and correlated asset price movements. If an

asset ends up being in the wrong classification category then it may receive a

disproportionately higher (or lower) investment than its correct bucket ­ especially if it

has a favorable ranking attribute within that category (e.g., reported returns). Several


6
 See, for example, Brown and Goetzmann (1995); Carhart (1997); Daniel et al. (1997); Wermers (2002);
Cohen, Coval, and Pastor (2005); Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005); Kosowski et al. (2006).
7
  Past research in the equity space has investigated whether funds alter their investment style and whether
funds with characteristics are more likely to deviate from stated objectives in their mandate due to various
reasons including fund manager incentives. In particular, DiBartolomeo and Witkowskip (1997) show that
younger mutual funds are particularly prone to misclassification and Frijns et al. (2013) show that funds
which switch across fund objectives aggressively tend to have higher expense ratios. Along these lines,
Huang, Sialm and Zhang (2011) argue that funds with higher expense ratios experience more severe
performance consequences when they alter risk. Relatedly, Deli (2002) and Coles, Suay, and Woodbury
(2000) argue that fee structures could vary across funds because of difficulty of managing a riskier portfolio.
In order to test these ideas, in Appendices J and K, we both explore fund age, along with separating fees
into advisor and distribution fees charged by managers (where available and reported).


                                                      22
papers in the literature show the power of style investment in explaining asset flows. Froot

and Dabora (1999), Cooper, Gulen, and Rau (2005), Boyer (2011), and Kruger, Landier,

and Thesmar (2012), find that mutual fund styles, industries, and countries all appear to

be categories that have a substantial impact on investor behavior (and asset price

movements).

       We test for the relationship between Misclassification and flows in two ways. First,

we simply test whether Misclassified Funds receive higher inflows; they do ­ significantly

higher inflows. This is shown in Column 1 of Table 7. The coefficient on Misclassified of

0.0637 (t=4.95) implies over 12% higher probability of positive flows for Misclassified

funds controlling for other determinants. However, given that Misclassification is also

related to other attributes which drive flows (e.g., Morningstar Stars), it is difficult to

interpret what magnitude of the flows might be coming from the Misclassification itself.

Thus, we additionally run a two stage least squares procedure. In the first stage, we

estimate ­ controlling for other fund, category, and time effects ­ the impact of being a

Misclassified fund on the number of Morningstar Stars that a fund receives (run in Table

5). We then take this estimate of just the extra portion of Morningstar Stars a

Misclassified Fund gets from being misclassified, and take this piece of their Stars ­

Misclassified Stars - to see if it has an impact on investor flows. We find that it has a

significantly positive impact. In particular, Column 2 of Table 7 implies that a one

Misclassified Star increase raises the probability of positive flows by almost 17.1%

(t=5.16).

       We also examine if there is a difference between investors (e.g., institutional vs.

retail) with respect to their behavioral responses to misclassified funds. From Morningstar

Direct, we can classify share classes into a number of specific categories: in particular,

                                            23
into Institutions, Retirement, and Retail classes. These are shown in Columns 3-5 of Table

7. From these columns, we first see that the positive flows accruing to Misclassified funds

appear to be coming broadly across all types of investors. In particular, the coefficient on

Misclassified is large and highly significant across all 3 share-class categories. That said,

individual investors do ­ in point estimate ­ seem to be slightly more tilted to

misclassifying funds than institutions. While misclassified Institutional share classes are

11.4% more likely to receive positive investor flows than other funds of their same share

class, misclassified Retail and Retirement share classes increased their probabilities by

over 20% from their respective unconditional means. Even amongst individual investors,

the fact that retirement investors appear to be most influenced by Misclassified funds in

terms of flows, is consistent with investor sophistication findings; Fisch et al. (2019) find

that financial literacy is significantly lower for retirement investors than other types of

retail investors.

III.6. Who Misclassifies?

       From investor behavior with respect to these Misclassified funds vs. other funds,

we turn to examining the characteristics that correlate with a fund being a Misclassified

fund, along with the determinants of misclassification of a fund over time. In particular,

we first run a characteristics-regression with the dependent variable being whether the

fund is a Misclassified fund (or not), in order to examine which characteristics are more

related to being a Misclassified fund. The results of the characteristics regressions are in

Table 8. From Table 8, we note a number of characteristics of misclassifiers. In particular,

from the full specification in Column 3, younger and larger funds tend to misclassify, as

do managers earlier in their careers (with less tenure). Moreover, the more separate share

classes a fund has, the more likely it is to be a misclassifier. Additionally, if the fund is

                                             24
the only taxable fixed income fund in the family, it has a higher likelihood of being a

misclassifier. Lastly, consistent with the advantages that we found in the paper from

misclassifying (i.e., being able to hold higher yielding bonds than peers, resulting in higher

returns and flows), we find that misclassifying funds are related to having a significantly

higher share of the fund's risk category (Market Share) and higher realized returns when

holding the (misclassified) riskier positions.

       To explore the time-series decisions of funds to begin and end misclassifying, we

define two variables to capture fund reporting behavior over time. The first variable, Start

Being Misclassified, takes a value of one if a previously correctly classified fund starts

misclassifying its holdings. In addition to this variable, we define another indicator

variable, End Being Misclassified, which takes a value of one if a previously misclassified

fund starts correctly classifying its holdings. We then test the determinants of both of

these in Panel A of Table 9. It is again younger managers of funds that offer more share

classes, who have experienced particularly poor recent performance. Then, in predicting

when a fund will end being a misclassifier, it appears to be when these younger fund

managers of funds with numerous share classes realize a string of especially positive recent

returns.

       In Panel B of Table 9, we then explore the geographic location of misclassifying

(vs. non-misclassifying) funds. From Panel B, relative to the Northeast (which has the

highest prevalence of mutual funds, and is the omitted category), funds in the Midwest

appear less likely, on average, to misclassify, while funds in the South appear more likely

misclassify.

       Lastly, we explore the impact of a "family specific" effect on misclassification of

funds. In Panel C of Table 9, the inclusion of a family fixed effect explains a large

                                                 25
percentage of the variation in misclassification. In particular, in Column 1 we include only

Year-Quarter FEs, explaining 0.3% of the variation. When we include family fixed effects

in Column 2, the R2 increases to 22.7%. Thus, family specific factors appear to explain

over a fifth of the variation in which funds misclassify across the universe and across time

(controlling for any time-specific variation that might impact all funds equivalently, such

as the Fed lowering target interests or a pervasive change in ratings). Moreover, Column

3 then adds a Fund specific fixed-effect in addition, with R2 rising 49.4%. This suggests

that even with the importance of family effects in determining misclassifying, a sizable

amount of the variation remains determined at the fund-level (as also suggested in Table

8).



IV.    Misclassified Funds Returns across Junk Bond Regimes, Non-Rated Securities, and

       Morningstar's Response

       We have been in contact with Morningstar since the beginning of the project. We

were first referred to technical support teams with whom we checked each step of our

process and the self-reported surveys that fund managers fill out, along with Morningstar's

scoring process, to ensure that we had each step correct. Then, following the first posting

of a draft of our work, Morningstar released an official organizational response shown in

Appendix E. In Appendix F, we include our reply to Morningstar's initial comments.

Morningstar then responded with a second response contained in Appendix G, along with

our reply to these comments in Appendix H.

       Essentially, Morningstar posited two points in their initial response. First, that

the star analysis in particular was mis-specified due to not comparing within Morningstar



                                            26
Official Fund Category (Appendix D).8 As seen in the current draft, all specifications

include official Morningstar Category fixed effects. From these tests, comparing within

categories, all of our results are strong and significant. Which is to say: Misclassified funds

receive significantly more stars than peer-group funds within an official Morningstar

Category. Second, Morningstar posited that the discrepancies are due nearly entirely to

their classification formula's dealing with non-rated bonds. We show in Appendix F,

however, that even kicking out all funds that have any non-rated bonds, all of the results

remain large and significant (in fact larger in point-estimate in some cases).

        We then look more closely at the characteristics and behaviors of the non-rated

bonds themselves, and the Misclassified Funds that hold them. First, we look at the non-

rated bonds themselves in Table 10. From Table 10, the yields of non-rated bonds look

incredibly similar to junk bond yields, and very little like the higher rated bonds that

they are proposed to be by fund managers, and at which Morningstar takes their word.

        Second, in Table 11, we examine the performance of Misclassified funds around

times of junk bond crashes, and junk bond outperformance. If these classified into "safer"

categories by Morningstar truly did hold the safe, high credit-quality bond issues they

claimed ­ and represented by Morningstar in their relatively safe risk classifications of the

funds ­ the funds should not be sensitive to the movement of junk bonds. However, this

is not what is seen in Table 11. Table 11 shows that Misclassified funds' over- and under-

performance relative to their peer funds relates strongly to junk bond returns (captured


8
  In addition to the analyses in Appendix D, in Appendix I we replicate the Morningstar Star Rating
methodology itself. We show that Misclassified funds receive significantly more Stars from taking on more
risk in their underlying portfolios, and get these Stars for "free" in the sense investors perceive these funds
as being less risky and so allocate significantly more flows to them as a result (as we show that even
conditional on the same number of Stars, investors allocate significantly more flows to funds that they
believe attain these flows while taking on lower risk).


                                                      27
by the return on a junk bond index ­ JNK). Misclassified funds significantly underperform

precisely when the junk bond market crashes, along with experiencing their greatest fund

outperformance when the junk bond market surges (even though they are supposedly

holding chiefly highly rated, safe securities).

       Morningstar's second reply (Appendix G) then shifts focus to more technical

points, stating: "To that end, we were able to largely reproduce the authors' multivariate

analysis of the binary "misclassified" dummy variable they defined and various ratings

metrics." In Appendix H, we explore the points and claims from this response in further

detail in the data, unfortunately not finding strong support.



V.     Conclusion

       Investors rely on external information intermediaries to lower their cost of

information acquisition. While prima facie this brings up no issues, if the information

that the intermediary is passing on is biased, these biases propagate throughout markets

and can cause real distortions in investor behavior and market outcomes. We document

precisely this in the market for fixed income mutual funds. In particular, we show that

investors' reliance on Morningstar has resulted in significant investment based on

verifiably biased reports by fund managers that Morningstar simply passes on as truth.

       We provide the first systematic study that compares fund reported asset profiles

provided by Morningstar against their actual portfolio holdings, and show evidence of

significant misclassification across the universe of all bond funds. A large portion of bond

funds are not passing on a realistic view of the fund's actual holdings to Morningstar and

Morningstar creates its risk classifications, and even fund ratings, based on this self-

reported data. Up to 31.4% of all funds in recent years, are reported as overly safe by

                                              28
Morningstar. This misreporting has been not only persistent and widespread, but also

appears to be strategic. We show that misclassified funds have higher average risk - and

accompanying yields on their holdings - than their category peers. We also show evidence

suggesting the misreporting has real impacts on investor behavior and mutual fund

success. Misclassified funds reap significant real benefits from this incorrectly ascribed

outperformance in terms of being able to charge higher fees and receiving higher flows

from investors.

       We exploit a novel setting in which investors reliance on external information

intermediaries can lead to predictable patterns in fund ratings and capital flows, and in

which we can ex-post verify the veracity of the information conveyed. We believe that

our study is a first step to think about a market design in which information intermediaries

have more aligned incentives to better process and deliver the information they gather

from market constituents. Future research should explore alternate monitoring and

verification mechanisms for the increasingly complex information aggregation in modern

financial markets, along with ways that investors can engage as important partners in

information collection and price-setting.




                                            29
                                       References


Acharya, V. and Naqvi, H., 2019. On reaching for yield and the coexistence of bubbles
and negative bubbles. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 38, pp.1-10.

Agarwal, V., Barber, B.M., Cheng, S., Hameed, A. and Yasuda, A., 2019. Private
company valuations by mutual funds. Available at SSRN 3066449.

Andonov, Aleksandar, Rob M.M.J. Bauer, and K.J. Martijn Cremers, 2017. Pension Fund
Asset Allocation and Liability Discount Rates, Review of Financial Studies 30, 2555-2595.

Bams, Dennis, Otten, Roger, and Ramezanifar, Ehsan, 2017. Investment style
misclassification and mutual fund performance. In 28th Australasian Finance and Banking
Conference.

Barberis, N., and Shleifer, A., 2003. Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics 68,
161­199.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., and Wurgler, J. 2005. Comovement, Journal of Financial
Economics 75, 283­317.

Becker, Bo and Victoria Ivashina, 2015. Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market, Journal
of Finance 70, 1863-1901.

Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1997. Mutual fund styles, Journal of
Financial Economics 43, no. 3, 373-399.

Brown, Keith C., Harlow, W. Van and Zhang, Hanjiang, 2009. Staying the course: The
role of investment style consistency in the performance of mutual funds. Available at
SSRN 1364737.

Ben-David, Itzhak and Li, Jiacui and Rossi, Andrea and Song, Yang, 2019. What do
mutual fund investors really care about?, Fisher College of Business Working Paper No.
2019-03-005.

Bennin, Robert, 1980. Error rates in CRSP and COMPUSTAT: A second look, Journal
of Finance 35, 1267­1271.

Boyer, Brian H., 2011. Style-related comovement: Fundamentals or labels?, Journal of
Finance 66, 307-332.

Bollen, Nicholas and Pool, Veronica, 2009. Do hedge fund managers misreport returns?
Evidence from the pooled distribution, Journal of Finance, 2257-2288.

Bollen Nicholas and Pool, Veronica, 2012. Suspicious patterns in hedge fund returns and
risk of fraud, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2673-2702.



                                           30
Budiono, Diana and Martens, Martens, 2009. Mutual fund style timing skills and alpha.
Available at SSRN 1341740.

Canina, Linda, Roni Michaely, Richard Thaler, and Kent Womack, 1998. Caveat
compounder: A warning about using the daily CRSP equal-weighted index to compute
long-run excess returns, Journal of Finance 53, 403­416.

Carhart, Mark M, 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. The Journal of
Finance 52, no. 1, 57-82.

Chan, Louis K., Chen, Hsiu-Lang, and Lakonishok, Joseph, 2002. On mutual fund
investment styles. The Review of Financial Studies 15, pp.1407-1437.

Choi, Jaweon, Kronlund, Mathias and Oh, Ji Y.J., 2018. Sitting Bucks: Zero Returns in
Fixed Income Funds, Working Paper.

Choi, Jaewon, and Mathias Kronlund, 2017. Reaching for Yield in Corporate Bond Mutual
Funds, Review of Financial Studies 31, 1930-1965.

Cici, Gjergji, Gibson, Scott and Merrick Jr, John J., 2011. Missing the marks? Dispersion
in corporate bond valuations across mutual funds. Journal of Financial Economics, 101(1),
pp.206-226.

Cohen, Randolph B., Coval, Joshua D. and Pástor, Lubos, 2005. Judging fund managers
by the company they keep. The Journal of Finance, 60(3), pp.1057-1096. Vancouver

Coles, J.L., Suay, J. and Woodbury, D., 2000. Fund advisor compensation in closed end
funds. The Journal of Finance, 55(3), pp.1385-1414.

Cooper, Michael, Gulen, Huseyin, Rau, Raghavendra, 2005. Changing names with style:
Mutual fund name changes and their effects on fund flows, Journal of Finance 60, 2825­
2858.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997. Measuring
mutual fund performance with characteristics-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52,
1035­1058.

Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2008. Star power: The effect of Morningstar
ratings on mutual fund flow, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 907-936.

Deli, Daniel N., 2002. Mutual fund advisory contracts: An empirical investigation. The
Journal of Finance, 57(1), pp.109-133.

Di Bartolomeo, Dan, and Erik Witkowski, 1997. Mutual fund misclassification: Evidence
based on style analysis, Financial Analysts Journal 53, no. 5, 32-43.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2018. .A Model of Monetary Policy
and Risk Premia., Journal of Finance 73, 317-373.


                                           31
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 2001. A first look at the
accuracy of the CRSP Mutual Fund Database and a comparison of the CRSP and
Morningstar Mutual Fund Databases, Journal of Finance 56, 2415­2430.

Evans, Richard B., and Yang Sun, 2018. Models or stars: The role of asset pricing models
and heuristics in investor risk adjustment, Working paper, University of Virginia.

Fisch, J.E., Lusardi, A. and Hasler, A., 2019. Defined contribution plans and the challenge
of financial illiteracy. Cornell Law Review, pp.19-22.

Frijns, Bart, Aaron B. Gilbert, and Remco CJ Zwinkels, 2013. On the Style-based
Feedback Trading of Mutual Fund Managers. Available at SSRN 2114094.

Froot, Kenneth, Dabora, Emil, 1999. How are stock prices affected by the location of
trade? Journal of Financial Economics 53, 189­216.

Gil-Bazo, Javier and Pablo Ruiz-Verdu, 2009. The relation between price and performance
in the mutual fund industry, The Journal of Finance 64, no. 5, 2153-2183.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., and Abigail Sussman, 2018. Do investors value sustainability? A
natural experiment examining ranking and fund flows, Working paper, University of
Chicago.

Huang, Jennifer, Clemens Sialm, and Hanjiang Zhang, 2011. Risk shifting and mutual
fund performance. Review of Financial Studies 24, no. 8, 2575-2616.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008. Unobserved actions of mutual
funds, Review of Financial Studies 21, no. 6, 2379-2416.

Kaniel, Ron, and Robert Parham, 2017. WSJ category kings: The impact of media
attention on consumer and mutual fund investment decisions, Journal of Financial
Economics 123, 337-356.

Kruger, P., Landier, A., and Thesmar, D., 2012. Categorization bias in the stock market.
Unpublished working paper. University of Geneva, Toulouse School of Economics, and
HEC.

Kosowski, Robert, Timmermann, Allan, Wermers, Russ and White, Hal, 2006. Can
mutual fund "stars" really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis. The
Journal of Finance, 61(6), pp.2551-2595.

Lian, Chen, Yueran Ma, and Carmen Wang, 2019. Low Interest Rates and Risk-Taking:
Evidence from Individual Investment Decisions, Review of Financial Studies 32, 2107-
2148.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, Malloy, Christopher and Marston, F., 2009. Rewriting history.
The Journal of Finance, 64(4), pp.1935-1960.



                                            32
Nanda, Vikram, Wang, Z. Jay, and Zheng Lu., 2004. Family values and star phenomenon:
strategies for mutual fund families, 17(3), pp.667-698.

Ozdagli, Ali and Zixuan Wang, 2019. Interest Rates and Insurance Company Investment
Behavior, unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and Harvard Business
School.

Rajan, Raghuram, 2013. A Step in the Dark: Unconventional Monetary Policy After the
Crisis., Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, Bank for International Settlements. Available
online at https://www.bis.org/events/agm2013/sp130623.htm.

Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2015. How much does size erode mutual fund
performance? A regression discontinuity approach, Working paper, Boston College.

Rosenberg, Barr, and Michel Houglet, 1974. Error rates in CRSP and Compustat data
bases and their implications, Journal of Finance 29, 1303­1310.

Sensoy, B.A., 2009. Performance evaluation and self-designated benchmark indexes in the
mutual fund industry. Journal of Financial Economics, 92(1), pp.25-39.

Shumway, Tyler, 1997. The delisting bias in CRSP data, Journal of Finance 52, 327­340.

Shumway, Tyler, and Vincent A. Warther, 1999. The delisting bias in CRSP's NASDAQ
data and its implications for interpretation of the size effect, Journal of Finance 54, 2361­
2379.

Stein, Jeremy, 2013, Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy
Responses., Research Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Available online at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20130207a.htm.

Swinkels, Laurens, and Liam Tjong-A-Tjoe, 2007. Can mutual funds time investment
styles?, Journal of Asset Management 8, no. 2, 123-132.

Vijh, Anand, 1994. S&P 500 trading strategies and stock betas, Review of Financial
Studies 7, 215­251.

Wermers, Russ, 2012. Matter of style: The causes and consequences of style drift in
institutional portfolios. Available at SSRN 2024259.




                                             33
Figure 1. Sample Bond Fund Holding Data
This figure contains an excerpt from the AZL Enhanced Bond Index Fund's September
30, 2018 N-Q Schedule of Investments held (source:
https:www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1091439/000119312518338086/d615188dnq.htm
)




                                       34
Figure 2. Morningstar Survey
This figure contains a portion of the fixed income template sent by Morningstar to
survey mutual funds in August 2019.




                                          35
Figure 3. Distribution of Difference between Reported and Calculated Holdings
This graph plots the histograms of fund reported % holdings minus the calculated %
holdings in the various bond credit rating categories. The sample period begins in Q1
2017, when Morningstar began calculating % holdings of assets in each credit risk category
per each fixed income fund, and ends in Q2 2018. Observations where fund reported % is
exactly the same as the calculated % holdings are removed to aid readability.




                                           36
Figure 4. Credit Risk Distribution of US Fixed Income Funds
This figure plots the credit risk distribution of fund-quarter observations between Q1 2017
and Q2 2018. The blue is the distribution of the official average credit quality category
that Morningstar assigns to US Fixed Income funds. According to MS's methodology, this
official credit quality category is calculated using fund survey reported % holdings of
assets in the various credit risk categories. In red, we replicate the official credit quality
category using the fund survey-reported % holdings. The grey is the counter-factual credit
risk category that would result if we had used MS calculated % holdings. The dashed lines
represent breaks in the fixed income fund style-box. AAA and AA credit quality funds
are high credit quality; A and BBB credit quality funds are medium credit quality; and
BB and B are low credit quality as deemed by Morningstar.




                                             37
                                                 Table 1.
                                            Description of Data
       We obtain credit ratings from three sources. Dodd-Frank requires all credit rating agencies
       to release their rating data history through XBRL filings with a one year delay. Capital
       IQ subscription contains the S&P rating history. Mergent FISD contains corporates,
       supranational, and agency/treasuries debts.           Portfolio history is directly from
       Morningstar's collection of filings and surveys for each fund. The surveyed holdings % on
       individual fixed income funds comes from the Morningstar Direct database from Q1 2003
       to Q2 2018.

      Panel A. Sources of Credit Ratings:
Dates                   Source               Coverage Description
Jun 2012 to Jun 2018      XBRL Filing        All NRSROs Rated Bonds
Jan 2003 to Jun 2018      Capital IQ         S&P Rating History
                                             S&P, Moody's, Fitch Ratings for Corporations and
Jan 2003 to Jun 2018      Mergent FISD       Treasuries

       Panel B. Actual Holdings of US Fixed Income Funds from Q1 2003 to Q2 2018
                     10th P       Median        90th P       Mean         Std.               N
        AAA           0.00%        40.8%        81.4%        39.0%       31.2%             18,508
        AA            0.00%        2.48%        9.15%        3.73%       4.92%             18,508
        A             0.00%        7.97%        22.7%        9.58%       9.94%             18,508
        BBB          0.326%        12.6%        35.8%        15.9%       15.9%             18,508
        BB            0.00%        3.88%        28.2%        9.10%       11.6%             18,508
        B             0.00%        1.52%        44.8%        11.4%       18.3%             18,508
        Below B       0.00%       0.537%        18.1%        4.71%       8.08%             18,508
        Unrated     0.0743%        4.12%        15.7%        6.50%       7.42%             18,508




                                                   38
Panel C. Surveyed Holdings of US Fixed Income Funds from Q1 2003 to Q2 2018

             10th P      Median       90th P       Mean         Std.       N
AAA          0.00%       41.1%        83.9%        40.1%       31.5%     18,508
AA           0.00%       3.56%        12.8%        5.51%       7.97%     18,508
A            0.00%       9.34%        25.6%        10.9%       10.7%     18,508
BBB          0.50%       12.5%        34.6%        15.7%       15.1%     18,508
BB           0.00%       4.20%        32.0%        10.3%       13.3%     18,508
B            0.00%       1.70%        46.0%        11.8%       18.6%     18,508
Below B      0.00%       0.39%        14.6%        3.99%       7.16%     18,508
Unrated      0.00%       0.32%        5.26%        1.67%       3.61%     18,508




                                       39
                                        Table 2.
                             Time Series of Misclassification

In this table, we report the time series of Fund-Quarter observations in each Morningstar
Credit Quality Category. The last column is the number of funds that are misclassified
into the high or med credit quality category. Morningstar changed the way it calculated
average credit quality in August 2010. Prior to August 2010, the average credit quality is
a simple weighted average of the underlying linear bond scores, in which a AAA bond has
a score of 2, AA has a score of 3, and so on. After August 2010, the credit risk variable
attempts to describe a fund in terms of the returns and risks of a portfolio of rated bonds,
and nonlinear scores are assigned to each category. The sample is from Q1 2003 to Q2
2018. We record the weighing scheme used after August 2010 in Appendix C.

                     High Credit       Med Credit        Low Credit           #
         Year          Quality          Quality           Quality        Misclassified
         2003            251              412               321               7
         2004            262              396               337               4
         2005            255              364               282               4
         2006            315              414               332               5
         2007            322              516               422               7
         2008            359              610               468               8
         2009            246              698               548               9
         2010            209              705               583              147
         2011            189              765               658              307
         2012            194              857               708              283
         2013            191              887               824              297
         2014            178              920               891              348
         2015            181             1,056             1,022             321
         2016            209             1,195             1,024             360
         2017            225             1,215              993              370
         2018            123              581               484              191




                                            40
                                               Table 3.
                                      Yields and Misclassification

      In this table, we regress various yield metrics on misclassified dummy and control
      variables. Misclassified dummy is 1 if the official credit quality (High or Medium) is higher
      than the counter factual credit quality, and 0 otherwise. Funds voluntarily report their
      portfolio yields (1) and (4) to Morningstar. Morningstar began calculating the holding
      yields (2) and (5) in 2017. The 12-month total interest, coupon, and dividend payments
      constitute the 12-month yield (3) and (6). The sample period is Q3 2010 to Q2 2018. t-
      statistics are double-clustered by time and fund.

                                  (1)       (2)        (3)             (4)       (5)        (6)
                                Reported Calculated 12-Month         Reported Calculated 12-Month
                                 Yieldt    Yieldt    Yieldt+11        Yieldt    Yieldt    Yieldt+11

Misclassifiedt-1                0.277***    0.237***      0.190***    0.0106       0.0130      -0.0735
                                 (5.494)     (5.372)       (3.344)    (0.157)      (0.273)     (-1.106)

Reported Credit Scoret-1        0.112***    0.0569*** 0.0551*** 0.0727***        0.0486***    0.0552***

                                 (8.394)     (6.188)      (4.744)     (7.861)      (9.229)     (6.755)

Reported Durationt-1            0.127***    0.0229**      0.107***   0.138***     0.0359**    0.110***
                                 (4.263)     (3.083)       (3.272)    (4.820)      (3.116)     (3.637)

Time x Morningstar                Yes          Yes          Yes         No           No          No
Reported Risk Style FE
Time x Correct Fund Risk           No          No           No          Yes         Yes          Yes
Style FE
Time x Morningstar                Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Category FE

Observations                      6,402       1,303        7,127       7,957        1,542       8,800
Adjusted R-squared                0.673       0.816        0.587       0.736        0.873       0.607




                                                     41
                                        Table 4.
                           Counterfactuals and Misclassification

In this table, we regress monthly fund returns on misclassified dummy and control
variables. Misclassified dummy is 1 if the official credit quality (High or Medium) is higher
than the counter factual credit quality, and 0 otherwise. The sample period is Q3 2010 to
Q2 2018. t-statistics are clustered quarterly.


                                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
                              Fund Returnt Fund Returnt Fund Returnt Fund Returnt


Misclassifiedt-1                 3.579***         3.038***       -2.341**         -0.558
                                  (2.951)          (3.472)       (-2.003)        (-0.646)

Reported Credit Scoret-1                          0.411**                        0.611**
                                                  (2.419)                        (2.259)

Reported Durationt-1                                1.522                          1.468
                                                   (1.065)                        (1.012)

Average Expenset-1                                -3.551***                     -3.392***
                                                   (-3.393)                      (-3.774)

Time x Morningstar                 Yes              Yes             No              No
Reported Risk Style FE
Time x Correct Fund Risk            No               No             Yes            Yes
Style FE
Time x Morningstar                 Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes
Category FE

Observations                      25,318           22,671          31,196         27,941
Adjusted R-squared                 0.874            0.874           0.841          0.844




                                             42
                                         Table 5.
                       Morningstar Star Ratings and Misclassification

  In this table, we regress Morningstar ratings on the misclassified dummy and controls.
  Since the ratings and expenses are reported at the share class level, the fund level
  Morningstar Ratings and the Average Expense ratio are calculated as the value weighted
  average of their respective share-class level values. The sample period is Q3 2010 to Q2
  2018. t-statistics are double-clustered by time and fund.


                                    (1)                (2)          (3)           (4)
                                Morningstar        Morningstar   Morningstar   Morningstar
                                  Rating             Rating        Rating        Rating
                                   3 Yrt              3 Yrt       Overallt      Overallt

Misclassifiedt-1                  0.383***          0.170***      0.341***       0.182***
                                   (5.971)           (3.774)       (4.660)        (3.218)

Reported Credit Scoret-1         0.0698***          0.0299**      0.0588***       0.0289*
                                  (4.355)            (2.553)       (3.090)        (1.774)

Reported Durationt-1              0.107***           -0.0277      0.113***        0.0122
                                   (3.679)           (-1.138)      (2.752)        (0.386)

Average Expensest-1              -1.024***          -0.755***     -0.822***      -0.622***
                                  (-6.915)           (-6.966)      (-5.045)       (-4.566)

3 Year Returnst-1                                   15.22***                     11.36***
                                                     (8.036)                      (6.202)

Time x Morningstar Reported         Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes
Risk Style FE
Time x Morningstar Category         Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes
FE

Observations                       7,391              7,391         7,391          7,391
Adjusted R-squared                 0.211              0.541         0.170          0.373




                                              43
                                        Table 6.
                           Expense Ratios and Misclassification

In this table, we analyze whether misclassified funds are more expensive than usual. We
regress average expense ratio on misclassified dummy and control variables. The average
expense ratio is calculated at the fund level as the value weighted average of their
respective share-class level values. The sample period is Q3 2010 to Q2 2018. t-statistics
are double-clustered by time and fund.

                                      (1)               (2)                (3)
                                    Average           Average            Average
                                    Expenset          Expenset           Expenset

Misclassifiedt-1                    0.114***          0.0765***         0.0760***
                                     (6.356)           (4.186)           (4.172)

Reported Credit Scoret-1                              0.0224***         0.0222***
                                                       (3.611)           (3.592)

Reported Durationt-1                                                     -0.00790
                                                                         (-0.754)

Time x Morningstar                    Yes                Yes                Yes
Reported Risk Style FE
Time x Morningstar                    Yes                Yes                Yes
Category FE

Observations                          8,373             7,586              7,586
Adjusted R-squared                    0.125             0.153              0.154




                                              44
                                              Table 7.
                                   Fund Flows and Misclassification

       In this table, we regress whether investor in net contributed cash-flows into funds and
       share classes as related to lagged fund misclassifications. There are two specifications for
       fund level regressions in columns (1) and (2). The first column regresses flow indicator on
       misclassified dummy directly. The second column regresses the flow indicator on
       misclassified stars. We separately regress the flow indicator at the share-class level for
       institutional (3), retail (4), and retirement (5) classes against the misclassified dummy.
       The sample period is Q3 2010 to Q2 2018. t-statistics are clustered quarterly.


                                  (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                             Institutional     Retail       Retirement
                                    Fund Portfolio           Share Class     Share Class    Share Class
                                Flowt>0        Flowt>0         Flowt>0        Flowt>0         Flowt>0

Misclassifiedt-1               0.0637***                      0.0639***       0.0905***       0.129***
                                (4.947)                        (3.639)         (4.368)         (5.356)
Misclassified Starst                           0.171***
                                                (5.155)
Reported Credit Scoret-1        0.00438        -0.00422        0.00736*        -0.00435      -0.0117***
                                (1.198)        (-0.757)         (1.864)        (-0.945)        (-2.906)
Reported Durationt-1           0.0191***        0.00201       0.0145***        0.00537        -0.0259**
                                (3.998)         (0.261)         (2.855)         (0.388)        (-2.590)
Average Expensest-1            -0.238***        -0.0685       -0.160***       -0.204***        -0.104**
                                (-7.431)       (-1.409)        (-4.776)        (-5.826)        (-2.159)

Time x Morningstar                Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Reported Risk Style FE
Time x Morningstar                Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Category FE

Observations                     7,766           7,391          7,248           4,306           5,733
Adjusted R-squared               0.068           0.086          0.048           0.079           0.019




                                                     45
                                          Table 8.
                           Characteristics of Misclassified Funds

  In this table, we regress whether a bond fund is misclassified against various
  contemporaneous fund characteristics. New Fund indicates whether a fund has less than
  three years of history. Log Size is the log of total fund level AUM. The number of fund
  managers (Number of Managers) and their average tenure lengths (Average Tenure
  Length) are calculated using Morningstar Direct. Only Taxable Bond Fund indicates
  whether a fund is the only taxable bond fund present within a fund family. This is
  calculated by matching a fund to its family history information in the CRSP mutual fund
  database. The number of share classes (Number of Share Classes) is calculated from data
  provided by Morningstar Direct. Market Share is a fund's AUM as a percent of the total
  AUM placed in all funds of a respective Morningstar Category. Past 3 Year Returns is a
  fund's past 3 year value weighted net returns of its respective share classes. The sample
  period is Q3 2010 to Q2 2018. t-statistics are clustered quarterly.

                                             (1)              (2)                  (3)
                                         Misclassified    Misclassified        Misclassified

New Fund                                  0.0668***         0.0785***            0.161***
                                            (3.834)           (4.257)             (5.673)
Log Size                                  0.0363***          0.0132**             0.00921
                                            (7.484)           (2.294)             (1.628)
Average Tenure Length                    -0.000263**        -0.000232         -0.000350***
                                           (-2.054)          (-1.647)            (-2.829)
Number of Managers                         0.000937         0.00589**             0.00347
                                            (0.490)           (2.662)             (1.506)
Number of Share Classes                   0.0185***         0.0150***           0.0152***
                                            (11.81)           (10.34)             (9.867)
Only Taxable Bond Fund                     0.0331**           0.0263*            0.0361**
                                            (2.357)           (1.947)             (2.500)
Market Share                              -0.906***          1.548***            1.766***
                                           (-3.143)           (2.842)             (3.273)
Past 3 Year Returns                                                              1.650***
                                                                                  (6.834)

Time FE                                      Yes               No                  No
Time x Morningstar Reported Risk             No                Yes                 Yes
Style FE
Time x Morningstar Category FE                No               Yes                 Yes

Observations                                7,612             7,543               7,543
Adjusted R-squared                          0.030             0.155               0.178




                                             46
                                       Table 9.
  Further Determinants of Misclassifying over Time, Geographic Location, and across
                                       Families

In the following tables, we explore further determinants of misclassification. The sample period is Q3 2010
to Q2 2018. In Panel A, we explore how a fund starts and ends misclassifying their holdings are related to
various characteristics. In column (1), the left-hand side variable is an indicator that represents when a
previously correctly classified fund starts misclassifying. In column (2), the left-hand side variable is an
indicator for when a previously misclassified fund starts correctly classifying. In column 3, we regress (1)
minus (2). New Fund indicates whether a fund has less than three years of history. Log Size is the log of
total fund level AUM. The number of fund managers (Number of Managers) and their average tenure
lengths (Average Tenure Length) are calculated using Morningstar Direct. Only Taxable Bond Fund
indicates whether a fund is the only taxable bond fund present within a fund family. This is calculated by
matching a fund to its family history information in the CRSP mutual fund database. The number of share
classes (Number of Share Classes) is calculated from data provided by Morningstar Direct. Market Share is
a fund's AUM as a percent of the total AUM placed in all funds of a respective Morningstar Category. Past
3 Year Returns is a fund's past 3-year value weighted net returns of its respective share classes. In Panel
B, we regress the misclassification indicator against controls, category fixed effects, and additionally
geographic indicators. Northwest, West, South, and Midwest correspond to U.S. Census Bureau statistical
regions. In Panel C, we regress the misclassification indicator against Time, Fund Family, and Fund Fixed
Effects. t-statistics are clustered quarterly.

Panel A. Characteristics of Misclassified Funds

                                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                           Start Being         End Being            (Start-End)
                                           Misclassified       Misclassified        Misclassified

         New Fund                             -0.00665            0.00366              -0.0103
                                              (-0.684)             (0.255)            (-0.534)
         Log Size                              0.00174            -0.00228             0.00402
                                               (0.553)            (-0.685)             (0.912)
         Average Tenure Length             -0.000128***        -0.000142***           1.38e-05
                                              (-2.927)            (-2.947)             (0.197)
         Number of Managers                  0.000885            0.00335**            -0.00247
                                               (0.747)             (2.349)            (-1.478)
         Number of Share Classes            0.00294***          0.00341***           -0.000475
                                               (2.843)             (3.767)            (-0.326)
         Only Taxable Bond Fund                0.00445            -0.00588              0.0103
                                               (0.589)            (-0.651)             (0.857)
         Market Share                           0.454               1.010               -0.557
                                               (0.820)             (1.513)            (-0.538)
         Past 3-Year Returns                  -0.0738*            0.186**             -0.260**
                                              (-1.820)             (2.193)            (-2.731)

         Time x Morningstar                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes
         Reported Risk Style FE
         Time x Morningstar                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes
         Category FE

         Observations                          7,941               7,941                7,941
         Adjusted R-squared                    0.004               0.028                0.011




                                                       47
Panel B. Geography of Misclassification

                                                      (1)
                                                  Misclassified

                     Northeast                          -

                     West                           -0.0115
                                                    (-0.727)
                     South                         0.0677***
                                                    (5.025)
                     Midwest                        -0.0177
                                                    (-1.655)

                     Controls                         Yes

                     Time x Morningstar               Yes
                     Reported Risk Style FE
                     Time x Morningstar               Yes
                     Category FE

                     Observations                    6,774
                     Adjusted R-squared              0.153

Panel C. Misclassification and Fund Family Fixed Effects

                                     (1)              (2)             (3)
                                 Misclassified    Misclassified   Misclassified

   Time FE                           Yes              Yes             Yes
   Family FE                         No               Yes             Yes
   Fund FE                           No               No              Yes

   Observations                     6,923            6,919           6,906
   Adjusted R-squared               0.003            0.227           0.494




                                            48
                                        Table 10.
                  The Characteristics of Unrated Bonds held by Funds

This table summarizes the corporate bonds in the Mergent FISD database that were
issued between 2010 and 2016. Each box describes the mean offering yield and the number
of bonds in different ranges of offering maturities and credit qualities. A bond's credit
rating at issuance is the Barclays/Bloomberg composite of Fitch, Moody's, and S&P's
respective ratings that were available within 30 trading days of the offering date. N is the
number of issue observations in each box.

                                          Issuing Maturity
                           0 to 3.5 Years   3.5 to 6 Years     6 to 10 Years
 High Investment
                              1.44%              2.21%             2.70%
 Grade (AA to AAA)
                              N=113              N=146             N=33
 Medium Investment
                              1.75%               2.80%            3.75%
 Grade (BBB to A)
                              N=483              N=1,110           N=370

 Junk Grade Bonds              5.14%             8.08%             7.69%
 (BB and Below)                N=43              N=563            N=1,655
                               7.81%             6.43%             7.09%
 Unrated Bonds
                               N=81              N=245             N=356




                                            49
                                      Table 11.
   Misclassified Fund Performance around Junk Bond Crashes (and Outperformance)

In this table, we regress monthly fund returns on misclassified dummy and control
variables. Misclassified dummy is 1 if the official credit quality (High or Medium) is higher
than the counter factual credit quality, and 0 otherwise. In the columns, we regress
separately the sample months when JNK, the SPDR Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Bond
ETF, had major negative returns (1), close to 0 returns (2), and substantial positive
returns (3). The sample period is Q3 2010 to Q2 2018. t-statistics are clustered quarterly.


                                       (1)          (2)          (3)
                                   Fund Returnt Fund Returnt Fund Returnt
                                    JNK < -1% -1%<JNK<1% JNK > 1%

          Misclassifiedt-1           -4.672***        2.849**          7.630***
                                      (-3.117)        (2.270)           (6.141)

          Reported Credit            -1.421**           0.263          2.024***
          Scoret-1
                                      (-2.270)         (0.828)         (5.232)

          Reported Durationt-1         -4.784           0.378          5.227**
                                      (-1.246)         (0.187)         (2.327)

          Average Expenset-1         -9.683***        -2.234*           -1.146
                                      (-3.457)        (-2.011)         (-0.945)

          Time x Morningstar            Yes             Yes              Yes
          Reported Risk Style
          FE
          Time x Morningstar            Yes             Yes              Yes
          Category FE

          Observations                 4,522            9,972           8,177
          Adjusted R-squared           0.855            0.879           0.820




                                               50
        Online Appendix
     Don't Take Their Word For It:
The Misclassification of Bond Mutual Funds




                    1
                              Appendix A: Variable Definitions
Variable Name         Definition                                                 Data Source
                                                                                 Morningstar
Reported AAA %        % of holdings in AAA assets as reported by a fund
                                                                                 Direct
                      % of holdings in AAA assets as calculated by               Morningstar
Calculated AAA %
                      Morningstar                                                Direct
                      % of holdings in AAA assets as calculated by us
AAA %                                                                            Constructed
                      from the portfolio
...                   ...                                                        ...
                      A fixed fund could be categorized as any of the
                      following:
                      "High Limited", "Medium Limited", "Low
Morningstar                                                                      Morningstar
                      Limited",
Reported Risk Style                                                              Direct
                      "High Moderate", "Medium Moderate", "Low
                      Moderate", "High Extensive", "Medium Extensive",
                      and "Low Extensive"
                      We re-evaluate a fund as either high, medium, or
Correct Fund Risk     low credit quality using their holdings. This
                                                                                 Constructed
Style                 counterfactual fund style is the fund style as
                      indicated by the re-evaluated credit quality.
                      Dummy variable that indicates whether a fund is
                      misclassified in their fund credit quality dimension.
Misclassified Dummy   It is 1 if the official credit style (High or Medium) is   Constructed
                      higher than the counter factual credit quality as
                      indicated by holdings, and 0 otherwise.
                      Morningstar's categorization of mutual funds based
Morningstar                                                                      Morningstar
                      on the types of assets owned. See Appendix D for
Category                                                                         Direct
                      the various categories included in the sample.
                      Default scores calculated using the reported % asset
Reported Credit
                      holdings using Morningstar's credit risk model             Constructed
Score
                      formula (Appendix B)
                                                                                 Morningstar
Reported Duration     The reported effective duration of a portfolio
                                                                                 Direct
                      The reported yield to maturity of a portfolio (in %        Morningstar
Reported Yield
                      points)                                                    Direct
                      Morningstar calculated average yield to maturity of        Morningstar
Calculated Yield
                      a portfolio (in % points)                                  Direct
                      The total coupon and dividend payment from the             Morningstar
12-Month Yield
                      past 12 months (in % points)                               Direct


                                               2
                     The fund return is the value weighted average of the
Fund Return          share class returns. Share class returns come from   Constructed
                     Morningstar Direct
Morningstar Rating   The fund level Morningstar Rating is the value
                                                                            Constructed
3-yr                 weighted average of share level Morningstar Ratings
Morningstar Rating   The fund level Morningstar Rating is the value
                                                                            Constructed
General              weighted average of share level Morningstar Ratings
                     Average expense at the fund level is calculated by
Average Expense      taking the value weighted average of the share-class   Constructed
                     level expense ratios
                                                                            Morningstar
Monthly Flow         Monthly fund level investor flows
                                                                            Direct
                     Quarterly fund level investor flow is the quarterly
Flow                                                                        Constructed
                     sum of monthly flow
                     Monthly returns of SPDR Bloomberg Barclays High
JNK                                                                         Bloomberg
                     Yield Bond ETF




                                             3
                            Appendix B: Credit Risk of a Fund Portfolio

Morningstar defines a bond portfolio's average credit risk using a weighted average score
using the credit rating of the underlying assets. Prior to August 2010, a bond asset's score
is defined using the following table:

Bond    AAA          AA           A          BBB        BB        B            Below        Not        Not
Quality                                                                        B            Rated      Rated
                                                                                                       Muni
Score    2           3            4          5          6         7            8            7          6


The portfolio's average position size weighted score then defines its credit quality using
the following breakpoints.

  Portfolio   0 to 2.5       2.5 to      3.5 to         4.5 to        5.5 to       6.5 to           >7.5
  Average                    3.5         4.5            5.5           6.5          7.5
  Score
  Quality     AAA            AA          A              BBB           BB           B                Below B
  Rating
  Fund        High           High        Medium         Medium        Low          Low              Low
  Style
  Quality

After August 2010, the scores are based on a relative default rate:

Bond    AAA          AA           A          BBB        BB        B            Below        Not        Not
Quality                                                                        B            Rated      Rated
                                                                                                       Muni
Score    0           0.56         2.22       5.00       17.78     49.44        100.00       49.44      17.78


The respective breakpoints for post August 2010 are then:


  Portfolio   0 to           0.13889     1.25000        3.47223       9.02778      31.25000         
  Average     0.13889        to          to             to            to           to               72.36112
  Score                      1.25000     3.47223        9.02778       31.25000     72.36112
  Quality     AAA            AA          A              BBB           BB           B                Below B
  Rating
  Fund        High           High        Medium         Medium        Low          Low              Low
  Style
  Quality




                                                    4
                         Appendix C: Credit Rating Composites

The following table lists the assumption used for our analysis and the subsequent %
misclassified bond funds in the High and Medium credit quality categories from Q1 2017
to Q2 2018 in our final sample.

           Assumptions in Classifying Bond Funds                     % Fund-Quarter Obs.
                                                                 Misclassified Between Q1 2017
                                                                          and Q2 2018

    1) Use Morningstar's Calculated % Composition for each                  31.4%
       bond fund portfolio.

    1) Calculate % composition directly using the                           31.0%
       Bloomberg/Barclays Method for all Bond Broad Type
       assets holdings.
                           Baseline Analysis                                24.1%
    1) Ignore Bond Subtypes that are Warrants/Rights (Calls),
       Warrants/Rights (Puts), Futures, Option (Calls),
       Options (Puts), Interest Rate Swaps, Interest Rate
       Futures, Interest Rate Forwards, Credit Default Swaps,
       and Treasury Futures.
    2) Calculate % composition directly using the
       Bloomberg/Barclays Method for all other Bond Broad
       Type assets holdings.
    1) Ignore Bond Subtypes that are Warrants/Rights (Calls),               20.6%
       Warrants/Rights (Puts), Futures, Option (Calls),
       Options (Puts), Interest Rate Swaps, Interest Rate
       Futures, Interest Rate Forwards, Credit Default Swaps,
       and Treasury Futures.
    2) Calculated % composition directly using the best rating
       from the Fitch, Moody's, and S&P for all other Bond
       Broad Types assets holdings.
    1) Ignore Bond Subtypes that are Warrants/Rights (Calls),               14.4%
       Warrants/Rights (Puts), Futures, Option (Calls),
       Options (Puts), Interest Rate Swaps, Interest Rate
       Futures, Interest Rate Forwards, Credit Default Swaps,
       and Treasury Futures.
    2) Calculated % composition using the best rating from the
       8 US NRSROs (Fitch, Moody's, S&P, AMBest, DBRS,
       Egan-Jones, Kroll, and Morningstar) for all other Bond
       Broad Types assets holdings.



                                             5
                         Appendix D: Morningstar Categories

This table describes the fraction of fund observations in each Morningstar Category that
are misclassified according to our baseline classification system between Q1 2017 to Q2
2018.


        Morningstar Category                   Fraction of Bond-Fund Observations
                                                           Misclassified
 US Fund Ultrashort Bond                                    41.89%
 US Fund Inflation-Protected Bond                            29.7%
 US Fund Short-Term Bond                                     26.7%
 US Fund Intermediate Core-Plus                              22.1%
 Bond
 US Fund Intermediate Core Bond                              18.8%
 US Fund Corporate Bond                                      8.90%




                                           6
                 Appendix E:
        Link to Morningstar's Response



                 Appendix F:
              Link to Our Reply



                  Appendix G:
Link to Morningstar's Second Response Comments



                 Appendix H:
     Link to Our Reply to these Comments




                      7
    Appendix I: Replicating Morningstar Ratings and Understanding the Relationship
                between Misclassification and Morningstar Star Ratings

We begin our analysis by replicating Morningstar's 3-year ratings for our collection of
bond mutual funds. Morningstar's methodology is linked here, and utilizes a return with
a "risk-adjustment" within Morningstar Categories (listed in Appendix D). We are able
to explain 91.31% of the variation in the ratings of bond share-class/quarter observations
in the last 2 years using ratings constructed from historic returns, a proxy risk-free rate,
Morningstar's risk-aversion assumption, and historic Morningstar categories.9

Through this replication exercise, however, we find that the risk adjustments do very little
to change the ranking of bond mutual funds within each category. Ranking funds by their
raw 3-year excess returns and using the star-ranking percentile breakpoints gives almost
the same exact ratings as ranking with a certainty equivalent excess return using
Morningstar's risk aversion function (the former explains 90.70% of the variation as
opposed to 91.31% of the variation explained by the latter method). This implies that
returns resulting from holding riskier bonds are not substantially adjusted by
Morningstar's rating process; therefore, our finding that misclassified funds have higher
Morningstar Stars could follow from the fact that these funds tend to hold riskier assets
than their style-box peers. To explore this in more depth, in Appendix Figure I1 below,
we simply separate and plot funds and their received Morningstar stars by the risk level
of:

1.) The assets they actually hold (Yellow Bars); and
2.) The assets that they claim to hold in their self-reported survey responses (Blue Bars).




9
  The variation explained by our replicated stars decreases as we go further back in time to roughly 77.65%
for the sample between Q3 2010 to Q1 2020. We suspect that this is because many previous US taxable
bond funds have switched out of their rank-determining US Taxable Bond categories (for instance to target
date mixed asset classes, etc.), and thus out of our sample collected through Morningstar Direct. In addition,
Morningstar tweaked their categorization by backfilling the Intermediate Core-Plus Grade category through
the data, affecting our rankings within historic Morningstar Categories.


                                                      8
                      3.5


                      3.4
  Morningstar Stars




                      3.3


                      3.2


                      3.1


                       3


                      2.9
                            Low Risk                   Medium Risk           High Risk

                                       Self-Reported      Holdings-Implied

Appendix Figure I1. Morningstar Stars by Surveyed and Holdings Implied Credit Risk Group (Q3
2010 - Q2 2018)

From Appendix Figure I1, the Holdings-Implied risk categories (Yellow Bars) reflect the
monotonic nature of the ratings to risky holdings. Higher risk funds tend to be assigned
more stars than medium risk funds, which in turn have more stars than low risk funds.

This pattern is significantly more muted for the Self-Reported (survey-response) risk-style
box implied risk levels (Blue Bars): bond funds in the medium risk category have almost
the identical star average as that of the funds in the high risk category.

Given Morningstar's Star Rating methodology and formula, a fund thus needs to actually
hold more risky assets to be ascribed more stars. This is further demonstrated in
Appendix Table I1 where we run a horserace by regressing fund portfolios' Morningstar
star ratings against Self-Reported and Holdings-Implied category indicators. Again, Star
Ratings are monotonically increasing in the "True" Holdings-Implied categories, while
exhibiting no relationship to the self-reported style-box categories after controls. These
results collectively show that bond mutual funds can gain substantially more Morningstar
stars (given the Star rating formula) by holding riskier assets.




                                                         9
                                    Appendix Table I1
                                           (1)                (2)               (3)
                                       Morningstar         Morningstar       Morningstar
                                         Ratingt            Ratingt           Ratingt

Holdings-Implied Low Riskt-1                  -                  -                 -

Holdings-Implied Medium Riskt-1             0.147             0.199              0.204
                                           (0.973)           (1.323)            (1.356)
Holdings-Implied High Riskt-1             0.532***          0.527***           0.535***
                                           (3.111)           (3.104)            (3.148)

Self-Reported Low Riskt-1                     -                  -                 -

Self-Reported Medium Riskt-1               0.145              0.0425             0.0425
                                          (1.370)            (0.393)            (0.391)
Self-Reported High Riskt-1                -0.0570            -0.0403            -0.0494
                                          (-0.392)           (-0.283)           (-0.346)


Reported Credit Scoret-1                  -0.00193          0.0322***         0.0322***
                                          (-0.577)            (5.897)           (5.930)
Reported Durationt-1                     0.0518***           0.127***          0.126***
                                           (3.543)            (4.483)           (3.238)


Time FE                                     Yes                No                 No
Time x Morningstar Category FE              No                 Yes                Yes
Time x Duration Classification FE           No                 No                 Yes


Observations                               11,330             11,294            11,281
Adjusted R-squared                          0.039              0.131             0.128


This leads to the natural question, if stars can be gained by holding riskier assets, why do
funds misclassify at all to give the appearance of being less risky with regard to their risk
style boxes? In Appendix Table I2, we show evidence of one motivation. In particular, in
Appendix Table I2, we find that for the same level of Morningstar ratings, investors have
a preference for lower risk (and against indications of a high risk). We regress measures
of mutual fund flows against a dummy variable indicating whether a fund is assigned a
non-investment "High Risk" classification. We see that investors invest substantially less
in these funds relative to other funds of the same Morningstar Rating. This is true
throughout our sample. Additionally, investor flows seem only to correspond to the self-
reported risk measure. The holdings-implied high risk indicator included in columns 2 and
4 has no power in explaining the direction or the magnitude of investor flows; that is if a


                                             10
fund is truly holding riskier assets, and yet through misclassification by its survey
responses has achieved a low risk classification by Morningstar, then it effectively gained
Morningstar Stars without suffering the adverse investor flow related consequences of
being labeled a risky portfolio.

                                       Appendix Table I2
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
                                          Flowt > 0   Flowt > 0    Flowt > 0   Flowt > 0

          Self-Reported High Riskt-1      -0.0513**   -0.0739***   -0.0369**   -0.0545***
                                           (-2.524)     (-3.823)    (-2.101)     (-3.081)
          Holdings-Implied High Riskt-1                 -0.0109                  -0.0135
                                                        (-0.872)                 (-1.102)
          Reported Durationt-1                         -0.00693                  0.00345
                                                        (-1.478)                 (0.872)
          3 Year Returnt-1                               0.321*                 0.713***
                                                        (1.726)                  (3.254)

          Time X Morningstar                Yes          Yes
          Rating FE
          Time X Morningstar                                         Yes          Yes
          Rating X Morningstar
          Category FE

          Observations                     13,095      12,330       12,925      12,180
          Adjusted R-squared                0.076       0.082        0.109       0.119



In summary, misclassification is related to higher Morningstar stars because misclassified
funds have substantially riskier underlying holdings (as shown in Appendix Figure I1 and
Appendix Table I1), which mechanically drives the rankings given the star rating
methodology). Moreover, these same funds understate their underlying risk, as this lower
risk perception attracts substantially higher investor flows conditional on Morningstar
star ratings.




                                               11
                        Appendix J: Fund Expenses and Fund Age

In this table, we further analyze whether misclassified funds are more expensive than
usual. We regress average expense ratio on the misclassified indicator whiling controlling
for characteristics including the Fund Age. The average expense ratio is calculated at the
fund level as the value weighted average of their respective share-class level values.
Column (1) generates a "true" risk style fixed effect using holding related credit qualities,
while column (2) uses a fund's reported risk style FE. The sample period is Q3 2010 to
Q2 2018. t-statistics are double-clustered by time and fund.

                                            (1)                         (2)
                                     Average Expensest           Average Expensest

     Misclassifiedt-1                     0.0829**                     0.148***
                                            (2.228)                     (4.018)
     Reported Credit Scoret-1            0.00978***                   0.0205***
                                            (3.777)                     (3.541)
     Reported Durationt-1                  -0.00480                    -0.00767
                                           (-0.427)                    (-0.655)
     Fund Aget                           0.00796***                  0.00796***
                                            (5.676)                     (4.643)
     Fund Aget*Misclassified t-1          -0.00364*                  -0.00432**
                                           (-2.005)                    (-2.134)

     Time x Morningstar                       No                        Yes
     Reported Risk Style FE
     Time x Morningstar True                 Yes                         No
     Risk Style FE
     Time x Morningstar                      Yes                        Yes
     Category FE

     Observations                           9,335                       7,573
     Adjusted R-squared                     0.295                       0.199




                                             12
                       Appendix K: Fund Advisor and Distribution Fees

   In this table, we analyze whether misclassified funds are more expensive than usual with
   respect to advisor and distribution fees. In Panel A (B) we regress the average Advisor
   Fee (Distribution Fee) on misclassified dummy and control variables. The average fee
   variables are calculated at the fund level as the value weighted average of their respective
   share-class level values. The sample period is Q3 2010 to Q2 2018. t-statistics are double-
   clustered by time and fund.

   Panel A: Advisor Fees
                                      (1)                     (2)                    (3)
                                  Advisor Fee             Advisor Fee            Advisor Fee

Misclassifiedt-1                   0.0382***                0.0245*                0.0242*
                                    (3.453)                 (1.929)                 (1.897)
Reported Credit Scoret-1                                   0.00892**              0.00869**
                                                            (2.712)                 (2.713)
Reported Durationt-1                                                               -0.00508
                                                                                   (-0.896)

Time x Morningstar                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Reported Risk Style FE
Time x Morningstar                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Category FE

Observations                          4,935                  4,437                  4,437
Adjusted R-squared                    0.114                  0.128                  0.129

   Panel B: Distribution Fees
                                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)
                                Distribution Fee       Distribution Fee       Distribution Fee

Misclassifiedt-1                   0.0546***                0.0337                  0.0338
                                    (2.955)                 (1.723)                (1.719)
Reported Credit Scoret-1                                   0.0103**               0.00969**
                                                            (2.390)                (2.328)
Reported Durationt-1                                                               -0.0183
                                                                                   (-1.396)

Time x Morningstar                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Reported Risk Style FE
Time x Morningstar                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Category FE

Observations                          3,440                  3,138                  3,138
Adjusted R-squared                    0.030                  0.040                  0.047


                                                13
