                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         BENCHMARK INTEREST RATES WHEN THE GOVERNMENT IS RISKY

                                        Patrick Augustin
                                        Mikhail Chernov
                                         Lukas Schmid
                                         Dongho Song

                                      Working Paper 26429
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26429


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We thank Vadim di Pietro, Valentin Haddad, Michael Johannes, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Lars
Lochstoer, Francis Longstaff, Renate Marold, Guillaume Roussellet, Suresh Sundaresan, and
Tony Zhang for comments on earlier drafts, and participants in seminars sponsored by the
Canadian Derivatives Institute, Duke, McGill, OSU, UCLA, the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Conference on Advances in Financial Research, the HEC-McGill 2019 Summer
Finance Workshop, and the ICEF 2019 International Finance Conference. The authors
acknowledge financial support from the Canadian Derivatives Institute. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Benchmark Interest Rates When the Government is Risky
Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song
NBER Working Paper No. 26429
November 2019
JEL No. C1,E43,E44,G12,H60

                                           ABSTRACT

Since the Global Financial Crisis, rates on interest rate swaps have fallen below maturity matched
U.S. Treasury rates across different maturities. Swap rates represent future uncollateralized
borrowing between banks. Treasuries should be expensive and produce yields that are lower than
those of maturity matched swap rates, as they are deemed to have superior liquidity and to be
safe, so this is a surprising development. We show, by no-arbitrage, that the U.S. sovereign
default risk explains the negative swap spreads over Treasuries. This view is supported by a
quantitative equilibrium model that jointly accounts for macroeconomic fundamentals and the
term structures of interest and U.S. credit default swap rates. We account for interbank credit risk,
liquidity effects, and cost of collateralization in the model. Thus, the sovereign risk explanation
complements others based on frictions such as balance sheet constraints, convenience yield, and
hedging demand.

Patrick Augustin                                  Lukas Schmid
Desautels Faculty of Management                   Duke University
McGill University                                 Fuqua School of Business
1001 Sherbrooke Street West, Room 552             lukas.schmid@duke.edu
Montreal, Qc H3A 1G5 Canada
patrick.augustin@mcgill.ca                        Dongho Song
                                                  Johns Hopkins University
Mikhail Chernov                                   Carey Business School
Anderson School of Management                     100 International Drive
University of California, Los Angeles             Baltimore, MD 21202
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417                   dongho.song@jhu.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

The financial crisis of 2008 marked the first of continuing disruptions in financial markets.
Three phenomena are particularly significant in the fixed-income markets: (i) long-term
swap rates linked to LIBOR fell below maturity matched U.S. Treasury yields (Klingler
and Sundaresan, 2018; Jermann, 2019), (ii) short- to intermediate-term maturity swap rates
linked to the Effective Federal Funds Rate (EFFR) also fell below maturity matched U.S.
Treasury yields (Klingler and Sundaresan, 2019), and (iii) premiums on CDS contracts for
the U.S. government have risen to at least 100 times their pre-crisis levels (Chernov, Schmid,
and Schneider, 2019).

Observations (i) and (ii) appear puzzling from the perspective of the standard asset pricing
theory. They imply that swap spreads (i.e., the difference between swap and Treasury
rates) linked to LIBOR and EFFR are negative, an irregularity often referred to as the
"negative swap spread puzzle." Although these issues have been the focus of research,
they are typically studied in isolation. The third phenomenon is also perceived as puzzling
because of the sheer magnitude of U.S. CDS premiums.

In this paper, we argue that these phenomena are interrelated and can be understood
together by accounting for a change in the perceived credit quality of the U.S. after the
crisis. In contrast, although the factors behind extant explanations of phenomena (i) and
(ii) are valid, the factors were also present before the crisis when swap spreads were positive.

The no-arbitrage argument for the relative magnitude of interest rates can account for these
puzzles. Consider a strategy that sells short a par Treasury bond borrowed via a reverse repo
transaction, together with a position in a swap contract that receives a fixed rate of interest.
The total cash flows are equal to the difference between the swap rate and the Treasury
yield (a coupon in the case of par), net of the difference between the floating payments in
the swap and the reverse repo. Uncollateralized interest rates are expected to be greater
than collateralized rates, so the present value of the floating payments (one-period interest
rates) is positive. Thus, the difference between the swap rate and the Treasury yield must
also be positive. We analyze violations of this condition in three steps.

First, we examine various interest rate spreads. The swap linked to the EFFR is known
as the overnight indexed swap (OIS), and that linked to LIBOR as the interest rate swap
(IRS). The difference between the OIS and Treasury rates continues to be negative at
longer maturities. The difference between the IRS and Treasury rates is negative between
maturities of 7 years and up to 30 years. Finally, the spread between the IRS and OIS rates
is positive across all maturities for the entire sample, as would have been expected in 2007.
Thus, the negative swap spread puzzles must have a common source, which can be derived
from the relation between OIS and Treasury rates. We also provide evidence suggesting
that OIS swap spreads and CDS premiums exhibit significant co-movement.

Second, we argue that the negative difference between swap and Treasury rates is driven by
the credit riskiness of the U.S. government. If the U.S. can default, a credit-risk-free position

                                               1
can be restored by combining a short Treasury bond and Treasury protection sold via a
CDS contract. Thus, the original no-arbitrage argument reviewed above should be modified
if a CDS position is introduced, and the difference between the swap rate and the Treasury
yield minus the CDS premium should be positive, implying that negative swap spreads can
persist even in the absence of arbitrage. The key insight is that Treasury bonds can default,
but benchmark indices like LIBOR or EFFR cannot because they are not investable, and so
swap contracts can be more valuable than Treasuries, thereby lowering swap rates relative
to those of bonds.

Third, we propose a realistic quantitative model that can explain negative swap spreads
by accounting for the sovereign credit risk of the U.S. government. As Chernov, Schmid,
and Schneider (2019) observe, an equilibrium model is required to measure the credit risk
premium in the absence of an observed risk-free reference rate, and so we follow their mod-
eling strategy but make two adjustments. A high level of quantitative realism is required,
so we specify a more realistic model of the joint behavior of macroeconomic fundamentals.
We also simplify the modeling of the default trigger and take an intensity-based rather
than a structural approach. The macroeconomic variables that drive the default intensity
are selected based on the analysis of Augustin (2018) and Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider
(2019).

To provide plausible quantitative guidance on swap spreads, our model must account for
other factors beyond sovereign credit risk that may affect differences between interest rates
in current markets. We focus on a convenience yield on Treasuries, bank risk (credit and
funding liquidity), and the opportunity cost of collateral associated with swap transactions.
The first lowers Treasury yields, the second increases swap rates, and the third increases
swap rates if the short interest rate and the cost of collateral are positively correlated
(Johannes and Sundaresan, 2007). We evaluate the contributions of these different channels
and sovereign credit risk to the overall swap

We identify the convenience yield and bank risk empirically using observable interest rate
spreads and the unobserved collateral factor by matching the one-year IRS and the term
structure of the CDS. We are then able to value the OIS and IRS without using the data
on their respective rates. This valuation is thus an actual relative value exercise, in which
we determine the theoretical value of the swap rates using the market values of other
instruments. We estimate our model via Bayesian MCMC methods and thus establish the
model-implied time series for the relevant variables in our sample.

We find that our quantitative model provides an accurate account of the dynamics in both
OIS and IRS markets. The model generates swap spread series that were positive before
the onset of the financial crisis in 2008 and turned negative afterward. We conduct counter-
factual experiments to assess how the U.S. credit risk affects the behavior of swap spreads.
We find that they are uniformly positive in the absence of this risk, which confirms that
the sovereign risk is quantitatively relevant in the pricing of Treasuries and swaps. This
relative-value-based view is conceptually different from all other explanations of negative
swap spread puzzles, which are based on limits to arbitrage.

                                             2
Related literature

We contribute to the literature examining the puzzle that the difference between interest
rate swaps denominated in USD and U.S. Treasury rates, a.k.a. swap spreads, turned
negative for multiple maturities, effectively suggesting that the U.S. government is riskier
than a presumably safe AA-rated bank. Several explanations have been proposed for the
apparent pricing anomaly in financial markets, including the demand for duration by un-
derfunded pension plans (Klingler and Sundaresan, 2018), dealer funding costs (Lou, 2009),
or increases in regulatory leverage ratios (Boyarchenko, Gupta, Steele, and Yen, 2018).
Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) consider fading demand for U.S. Treasury bonds to be a
significant factor in negative OIS-Treasury spreads. Jermann (2019) proposes a theoretical
equilibrium explanation for negative swap spreads by considering regulatory leverage con-
straints for dealer balance sheets. The main differences between our approach and others
are summarized in Table 1.

The explanations based on frictions, although plausible, fail to provide a comprehensive
explanation of Treasury spreads that exceed the maturity matched spreads of short-term
and long-term funding instruments in interbank markets. The demand for duration by
underfunded pension plans is a plausible explanation for 30-year negative swap spreads, but
less so for shorter maturities, even if they have been persistently negative for many years.
Second, limits-to-arbitrage arguments can account for the persistence of negative swap
spreads but do not explain why they turned negative in the first place. Third, focusing on
individual segments of the maturity structure or selective instruments ignores the inherent
equilibrium relationships that must exist between benchmark interest rates. We propose a
model that explains both positive swap spreads before and negative swap spreads after the
crisis.

We suggest that negative swap spreads can be obtained without frictions (even though fric-
tions may amplify the phenomenon). We aim to provide a unified explanation of the price
dynamics of various fixed income instruments during the financial crisis, by incorporating
sovereign default risk into the modeling of benchmark interest rates, thus addressing the
challenge faced by the current partial equilibrium pricing models. Dittmar, Hsu, Roussel-
let, and Simasek (2019) propose that sovereign default risk can explain the pricing anoma-
lies observed among inflation-indexed securities (Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig, 2013;
Hilscher, Raviv, and Reis, 2014).

Our study also contributes to the extensive literature on no-arbitrage affine term structure
modeling and credit-sensitive instruments, as summarized by Duffie and Singleton (2003),
to the modeling of the term structure of overnight index swaps, interest rate swaps, or
LIBOR rates (Duffie and Huang, 1996; Duffie and Singleton, 1997; Collin-Dufresne and
Solnik, 2001; Grinblatt, 2001; He, 2001; Liu, Longstaff, and Mandell, 2006; Johannes and
Sundaresan, 2007; Feldhutter and Lando, 2008; Filipovic and Trolle, 2013; Monfort, Renne,
and Roussellet, 2016) and to other empirical examinations (Litzenberger, 1992; Sun, Sun-
daresan, and Wang, 1993; Gupta and Subrahmanyam, 2000; Wang and Yang, 2018). Our

                                             3
study also relates to investigations into the convenience yield embedded in Treasury bonds
(Krishnamurthy, 2002; Longstaff, 2004; Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright, 2007; Goyenko, Sub-
rahmanyam, and Ukhov, 2011; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012; Nagel, 2016;
Du, Im, and Schreger, 2018).



2     Preliminary evidence

2.1   Benchmark interest rates in the U.S.

Four types of U.S. interest rates and their interactions are considered in our analysis: (i)
Treasury yields; (ii) OIS premiums; (iii) IRS premiums; and (iv) CDS premiums. The U.S.
Treasury borrows money on behalf of the government by issuing debt securities of different
maturities. The effective annual interest that can be earned along the maturity spectrum
characterizes the Treasury yield curve. The Treasury yield curve can be characterized using
zero coupon, coupon, par, or forward rates. The most convenient method is to use zero-
coupon yields that are boostrapped from coupon bonds (e.g., Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright,
2007, henceforth GSW). The constant maturity Treasury (CMT) yield curve, or par rates,
are a common indicator of the U.S. government's borrowing costs, and are also bootstrapped
from coupon bonds. CM Ttn denotes the coupon at time t of a bond maturing in n periods.

Overnight indexed swaps (OIS) are fully collateralized contracts, in which a fixed rate
payer exchanges a constant cash flow, i.e., the OIS rate, against a floating payment that is
computed as the geometric average of the daily EFFR. The Federal Funds Target Rate is
determined by the Federal Open Market Committee so monetary policy can be established.
The EFFR is the actual interest rate at which banks lend reserve balances to other banks
overnight without collateral. This has been measured as the volume-weighted median of
the bilaterally negotiated transactions since March 1, 2016, and before then as the volume-
weighted average. OIS contracts with maturities of up to one year have only one settlement
(the geometric average is computed over the lifetime of the contract), while cash payments
for contracts with maturities of over one year arise quarterly (the geometric average is
re-computed every quarter). Hull and White (2013) and Wang and Yang (2018) discuss
the institutional details of OIS contracts, and OIStn denotes the rate at time t of a swap

maturing in n periods.

The arrangements of interest rate swaps (IRS) are similar to those of OIS but have a different
reference floating rate, which is the 3-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR), which
is fixed at the previous settlement date of an IRS. LIBOR is the interest rate at which
banks in the Eurodollar area are willing to lend to each other on an uncollateralized basis.
See Duffie and Singleton (1997), Collin-Dufresne and Solnik (2001), and Johannes and
Sundaresan (2007) for discussions on the institutional details of LIBOR swap contracts.
IRSt  n denotes the rate at time t of a swap maturing in n periods.




                                              4
The definitions of LIBOR and EFFR are conceptually similar, as they both relate to uncol-
lateralized interbank lending, so overnight LIBOR can be assumed to be similar to EFFR,
but the rates should not be identical. The banks in the LIBOR panel differ from those in
the Fed system, and the logistics of lending within the Fed system are different from those
in the Eurodollar area. Figure 1 compares the two rates.

The single exception to the identical positions corresponds to the onset of the banking
crisis of 2008. The difference between the instruments linked to LIBOR and EFFR is due
to the term effect. The floating legs are linked to the 3-month LIBOR and the daily EFFR
compounded over 3 months. The presence of bank credit risk means that lending to banks
without collateral for 3 months outright (at LIBOR) is more risky than lending overnight
(at EFFR) and rolling that over daily for 3 months.

The interest earned on collateralized borrowing through a repurchase agreement contract
(henceforth repo) is also a closely related rate, but it is not one that we consider in this
paper, as it has its own distinct issues and puzzles, although it does have some relevance to
our analysis. General collateral (GC) repo rates appear to be like a natural proxy for the
risk-free rate. Duffie and Stein (2015) suggest that GC rates exhibit similar flight-to-quality
spikes as Treasury bills and excess volatility due to the very short-term maturity of one day.
The GC repo market is also not active at maturities beyond 3 months, so no term structure
information is readily available. In addition, the post-2008 quantitative easing program
involved the purchase of Treasury bonds and thus affected the supply of collateral in repo
transactions, leading to distortions in rates. We limit our consideration of repo rates and
use them only qualitatively, without considering the specific values or their dynamics.

We also focus on the premium on credit default swaps (CDS) associated with the U.S.
government. CDS are effectively insurance contracts, in which the protection seller must
make payments in case of a credit event, which may include a failure to pay, repudia-
tion/moratorium, and restructuring. CDStn denotes the rate at time t of a swap maturing

in n periods.

If the U.S. government has no credit risk, these premiums would be expected to be ap-
proximately zero, which was the case before October 2007. The subsequent elevation in
the CDS premiums is prima facie evidence of U.S. credit risk, as Chernov, Schmid, and
Schneider (2019) argue. Whether CDS premiums reflect compensation for credit risk at all
is a matter of debate. In our view, both the arguments and the evidence for the U.S. credit
risk explanation are persuasive. See Appendix A.


2.2   Data

We source data on LIBOR, IRS, and OIS rates from Bloomberg, and U.S. CDS premiums
from Markit. Our sample begins on May 8, 2002, when observations on OIS rates are found
to be frequently available in the data, and ends on September 26, 2018. The 30-year OIS

                                              5
rates are often discarded by researchers because of their low liquidity. In addition, no OIS
data are available for maturities beyond 10 years during the crisis. Thus, longer-term OIS
rates are available only for part of the sample period. As the swap rates are par rates, we
use the constant maturity Treasury (CMT) rates published by the U.S. Federal Reserve
Bank as a maturity matched Treasury rate.

We report basic summary statistics for the term structure of all rates in Table 2, summa-
rizing the information for maturities of 3 and 6 months, and for 3, 5, 7, 10, 20, and 30
years. Panels A, B, and C in Table 2 show that on average, CMTs are lowest, with an
upward sloping term structure ranging from 1.25% at the short end to 3.95% at the 30-year
horizon. The OIS rates, reported in Panel A, are higher and range on average from 1.40% to
2.54% at 5-year maturity. Average OIS rates with maturities above 5 years are not directly
comparable to the CMTs, as there are fewer observations. OIS data for 7-year and 10-year
maturities start in May 2012 and August 2008, respectively, while those for 20- and 30-year
maturities start in September 2011. The LIBOR/swap rates reported in Panel B are the
largest, ranging on average from 1.66% to 3.97% at the short and long ends of the maturity
spectrum. All interest rates exhibit a decreasing term structure of volatility, as the standard
deviation for long-term maturities is lower than that for short-term maturities.

In Panel D, we report statistics for the Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) zero coupon
Treasury yields, which we use in our estimation. These are available for 1 to 30 years, and
are slightly larger than the CMTs, with an average yield of 1.50% to 4.07%.

In Panels E and F of Table 2, we report both USD and EUR denominated CDS premiums
on the U.S. Treasury. We use USD denominated contracts in our empirical analysis. EUR
contracts cover a longer span of data (from 2007 instead of 2010), so they can give us a
qualitative indication of the magnitude of the U.S. credit risk premium during the crisis.
The average cost of insurance against a default by the U.S. Treasury ranges from 11 bps to
37 bps for USD contracts, and from 13 bps to 44 bps for EUR denominated contracts. The
5-year contract is the most liquid. At the 99th percentile of the distribution, the 5-year
insurance premium reaches 66 bps during the post-2010 period, but at the height of the
global financial crisis (GFC), 5-year spreads jumped to a maximum of 95 bps (unreported
in the Table).


2.3   Swap spreads

Figure 2 visualizes the evidence on swap spreads, i.e., the difference between OIS or IRS
rates and maturity matched Treasury rates. Panel (d) of the figure confirms the negative
long-term IRS swap spreads observed in the post-crisis period, as emphasized by Jermann
(2019) and Klingler and Sundaresan (2018). According to Boyarchenko, Gupta, Steele,
and Yen (2018) and Jermann (2019), long-term swap spreads remain negative because
regulatory caps on leverage ratios make it too costly for investors to arbitrage away the
difference. Panels (a) and (b) of the figure confirm the negative short-term OIS spreads

                                              6
observed in the post-crisis period, as identified by Klingler and Sundaresan (2019), who
associate this inversion with a fading demand for U.S. Treasury notes and a corresponding
decline in the convenience yield.

Together, the panels provide additional evidence. The OIS swap spreads continue to be neg-
ative at longer maturities, and the liquidity of OIS with maturities of over 5 years declines.
Nevertheless, the prices convey qualitative information about the relative magnitudes of
OIS and Treasury rates. The difference is too large to be easily explained away by liquidity
effects.1


2.4    U.S. credit risk and negative swap spreads

In this section, we explain our intuition behind the proposed relation between negative swap
spreads and U.S. credit risk, and how we rely on the no-arbitrage bound type of argument.
Revisiting the case without credit risk can help us to appreciate the impact of credit risk. A
negative swap spread suggests that the Treasury is relatively less expensive. An arbitrageur
would aim to exploit this by buying the Treasury via a repo transaction and take a position
that pays the fixed (and receives the floating) rate in a swap contract. The cash flows
corresponding to these positions are displayed in Table 4.

We use notation CM S0    n for a generic swap rate, either OIS n or IRS n . The contractual
                                                                 0         0
floating rate in a swap (a LIBOR rate, or EFFR compounded over the period between
                                                n denotes the swap spread and equals CM S n -
tenors) is ft . The 3-month repo rate is rt . SS0                                        0
CM T0  n . The term S denotes the difference f - r . For expositional simplicity, we assume
                       t                          t  t
that floating and fixed payments are paid each period.

One receives St-1 - SS0n at each point t. No-arbitrage implies that P V (SS n ) = P V (S
                                                                           0            t-1 ),
where P V denotes the present value computed at time 0 (the swap inception). As the
uncollateralized borrowing costs are greater than the collateralized borrowing costs, the
present value of the floating payments must be positive, which implies a pure arbitrage
opportunity if SS0n < 0.


If the Treasury is credit-risky, the no-arbitrage argument above no longer holds. On default
at a random date  , the Treasury bond terminates, the future interest payments CM T0     n are

no longer received, and the bond pays 1 - L instead of the full face value, which then affects
the repayment of the repo loan. The swap contract is unaffected by the Treasury default
because it is linked to an index ft that is not investable. A swap is then more valuable than
a credit-risky Treasury bond.
   1
    In fact, the direction of liquidity effects could be ambiguous, ex ante, as for assets in zero net supply,
such as swaps, the liquidity premium is earned by the marginal investor, who is either long or short swaps
on average (see, e.g., Bongaerts, De Jong, and Driessen, 2011, Deuskar, Gupta, and Subrahmanyam, 2011,
and Brenner, Eldor, and Hauser, 2001).




                                                      7
A position in the bond can be complemented with the purchase of default protection via
a CDS contract, thus hedging the credit risk. This affects the cash flows of the overall
position (See Table 5). Specifically, in the case of default, the joint bond-CDS position has
full recovery of par, which is used to close out the repo loan. In addition, one receives the
unwind value of the swap, U . For simplicity, we assume that accruals due upon default are
rolled into the unwind value.

On balance, one receives St-1 - SS0   n - CDS n every period t in which there is no default.
                                               0
If there is a default at time  , one receives U . No-arbitrage means that the present value
of these cash flows must be equal to zero at the swap inception, implying
              n                           n                                  n
       P V (SS0 ) = P V (St-1 ) - P V (CDS0 ) + P V (U )  P V (U ) - P V (CDS0 ).

Thus, for sufficiently large CDS premiums and sufficiently small values of P V (U ), the swap
spread can be negative, and then the lower bound for the swap spread can be negative, and
observing a negative swap spread would not necessarily lead to arbitrage opportunities.

Accounting for the cumulative probability of no default, S0  n , the bound can be represented

as SS0n  P V (U )/S n - CDS n . Figure 2 demonstrates the relation between swap spreads
                       0        0
and the negative of the CDS premiums. For IRS, SS0      n > -CDS n , suggesting a small value
                                                                     0
                               n is occasionally less than -CDS n , implying a negative value
of P V0 (U ), while for OIS, SS0                                   0
of P V0 (U ).

Figure 2 suggests that CDS premiums co-move with the spreads in addition to serving as
an approximate lower bound for swap spreads. Table 3 provides additional evidence for
the relation between OIS spreads and U.S. CDS by regressing monthly changes in the OIS
swap spread on changes in the maturity matched U.S. CDS premiums and various controls.2
We run panel regressions by pooling all maturities and match the 3-month swap spreads
with the 6-month CDS premium because there are no CDS contracts with a lower level
of maturity. We add maturity-specific fixed effects to absorb time-invariant cross-maturity
differences due to the different possible clienteles.

The finding in column (1) is consistent with a negative relation between OIS swap spreads
and CDS premiums. In column (2), we show that the economic magnitude is similar for
maturities above 5 years, and in column (3), we pool all maturities together. The estimated
coefficient suggests that a 10 bps increase in the CDS premium is associated with a 0.7
bps drop in the OIS swap spread. The larger coefficient (-0.13) reported in column (4)
suggests that the sensitivity of the changes in OIS-Treasury to changes in CDS premiums
has recently increased.

In columns (5) to (10), we successively introduce lagged swap spreads, quarterly fixed ef-
fects to absorb the influence of common macroeconomic and financial factors, and controls.3
   2
     We examine the relation between swap spreads and U.S. credit risk at a monthly frequency because
the decision interval in our model is monthly. The results for the weekly frequency, which are stronger, are
available upon request.
   3
     The control variables include the CBOE VIX index, the exchange rate of the USD against a basket of


                                                     8
Even the conservative specification with the interaction of maturity and quarterly fixed ef-
fects in column (7) does not alter the significance or economic magnitude of the regression
coefficient. Longer-term OIS contracts were less liquid around the crisis and became succes-
sively more liquid, as discounting using OIS rates became more common over time. Thus,
the negative relation between swap spreads and CDS premiums is apparent in later years,
as demonstrated by the larger magnitude of the regression coefficient in columns (4), (8),
and (12), in which we restrict the regression to the time period post-2014. This finding also
suggests that our results are not merely driven by the U.S. debt ceiling episodes in August
2011 and October 2013.



3     A realistic model

As established, a negative swap spread can be obtained even in the absence of arbitrage
opportunities and may in fact be plausible in the context of current market data. To
determine the real situation, we must explicitly model the forces behind the magnitude of
swap spreads. In addition, the perceived credit risk of the U.S. government means that we
do not get to observe a risk-free rate. Thus, an equilibrium model is required to identify
such a rate, and we use a model of a representative agent with recursive preferences.

Another more subtle advantage of using the equilibrium framework concerns the change in
how the industry approaches the discounting of cash flows associated with collateralized
swap agreements. Full collateralization at the end of 2007 led market participants to use
the OIS rates instead of the LIBOR rates, and by the end of 2008 the whole industry had
switched to OIS (e.g., Cameron, 2013, Spears, 2019). Thus, a no-arbitrage model would
need to address the choice of reference interest rate.4

Under the null of our model, we obtain an equilibrium pricing kernel that we use to discount
cash flows of a given financial instrument. The reference interest rate here is the theoretical
real risk-free rate. All other interest rates appear as derived quantities in this framework
and are internally consistent.


3.1    Joint dynamics of macroeconomic fundamentals

As the literature on long-run risk suggests, accounting for the variation in conditional
expectations and the volatility of consumption growth is essential for the framework to
a broad group of major U.S. trading partners, the West Texas Intermediate oil price index, the economic
policy uncertainty index, the high-yield and investment-grade bond indices, inflation, the TED spread, the
3-month LIBOR-OIS spread, the 3-month T-bill rate, the U.S. Treasury total cash balances, and CDS depth
defined as the number of dealer quotes used to compute the mid-market spread.
    4
      For example, Chernov and Creal (2016) reflect this change, using OIS rates as a measure of reference
rates starting in 2009 and using a weighted average of LIBOR and OIS in 2008, with weights gradually
shifting towards OIS by the end of 2008.


                                                    9
quantitatively be a success. We therefore identify these quantities from a rich model that
includes the joint dynamics of consumption growth, inflation, output growth, and govern-
ment expenditures.

The strengths of this strategy are as follows. First, we can identify risk-free rates (both
real and nominal) without relying on asset price data. Second, we can exploit the rich joint
interactions between the macro fundamentals to identify conditional moments of consump-
tion growth (Schorfheide, Song, and Yaron, 2018, Zviadadze, 2016). Third, we identify
the dynamics of macro variables required in our model, other than consumption: infla-
tion to value nominal assets; output growth and government expenditures to model the
default probability of the U.S. government (as in Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider, 2019);
and macroeconomic uncertainty, which is an important driver of sovereign credit risk in
developed economies (as in Augustin, 2018).

Thus, we introduce a vector zt of macroeconomic fundamentals:

                                  zt = (ct , dt , gt , t ) ,

where ct = log(Ct+1 /Ct ) is log consumption growth, dt is log output growth, gt is the
government expenditure-to-output ratio, and t is inflation. The dynamics of state variables
in many long-run risk models are specified as a VAR(1) process in observable macro and
latent states, e.g., Bansal and Yaron (2004), or Bansal and Shaliastovich (2012). They are
similar to VARMA(1,1) models in observable macro states only (they are literally the same
in homoscedastic cases).

Thus, we assume that zt follows a VARMA(1,1) process with time-varying variance:
                                                     1/2                   1/2
           zt+1 = µz + z zt + zv vt + z · Vz,t · z,t+1 + z · z · Vz,t-1 · z,t ,              (1)

where zt+1 denotes a N × 1 vector (N = 4 in our case), z,t+1  N (0, I ), µz is an N × 1
vector, z is an N × N matrix, and z is an N × N matrix, where the diagonal elements
of z are defined as zi , for i = 1, 2, . . . , N . Denote the last term in equation (1) as wt+1 ,
                                                           1/2
                               wt+1 = z · z · Vz,t · z,t+1 ,

and stack the elements of zt and wt into a new vector yt = zt , wt        .

We treat t as Granger-caused by the other macro variables, but not vice versa. This is a
reduced-form representation of the exogenous and endogenous variables that enables us to
be consistent with the setup of Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2019) by restricting the
off-diagonal elements of the last column of z and z to zero.

The vector yt follows a VAR(1):
                                                                 1/2
                      yt+1 = µy + y yt + yv vt + y · Vy,t · y,t+1 ,


                                                10
where yt+1 denotes a 2N × 1 vector, y,t+1  N (0, I ), µy is a 2N × 1 vector, y is a 2N × 2N
matrix, and y is a 2N × 2N matrix, where the diagonal elements of y are defined as yi ,
for i = 1, 2, . . . , 2N .

We assume that the volatility vector consists of autonomous univariate autoregressive
gamma processes characterized by the bivariate vector vt , such that each element vi,t+1
follows an autoregressive gamma process vi,t+1  ARG(i , i , ci ) (Gourieroux and Jasiak,
2006 and Le, Singleton, and Dai, 2010), that is,
              vi,t+1 = i ci + i vi,t + i,t+1 ,   vart i,t+1 = i c2
                                                                 i + 2ci i vi,t .
                                                                               -1
The unconditional mean is Evi,t = i ci (1 - i )-1 , and we select ci = (1 - i )i  to set it
to 1 for identification purposes.

We add the volatility vector to the state vector yt to obtain xt = zt , wt , vt . With
K = (2 × N + 2) , the K × 1-dimensional multivariate state vector xt+1 follows a VAR(1)
process:
                                                           1/2
                            xt+1 = µ + xt +  · Vt                · x,t+1 ,
where x,t+1 defines a vector of independent shocks,  is a K × K matrix with positive
diagonal elements,  is a K × K matrix with strictly positive elements, and V is a K × K
diagonal matrix with elements given by:
                                       Vi,t = ai + bi vt ,
where parameter restrictions are required to guarantee the non-negativity of the volatility
process.


3.2   The pricing kernel

We assume a representative agent with recursive preferences:
                                                                         1/
                               Ut = [(1 -  )Ct + µt (Ut+1 ) ]                 ,
                        µt (Ut+1 ) =     Et (Ut+1 )
                                                    1/
                                                       ,
where  < 1 captures time preferences (the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is (1 -
)-1 ), and  < 1 captures the risk aversion (the relative risk aversion is 1 - ). Aggregate
consumption is denoted by Ct . With this utility function, the real pricing kernel is
                      Mt+1 =  (Ct+1 /Ct )-1 (Ut+1 /µt (Ut+1 ))- .

We can approximate the (log) pricing kernel using the solution method outlined in Hansen,
Heaton, and Li (2008) and Backus, Chernov, and Zin (2014). We log-linearize the scaled
time aggregator:
                     log(Ut /Ct )  ut  b0 + b1 log µt (ect+1 +ut+1 ),

                                                 11
where

                       b1 = e log µ ((1 -  ) + e log µ )-1
                       b0 = -1 log((1 -  ) + e log µ ) - b1 log µ,

with log µ = E (log µt ). We guess ut to be a linear function of the state xt , substitute
this guess into the log-linearized expression for ut , and use the method of undetermined
coefficients to solve for ut . Then the log pricing kernel is

      mt,t+1 = log  + ( - 1) ct+1 + ( - ) ct+1 + ut+1 - log µt ect+1 +ut+1
             = log  - ( - ) b0 b- 1                             -1
                                1 + ( - 1) ct+1 + ( - ) ut+1 - b1 ut .

See Appendix B for details.


3.3     Equilibrium risk-free rates

The price of a zero-coupon bond paying one unit of consumption n periods ahead from now
must satisfy the Euler equation

                                   Ptn = Et Mt,t+n .

We show in Appendix B.1 that the term structure of real interest rates is affine in the state
vector xt .

Similarly, the price of an n-period zero-coupon nominal bond is obtained from the nominal
stochastic discount factor and must satisfy the Euler equation

                                   Ptn = Et [Mt,t+n ] ,

where the nominal (log) stochastic discount factor is defined as mt,t+1 = mt,t+1 - t+1 =
mt,t+1 - e2 yt+1 . We show in Appendix B.2 that the term structure of nominal interest rates
is affine in the state vector xt .


3.4     The valuation approach for defaultable interest rates

To capture the credit risk of the U.S. government, we use the model of Chernov, Schmid,
and Schneider (2019) as a basis. This model is based on the contingent claims approach
(CCA), which delivers a fiscal default via the budget deficit that can no longer be restored
by raising taxes or eroding the real value of debt by creating inflation. The model requires
a numerical solution even under oversimplified assumptions about the underlying economy.
As we are seeking a high degree of realism, we do not model the whole elaborate structure
of the default mechanism for tractability, and instead exploit the equivalence between the

                                             12
CCA and compound Poisson approaches (Duffie and Lando, 2001) and model a default
hazard rate.

The exogenous variables of Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2019) that drive the U.S.
credit risk are the aggregate consumption growth rate, output growth, and the government
expenditures-to-output ratio. Augustin (2018) also shows that macroeconomic uncertainty
is an important driver of sovereign credit risk in developed economies. Thus, we assume
that the government's default risk is driven by a default intensity ht defined as

                    ht = h + hc ct + hd dt + hg gt + hv1 v1,t + hv2 v2,t .                  (2)

To model default risk, we also need a corresponding loss given the default (LGD), denoted
by L, which we assume to be constant.

Inflation or the bank credit risk may also be assumed to affect the default probability of
the U.S. government. Inflation may be relevant if we believe that the U.S. government may
attempt to "inflate away" its nominal debt. The bank credit risk may be important because
of the potential link between banks' solvency and government default (see, e.g., Acharya,
Drechsler, and Schnabl, 2014). For example, if the Fed bails out the banks, it could be
forced into insolvency. This could trigger government default because of the fiscal support
provided by the Treasury (Reis, 2015).

As discussed earlier in the case of t and as we show later in the case of the factor capturing
bank risk, the two variables are Granger-caused by macro variables, but not vice versa.
Nevertheless, inflation and bank credit risk are related to the default probability of the U.S.
government, albeit implicitly.

Given these assumptions, we can follow the approach of Duffie and Singleton (1999), which
implies that under the recovery-of-market-value assumption, credit risk can be accounted
for by augmenting the (log) discount factor with L · ht :
                                             n
                              ¯ n  Et e             mt+j -1,t+j -L·ht+j
                              Pt
                                             j =1                         .

However, P ¯ n does not correspond to an observable bond price, because Treasury prices also
            t
reflect the convenience yield.

Thus, to progress, we must address the following conceptual challenge. The swap spreads
are affected by factors other than the U.S. credit risk, although this is our main focus. First,
Treasury bonds are considered to be expensive and include a convenience yield relative to
other asset classes (e.g., Longstaff, 2004; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012; Nagel,
2016; Du, Im, and Schreger, 2018). Second, the swap rates typically reflect the credit and
funding risk of financial intermediaries (e.g., Feldhutter and Lando, 2008). Third, as pointed
out by Johannes and Sundaresan (2007), full collateralization of swaps increases the rates
because of an opportunity cost of collateral (if the correlation between the short interest
rate and the cost of collateral is positive). Thus, we must model all of these additional
drivers of swap spreads.

                                               13
In addition, no single asset is sensitive to only one of these factors, and so to identify
them, we must use several assets simultaneously. Both Treasuries and U.S. CDS provide
information about the U.S. credit risk, and while the former also reflects the convenience
yield, the latter does not. Similarly, the U.S. CDS reflects the opportunity cost of collateral,
which is irrelevant for Treasuries, but also affects swap rates. IRS contracts are also exposed
to the opportunity cost of collateral and the credit risk of banks in the Eurodollar area.
Thus, combining these assets will help us identify all of the required factors, and we can
then use them to evaluate the central object of the negative swap spread puzzle, i.e., the
OIS-Treasury spread, as an out-of-sample test of our model.


3.5   Spread factors

Empirically, we identify the safety factor via the difference between the 1-month OIS rate
                                 1, s             1
ot and (risky) Treasury rates yt     1,t = ot - yt . As discussed, this factor reflects not only
the ease of trading in Treasuries, but also the credit risk of banks in the Federal Reserve
system. We identify the bank credit factor via the difference between 1-month LIBOR and
OIS rates, s2,t = t - ot . We refer to s2 as the LIBOR-OIS spread. The cost of collateral s3,t
is treated as latent in the absence of an observable measure. We stack them into a vector
st = [s1,t , s2,t , s3,t ] .

The quantitative and conceptual evolution of these spreads provides a great deal of scope for
discussion, but we focus on the key takeaways. The difference between LIBOR and EFFR
can roughly represent the credit risk of banks in the Eurodollar area, while the difference
between EFFR and a Treasury bill rate can represent the convenience yield.

The first distinction is consistent with the view of the LIBOR-OIS spread and its use as
an indicator of the health of the banking sector in the wake of the financial crisis of 2008.
The use of OIS here is subtle, because it reflects the credit risk of banks in the Federal
Reserve system. Thus, the spread s2,t , reflects the relative riskiness of the banks in the
Eurodollar area. The U.S. LIBOR is used in practice for transactions between banks and
other financial institutions, such as mutual funds, while the EFFR is used for transactions
between banks in the Fed system.

The second distinction assumes that the EFFR and the Treasury rate represent the same
credit quality. Many researchers and practitioners treat the whole OIS curve as risk-free
because it is used to discount fully collateralized transactions. Full collateralization largely
mitigates the counterparty risk, but not the cash flow risk of the underlying asset, which in
this case is the EFFR. The credit risk of the U.S. Treasury is linked to that of the Federal
Reserve system because the Treasury fiscally supports the Fed (Reis, 2015), so the Fed will
never be insolvent separately from the Treasury. If the EFFR is assumed to be risk-free
and the Treasury credit-risky, it would be much easier to explain the negative swap spread.
The aforementioned bank risk embedded in the EFFR then suggests that the spread s1,t
would reflect that risk, in addition to the convenience yield of Treasuries.

                                              14
We assume that st follows a multivariate Gaussian AR(1) process, and it may also be
affected by the dynamics of the macro volatility vt :

                              st+1 = µs + sv vt + s st + s s,t+1 ,                                      (3)

where the innovations s,t+1  N (0, I). By construction, st does not Granger cause the
macro variables (zt , vt ). The conditional covariance of the one-period pricing kernel and
the factor is zero, so there is no one-period risk premium associated with st .5 Their multi-
period counterparts covary, thereby generating risk premiums because of the presence of
macro fundamentals in the conditional expectation of st . We introduce an extended state
vector xt = xt , st .


3.6    Valuation of credit sensitive instruments

Risky Treasury bonds. Following Duffie and Singleton (1999), the resulting risky Trea-
sury price is
                                               n
                                                      mt+j -1,t+j -L·ht+j +s1,t+j
                              Ptn  Et e        j =1                                 ,

and we show in Appendix B.3 that the term structure of risky interest rates is affine in the
extended state vector xt .

Hypothetical LIBOR bonds. We work with hypothetical zero-coupon LIBOR bonds Ln     t
discounted at the continuously compounded yield n
                                                t (defined at the monthly frequency),
such that

                                       Ln
                                        t = exp (-
                                                            n
                                                            t   · n) ,                                  (4)

where n  12 corresponds to LIBOR rate maturities of up to 12 months.6 Using the
approach of Duffie and Singleton (1999), the resulting price is
                                               n
                                                      mt+j -1,t+j -L·ht+j -s2,t+j
                              Ln
                               t  Et e         j =1                                 ,

and we show in Appendix B.4 that the term structure of LIBOR rates is affine in the
extended state vector xt , with rates n
                                      t inferred from Equation (4).

IRS. The fixed rate payer pays the annual interest rate swap premium IRSt,T . The floating
rate payer pays the LIBOR rate that has been realized at the previous coupon period. We
assume monthly time intervals to match the frequency of macroeconomic data. Thus, in
   5
     The impact of macro innovations on st+1 was estimated imprecisely, so we zeroed that out to save on
cumbersome notation.
   6
     Because actual LIBOR rates q,n t   are periodic and quoted on an annualized basis, we map the data
into continuously compounded rates according to the formula n   t = n
                                                                      -1
                                                                         log (1 + q,n
                                                                                  t   · n · 30/360). The day
count convention for LIBOR rates is act/360. We use 30/360 as the daycount convention given that it is
numerically close to act/360, and it simplifies the implementation.


                                                       15
the case of a quarterly IRS payment frequency, the floating leg would pay each period the
3-month LIBOR rate realized on the previous coupon period, 3    t-1 . The 1-month LIBOR
                      1    1
rate is equal to t  t = yt + s1,t + s2,t .

We value the term structure of zero-coupon LIBOR rates in Appendix B.4 and can thus
directly use the 3-month LIBOR rates for the computation of the LIBOR swap contracts.7
We discount all cash flows accounting for the cost of collateral s3,t following Johannes and
Sundaresan (2007). Thus, the present value of expected future payments by the fixed leg is
given by
                                                 n-1
                               f ix          n
                               t      =   IRSt           Et emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  ,
                                                  j =1

where  defines the time interval between two successive coupon periods. The present value
of expected future payments by the floating leg is given by
                                   n-1
                                                                       ·   3
                      f loat
                      t        =          Et emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  e           t+(j -1)   -1     .
                                   j =1

where  defines the time interval between two successive coupon periods.

A LIBOR swap contract is priced fairly if both the fixed and the floating legs have the same
value. The condition yields the formula for the IRS spread IRSt  n:


                                    n-1                                      3
                                                                         ·
                                             Et emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  e          t+(j -1)   -1
                       n              j =1
                    IRSt       =                                                                 .    (5)
                                                 n-1
                                                         Et   [emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  ]
                                                  j =1

See the Internet Appendix B.5 for the derivation.

OIS. The fixed rate payer pays the annual OIS premium OISt    n , and the floating rate payer

pays the geometric mean of daily overnight rates. As in our model a monthly minimal time
                                                            1 and EFFR compounded over
interval is assumed, there is no distinction between ot  OISt
a month. Thus, the quarterly payment frequency corresponds to the floating leg paying the
geometric average of three 1-month OIS rates.

As for IRS premiums, we discount all cash flows accounting for the cost of collateral s3,t+1 .
The present value of expected future payments by the fixed leg is given by
                                                 n-1
                               f ix          n
                               t      =   OISt           Et emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  ,
                                                  j =1

   7
    For maturities up to one year, zero-coupon rates are equivalent to par rates. For the numerical imple-
mentation, we map the continuously compounded LIBOR rates into periodic rates assuming a 30/360 day
count convention for simplicity.


                                                         16
where  defines the time interval between two successive coupon periods. The present value
of expected future payments by the floating leg is given by

                            n-1                                            
               f loat
               t        =           Et emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  exp                   ot+j -i    -1       .
                             j =1                                        i=1

OIS swaps with maturity of less than one year are subject to only one payment settlement,
while those with maturities equal to or greater than one year are subject to quarterly
payments.

An OIS contract is priced fairly if both the fixed and the floating legs have the same value.
This condition yields the formula for the OIS spread OISt  n:


                        n-1                                             
                                   Et emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  exp                  ot+j -i     -1
                n           j =1                                       i=1
             OISt   =                                                                          .       (6)
                                           n-1
                                                      Et   [emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  ]
                                               j =1

See the Internet Appendix B.6 for the derivation.

CDS. To value CDS contracts, we must model both the premium leg that pays the annual
CDS premium CDSt     n and the protection leg that pays the loss given default L. We note

the distinction between CDS contracts, which contractually recover a fraction of face value,
and risky Treasuries, which are usually modeled as recovering a fraction of market value.
Duffie and Singleton (1999) find little difference across different modeling assumptions of
recovery in the term structure of defaultable interest rates (see Figure 2 on p. 703).

A CDS contract with time to maturity n pays the annual premium until an earlier default
or the contract's termination date. As for other swap contracts, we account for the cost of
collateral. Accordingly, the present value of the premium payments of a USD-denominated
CDS contract is equal to

                                       n-1
                   pb            n
                   t    =     CDSt              Et emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  I ( > t + j ) ,
                                        j =1

where  defines the time interval between two successive coupon periods, and I (·) is an
indicator function that is equal to one if the condition inside the brackets is met, and zero
otherwise. For simplicity, we omit accrual payments in the notation, but account for them
in the formal implementation of the model. The present value of expected future payments
by the protection seller is given by
                                    ps
                                    t  = L · Et emt, +s3, I (  n) .




                                                            17
A CDS contract is priced fairly if both the premium and the protection legs have the same
value. This condition yields the formula for the CDS premium CDSt   n:


                     n                      Et [emt, +s3, I (  n)]
                  CDSt =L·          n-1
                                                                                  .                   (7)
                                    j =1   Et [emt,t+j  +s3,t+j  I ( > t + j )]

See the Internet Appendix B.7 for the derivation of the CDS premiums.



4       Results

4.1     Estimation

We use macroeconomic fundamentals and financial asset data to estimate the model via
Bayesian MCMC with diffuse priors. The outputs of the procedure are the state variables
and parameter estimates. Posterior estimates are provided in Table 6 and Table 7.

We conduct a two-stage estimation, which is the key feature of our approach. In the first
stage, we estimate the macro dynamics described by the autonomous VARMA for zt . In
the second stage, we use asset market data for the identification of the financial factors st .

The advantages of this are first that as the available data on CDS and interest rate swap pre-
miums provide a much shorter time interval, starting in 2002 (USD-denominated U.S. CDS
start even later, in 2010), the first stage enables us to use a longer history of macroeconomic
fundamentals to investigate zt . Second, we can identify the dynamics of the macroeconomic
factors and thus of the pricing kernel, without relying on asset market data. We therefore
avoid the "dark matter" critique of Chen, Dou, and Kogan (2017).

We next provide a brief outline of our two-stage estimation procedure, and give the details in
Appendix D. In the first stage, we use consumption growth, output growth, log government
expenditure-to-output ratio, and inflation from 1982 to 2018. Apart from the monthly
inflation data, the other macro variables are quarterly.8 The decision interval is one month
in our model, so we estimate the monthly counterparts of the respective quarterly series.
We adjust the state-space representation to address the mixed frequency of the observables.
Posterior estimates from the first stage estimation are provided in Table 6.

The estimated AR matrix z and MA matrix z imply that consumption and output growth
rates do not affect inflation and government expenditure. Output growth rates affect all
macro fundamentals (consumption is affected indirectly via output and the MA term). The
two variance factors only affect the conditional mean of inflation. The other elements of
the matrix zv are set to zero because they were poorly identified in our sample.
    8
    Our choice of quarterly consumption growth avoids modeling measurement errors in monthly consump-
tion growth (see Schorfheide, Song, and Yaron, 2018 for a detailed discussion). This significantly reduces
the dimension of the state vector leading to a much more tractable estimation problem.


                                                   18
After filtering out the estimates for zt and vt at the monthly frequency, we use data on the
term structure of Treasury GSW zero-coupon rates (maturity of 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 20, and 30
years), the term structure of CDS premiums (maturity of 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 20, and 30 years),
and the empirical measures of s1,t and s2,t to investigate the joint dynamics of st . We do not
use the IRS and OIS data in the estimation, so we can evaluate the implied swap spreads as
an out-of-sample test of our model. The one-year IRS is the only exception to this strategy
because it can help identify the latent cost of collateral, s3 .9 We use the bootstrap particle
filter to estimate s3,t .

To estimate the dynamics of the financial variables in the second stage, we condition on the
filtered macroeconomic fundamentals from the corresponding period. These fundamentals
visibly shift in level in the later part of our sample, so we re-estimate the constant term
µz to accommodate possible structural breaks in the level of macroeconomic fundamentals
zt . Similarly, we impose a one-time structural break in the default intensity ht by assuming
that it switched from zero to a positive value in December 2007 to reflect the previous
near-zero U.S. CDS premiums. Posterior estimates from the second stage estimation are
provided in Table 7.

Apart from the variance factors, the macro variables do not affect the financial variables
(the matrix sy was poorly identified). The variances have a significant impact on the con-
venience yield s1 , perhaps reflecting the flight-to-safety effect, and the cost of collateral s3 ,
reflecting lenders' collateral demand. Apart from output growth, all of the macro variables
play an important role in the default intensity. Output growth affects forecasts of future ht
via its impact on consumption growth (matrix z ).

In most no-arbitrage modeling of credit-sensitive assets, the LGD is not estimated separately
from the default intensity because of a joint identification problem. We separate the two
solely to simplify the interpretation of the magnitude of the default rate. Thus, following
Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2019), we calibrate the LGD to a specific value of L = 0.3.

The estimated risk aversion is 1 -   5. This value is clearly insufficient to match the
equity premium, which is natural in a bond pricing model. The elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (1 - )-1  1.33 is in line with standard calibrations in the long-run risk
literature.


4.2    Factors

Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the factors we use in our model. The first figure shows the macro
variables zt . The downward trend in inflation throughout the sample can be attributed to
the extensive moderation in the early part of our sample period, but it is somewhat puzzling
in the post-crisis sample, when monetary policy was particularly accommodating. However,
  9
    Using the one-year IRS data for estimation is innocuous because it is the shortest maturity and does
not exhibit any puzzles.


                                                  19
our series are consistent with the observation that inflation is low in spite of expansionary
monetary policies conducted by central banks around the globe, which has been referred to
as the "missing inflation puzzle" (Arias, Erceg, and Trabandt, 2016).

We also note a gradual elevation in government expenditures (as a fraction of output)
throughout the sample, consistent with the stabilization policies put in place after the
onset of the financial crisis. Log consumption and output growth are standard series. In
particular, the latter part of the sample period exhibits lower consumption growth volatility,
consistent with the period of extensive moderation, except for a bump in anticipation of
potential turmoil in 2008.

The second figure shows the observable finance variables, s1 and s2 , together with the la-
tent finance variable s3 . The convenience yield and the LIBOR-OIS factors exhibit familiar
patterns with substantial spikes during the period surrounding the financial crisis of 2008,
reflecting both a flight to quality and the increasing perceptions of bank risk in the after-
math of Lehman's collapse. The cost of posting collateral gradually increases during the
period of overheating in the credit markets as they headed into the crisis, when investment
opportunities were abundant.

Both s1 and s3 collapse after the crisis, which is an important pattern, as a decline in both
factors diminishes their effects on swap spreads. The credit risk of the U.S. Treasury is thus
quantitatively the main force affecting the spreads.

The post-crisis pattern in s1 and s3 is natural. The decline in convenience is associated with
an increase in the riskiness of Treasuries, and our estimated parameters do imply that both
variance factors are associated with an increase in the default intensity and a decline in s1 .
The cost-of-collateral is influenced by the cost of holding cash and lending out Treasuries
in rehypothecation, and interest rates have in fact been at historical lows since the financial
crisis.


4.3   Fit

Figures 5 - 6 demonstrate the model's fit to the financial data used in the estimation. Our
setup is unusual as our model is a hybrid of an endowment economy and a reduced-form no-
arbitrage valuation. Formally, it belongs to the class of affine models, but we impose various
additional economic restrictions that are not typically found in a traditional no-arbitrage
model. Thus, we do not expect as pristine a fit as a regular affine no-arbitrage model would
deliver. Nevertheless, we aim for a high degree of realism, as otherwise, the implications for
the IRS-Treasury and OIS-Treasury spreads would not be particularly plausible or relevant.

Figure 5 compares model-implied credit-risky and observed zero-coupon Treasury yields of
different maturities up to a 30-year horizon. The model has some difficulty matching the
one-year rate, but it performs well at longer horizons, which is not surprising. Our model

                                              20
does not explicitly account for the prolonged near-zero-bound interest rate experience after
the crisis, and the short end of the curve is much more sensitive to it than the long end.

Figure 6 shows the observed and the model-implied U.S. CDS rates. CDS premiums are
stripped of the level of benchmark interest rates, so they naturally do not have a first-order
sensitivity to the misspecification of the short interest rates. The fit of the model is good
throughout all maturities.


4.4   The U.S. "credit spread"

After verifying a reasonable fit of the model, we can explore its implications. Figure 7
displays nominal credit-risk-free interest rates (without convenience yield) against the risky
nominal Treasury benchmark. Before the financial crisis, there is, as expected, little differ-
ence between the riskless and the risky nominal rates because the U.S. CDS premium was
zero before the crisis. They are not identical because of the presence of the convenience
yield.

U.S. CDS premiums jumped in the financial crisis and have remained elevated ever since.
Figure 6 shows that CDS premiums fluctuated between 20 and 60 bps at different maturities
between 2011 and 2018. Accordingly, the ignition of U.S. credit risk is reflected in the
difference between risky and riskless nominal Treasury interest rates. The difference between
these rates is small at short horizons but becomes progressively more visible at longer
horizons. For example, the difference averages around 44 bps (70 bps) at the 5-year (10-
year) maturity during the post-crisis period and reaches a maximum level of 74 bps (91
bps).

We focus on the variation in the quantitative magnitude of credit risk and plot the U.S.
default intensity in Figure 8(A). The likelihood of a U.S. default spikes at 0.2% during
the global financial crisis (GFC) and then flares up again in times of elevated fiscal stress.
Over the last decade, the threats of government shutdowns in response to U.S. debt ceiling
breaches have become increasingly common. On August 5, 2011, the rating agency Standard
& Poor's downgraded the U.S., lowering its AAA credit rating by one notch to AA+. During
the post-GFC period, the average intensity is about 0.05%.

Figure 8(B) quantifies the impact of the credit risk premium on the CDS valuation. Specif-
ically, we characterize the "distress" risk premium associated with unpredictable variation
in the arrival rate ht . We follow Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) and Pan and Singleton
(2008) and report the difference between the model-based 5-year CDS premium and a hy-
pothetical premium for the case of a risk-neutral investor (denoted CDS  ). We omit the
cost of collateral s3 to focus on the pure effect of the credit risk premium.

The difference between CDS and CDS  is stable throughout the sample, averaging 14 bps.
The relative difference when measuring the fraction of the CDS premium due to the distress

                                             21
risk ranges between 20 and 80 percent. In contrast to the difference in levels, the relative
measure trend is upwards throughout the sample. While CDS premiums decline in the
post-GFC period, the relative contribution of the risk premium increases.

In Figure 9, we conduct an exercise to better gauge the impact of modeling the default risk
of the U.S. Treasury. We compare the sensitivity to all state variables of the "U.S. credit
spread" illustrated in Figure 7. We measure the sensitivities as factor loadings appearing in
the theoretical linear relation between the credit spread and the state variables. To enable
a quantitative interpretation of the results, we multiply these loadings by unconditional
standard deviations of the respective state variables. Thus, the reported numbers represent
a monthly change in the credit spread (expressed in decimals) in response to a one standard
deviation change in any given state variable.

Our discussion focuses on the four quantitatively most important variables. Higher gov-
ernment expenditures elevate the risky yield relative to the nominal yield and this effect
is particularly pronounced at the short end of the term structure, which is intuitive, as
the government can balance its budget in the long run either by raising taxes or by is-
suing more debt in expectation. Either measure is likely to be accompanied by poorer
default prospects, either directly or through the negative effects of elevated taxes on growth
projections, as Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2019) find. Quantitatively, a one-standard-
deviation increase in the government expenditure-to-output ratio increases the credit spread
by approximately 20 bps for the 5-year maturity.

Higher macroeconomic uncertainty also leads to greater risky yields, as the representative
agent in our model dislikes the economic uncertainty that accompanies a higher likelihood of
extreme events. Inflation variance has a greater impact at the short end of the yield curve,
as inflation surprises are more relevant for this maturity segment. Consumption variance
has a greater impact at the long end of the curve, which is reminiscent of the long-run
risk in volatility that has an impact due to the combination of recursive preferences with a
preference for early resolution of uncertainty.

The convenience yield affects the risky Treasury directly. A higher convenience yield implies
a lower yield. This effect is particularly pronounced for short-term bills, possibly due to the
importance of Treasuries in short-horizon repo transactions, and it affects the credit spread
by as much as 45 bps in response to a single standard deviation move. At longer maturities,
the effect stabilizes at around 10 bps.

Bank risk and the cost of collateral have indirect effects via their interactions with the
macroeconomic fundamentals and all spread factors. The LIBOR-OIS spread captures
bank risk. Bank risk interacts positively with U.S. credit risk, and so the effect on the
credit spread is positive. The cost of collateral is indirectly reflected through a negative
impact on the credit spread.




                                              22
4.5   Swap spreads

Figure 10 displays our headline result: the model-implied OIS-Treasury spread. Impor-
tantly, OIS information was not used in the model estimation. The model captures both
the positive spread before the crisis when the U.S. credit risk was next to nil, and the
negative spread in the post-crisis period. The results are quantitatively realistic for all
maturities.

In Figure 11, we also plot the model-implied IRS-Treasury spread. Recall that we only
use the 1-year maturity in our estimation. We qualitatively fit the evolution of the swap
spreads well for OIS-Treasury spreads. We match positive swaps spreads before the crisis,
and negative ones thereafter.

In our analysis in section 2.4, we offer qualitative arguments and suggestive evidence linking
U.S. credit risk to swap spreads. Our quantitative model allows for a rich set of different
effects beyond the sovereign risk channel, including the convenience yield, bank risk, cost of
collateral, and time-varying risk premiums. Thus, a natural question is whether the quan-
titative effect due to a U.S. credit risk premium is large enough to support our qualitative
analysis.

In our counterfactual analysis, we can use our model to evaluate the contribution of U.S.
credit risk to the spreads. Figure 12 reports the results of a decomposition of the OIS-
Treasury spread into the respective contributions coming from default and non-default risk.
We can then gauge the contribution of the default risk premium to the negative swap spreads
in our model. We plot the decomposition for maturities of 1, 3, 5, 10, 20, and 30 years. We
provide a similar decomposition for IRS-Treasury spreads in Figure 13.

The quantitative implication is clear. The model-implied OIS-Treasury spreads are uni-
formly positive when we only account for liquidity and bank frictions. The few negative
swap spread realizations are quantitatively very small. Accounting for the U.S. credit risk
premium, however, shifts the OIS-Treasury spread significantly downwards. The downward
shift is increasing in maturity, which clearly illustrates the critical role of U.S. credit risk
in matching negative OIS-Treasury spreads in an equilibrium model that explains multiple
benchmark rates jointly, even if we account for realistic liquidity and bank frictions.

In Table 8, we report model-implied regressions of changes in swap spreads on changes in
CDS premiums, similar to those reported in Table 3. We do not control for common time
fixed effects in these regressions because by construction, our model is driven by a limited
number of state variables that drive the common variation across swap spreads. The relation
between swap spreads and U.S. credit risk in the model reflects the salient features of the
data well. The relation is weakly significant for short-term maturities (column 1), highly
significant for maturities above 7 years (column 2), and becomes stronger over time (columns
3 and 4). The economic magnitudes are also similar to those in the data, slightly weaker
at short-term maturities, and stronger at longer maturities. For example, according to the


                                              23
results in column (5), a 10-bps increase in CDS premiums lowers swap spreads by 0.4 bps,
with an R2 of 16%. The most comparable regression in Table 3 is that in column (5), which
indicates a 0.7-bps change for a 10-bps change in CDS premiums, with an R2 of 2%. A
regression at the weekly frequency (unreported results) yields an R2 of 5% with a regression
coefficient of 2.1 bps. Post 2014, the coefficient in the data is negative at 0.13, while it is
negative at 0.11 in the model.

Thus, our model suggests that quantitatively, sovereign credit risk is a relevant factor that
is required to account for the negative swap-Treasury spread. The sovereign risk channel
operates through the U.S. credit risk premium, which can be large, even if the physical
default probability is small. Such a risk premium channel complements other explanations
based on frictions. We reach this conclusion based on a realistic model of benchmark inter-
est rates, in which frictions are identified via observable quantities (convenience yield and
LIBOR-OIS spread) and a latent factor (cost of collateral); time-varying risk premia are
established by the preferences of a representative risk averse agent and observed macroeco-
nomic fundamentals.



5    Conclusion

The puzzling behavior of benchmark interest rates has been a challenge for researchers since
the financial crisis. Most prominently, short-term and long-term overnight bank borrowing
costs, reflected in overnight indexed and interest rate swap contracts, have been lower than
maturity matched Treasury rates. The main explanations of these negative swap spread
puzzles are based on frictions, such as the demand for duration, caps on leverage, or fading
convenience yields for U.S. Treasuries.

We demonstrate that accounting for high-quality sovereign credit risk is important in our
understanding of post-crisis pricing phenomena. A low probability of U.S. Treasury default
reduces the no-arbitrage bounds of swap spreads to negative levels. Accounting for a U.S.
credit risk premium in Treasuries is thus essential for jointly explaining the dynamics of
the term structures of multiple benchmark interest rates. Even if the probability of a U.S.
credit event is small, the risk premium associated with it may be large.




                                              24
References
Acharya, Viral V., Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl, 2014, A pyrrhic victory? - Bank
  bailouts and sovereign credit risk, The Journal of Finance 69, 2689­2739.

Arias, Jonas, Christopher Erceg, and Matthias Trabandt, 2016, The Macroeconomic Risks
  of Undesirably Low Inflation, European Economic Review 88, 88­107.

Arora, Navneet, Priyank Gandhi, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2012, Counterparty credit risk
  and the credit default swap market, Journal of Financial Economics 103, 280­293.

Augustin, Patrick, 2014, Sovereign credit default swap premia, Journal of Investment Man-
 agement 12, 65­102.

Augustin, Patrick, 2018, The term structure of CDS spreads and sovereign credit risk,
 Journal of Monetary Economics 96, 53­76.

Augustin, Patrick, Valeri Sokolovski, Marti G. Subrahmanyam, and Davide Tomio, 2018,
 How Sovereign is Sovereign Credit Risk? Global Prices, Local Quantities, Working Paper
 New York University, Stern School of Business.

Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Stanley Zin, 2014, Sources of Entropy in Represen-
  tative Agent Models, Journal of Finance 69, 51­99.

Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2012, A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability
  Puzzles in Bond and Currency Markets, Review of Financial Studies.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
  Asset Pricing Puzzles, The Journal of Finance 59, 1481­1509.

Bongaerts, Dion, Frank De Jong, and Joost Driessen, J., 2011, Derivative pricing with
  liquidity risk: Theory and evidence from the credit default swap market, Journal of
  Finance 66, 203­240.

Boyarchenko, Nina, Pooja Gupta, Nick Steele, and Jacqueline Yen, 2018, Negative Swap
  Spreads, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 24.

Brenner, Menachem, Rafi Eldor, and Shmuel Hauser, 2001, The Price of Options Illiquidity,
  Journal of Finance 56, 789­805.

Cameron, Matt, 2013, Goldman and the OIS Gold Rush, Risk Magazine June, 15­19.

Chen, Hui, Winston Dou, and Leonid Kogan, 2017, Measuring the "Dark Matter" in Asset
  Pricing Models, Working Paper MIT.

Chernov, Mikhail, and Drew D. Creal, 2016, The PPP view of multihorizon currency re-
  turns, Working paper.

Chernov, Mikhail, Alexander S. Gorbenko, and Igor Makarov, 2013, CDS auctions, Review
 of Financial Studies 26, 768­805.

                                           25
Chernov, Mikhail, Lukas Schmid, and Andres Schneider, 2019, A macrofinance view of US
  Sovereign CDS premiums, Journal of Finance Forthcoming.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Bruno Solnik, 2001, On the Term Structure of Default Premia
  in the Swap and LIBOR Markets, The Journal of Finance 56, 1095­1115.

Deuskar, Prachi, Anurag Gupta, and Marti G. Subrahmanyam, 2011, Liquidity effect in
  OTC options markets: Premium or discount?, Journal of Financial Markets 14, 127­
  160.

Dittmar, Robert, Alex C. Hsu, Guillaume Roussellet, and Peter Simasek, 2019, Default
  Risk and the Pricing of U.S. Sovereign Bonds, Working Paper.

Du, Wenxin, Michael B. Gordy, S. Gadgil, and Clara Vega, 2016, Counterparty Risk and
 Counterparty Choice in the Credit Default Swap Market, Working Paper Federal Reserve
 Board.

Du, Wenxin, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger, 2018, The U.S. Treasury Premium, Journal of
 International Economics 112, 167­181.

Duffie, Darrell, and Ming Huang, 1996, Swap Rates and Credit Quality, Journal of Finance
 51, 921­949.

Duffie, Darrell, and David Lando, 2001, Term structures of credit spreads with incomplete
 accounting information, Econometrica 69, 633­664.

Duffie, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the Term Struc-
 ture of Interest-Rate Swap Yields, The Journal of Finance 52, 1287­1321.

Duffie, Darrel, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1999, Modeling Term Structures of Defaultable
 Bonds, Review of Financial Studies 12, 687­720.

Duffie, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2003, Credit Risk: Pricing, Measurement and
 Management. (Princeton University Press).

Duffie, Darrell, and Jeremy Stein, 2015, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29, 191­212.

English, William B., 1996, Understanding the Costs of Sovereign Default: American State
  Debts in the 1840`s, American Economic Review 86, 259­275.

Feldhutter, Peter, and David Lando, 2008, Decomposing swap spreads, Journal of Financial
  Economics 88, 375­405.

Filipovic, Damir, and Anders B. Trolle, 2013, The term structure of interbank risk, Journal
  of Financial Economics 109, 707­733.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig, 2013, Deflation Risk,
  NBER Working Paper No. 19238.



                                            26
Gourieroux, Christian, and Joann Jasiak, 2006, Autoregressive gamma processes, Journal
 of Forecasting 25, 129­152.

Goyenko, Ruslan, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Andrey Ukhov, 2011, The Term Struc-
 ture of Bond Market Liquidity and Its Implications for Expected Bond Returns, Journal
 of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 111­139.

Grinblatt, Mark, 2001, An analytic solution for interest rate swap spreads, International
  Review of Finance 2, 113­149.

Gupta, Anurag, and Marti G. Subrahmanyam, 2000, An empirical examination of the
 convexity bias in the pricing of interest rate swaps, Journal of Financial Economics 55,
 239­279.

Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The U.S. Treasury yield
 curve: 1961 to the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291­2304.

Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008, Consumption Strikes Back? Mea-
  suring Long-Run Risk, The Journal of Political Economy 116, pp. 260­302.

He, Hua, 2001, Modeling term structures of swap spreads, Working Paper.

Hilscher, Jens, Alon Raviv, and Ricardo Reis, 2014, Inflating Away the Public Debt? An
  Empirical Assessment, NBER Working Paper No. 20339.

Hull, John, and Alan White, 2013, LIBOR vs. OIS: The Derivatives Discounting Dilemma,
 Journal Of Investment Management 11, 14­27.

Jermann, Urban J., 2019, Negative Swap Spreads and Limited Arbitrage, Review of Finan-
  cial Studies Forthcoming.

Johannes, Michael, and Suresh M. Sundaresan, 2007, The Impact of Collateralization on
  Swap Rates, The Journal of Finance 62, 383­410.

Klingler, Sven, and Suresh Sundaresan, 2019, How Safe Are Safe Havens?, Working Paper
  Columbia University.

Klingler, Sven, and Suresh M. Sundaresan, 2018, An Explanation of Negative Swap Spreads:
  Demand for Duration from Underfunded Pension Plans, The Journal of Finance Forth-
  coming.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, The bond/old-bond spread, Journal of Financial Economics
  66, 463­506.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The Aggregate Demand for
  Treasury Debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233­267.

Lando, David, and Sven Klingler, 2018, Safe-Haven CDS Premia, Review of Financial
  Studies 31, 1856­1895.

                                           27
Le, Anh, Kenneth J. Singleton, and Qiang Dai, 2010, Discrete-Time AffineQ Term Structure
  Models with Generalized Market Prices of Risk, Review of Financial Studies 23, 2184­
  2227.

Litzenberger, Robert, 1992, Swaps: Plain and fanciful, Journal of Finance 47, 831­850.

Liu, Jun, Francis Longstaff, and Ravit E. Mandell, 2006, The Market Price of Risk in
  Interest Rate Swaps: The Roles of Default and Liquidity Risks, The Journal of Business
  79, 2337­2360.

Longstaff, Francis A., 2004, The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices,
  Journal of Business 77, 511­526.

Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield Spreads: Default
  Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market, Journal of
  Finance 60, 2213­2253.

Lou, Wujiang, 2009, On asymmetric funding of swaps and derivatives-a funding cost expla-
  nation of negative swap spreads, SSRN Working Paper 1610338.

Monfort, A., J.-P. Renne, and G. Roussellet, 2016, A Quadratic Kalman Filter, Journal of
 Banking and Finance Forthcoming.

Nagel, Stefan, 2016, The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131, 1927­1971.

Pan, Jun, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2008, Default and Recovery Implicit in the Term
  Structure of Sovereign CDS Spreads, Journal of Finance 63, 2345­2384.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2008, This Time is Different: A Panoramic
  View of Eight Centuries of Financial Crises, NBER Working Papers 13882 National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Reis, Ricardo, 2015, Different Types of Central Bank Insolvency and the Central Role of
  Seignorage, Journal of Monetary Economics 73, 20­25.

Schorfheide, F., D. Song, and A. Yaron, 2018, Identifying Long-Run Risks: A Bayesian
  Mixed-Frequency Approach, Econometrica 86, 617­654.

Spears, Taylor, 2019, Discounting collateral: quants, derivatives and the reconstruction of
  the `risk-free rate' after the financial crisis, Economy and Society, forthcoming.

Sun, Tong-Sheng, Suresh Sundaresan, and Ching Wang, 1993, nterest rate swaps: An
  empirical investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 34, 77­99.

Wang, Zhenyu, and Wei Yang, 2018, OIS Risk Premiums, Working Paper.

Zivney, Terry L., and Richard D. Marcus, 1989, The Day the United States Defaulted on
  Treasury Bills, The Financial Review 24, 475­489.

                                            28
Zviadadze, Irina, 2016, Term-Structure of Consumption Risk Premia in the Cross-Section
  of Currency Returns, The Journal of Finance Forthcoming.




                                         29
                       Figure 1: USD overnight LIBOR and EFFR



        6

        5

        4

        3

        2

        1

        0
               2004      2006      2008      2010       2012      2014      2016      2018

Notes: In this figure we report the time series of the difference between the overnight London Interbank
Offered Rate (LIBOR) and the Effective Federal Funds Rate (EFFR). LIBOR is the average interest rate at
which leading banks borrow funds of a sizeable amount from other banks in the Eurodollar area. The EFFR
is calculated as a volume-weighted median of overnight federal funds transactions provided by domestic
banks, U.S. branches, and agencies of foreign banks, as reported in the reporting form FR 2420. The data
frequency is weekly and based on Wednesday rates. All spreads are expressed in percentages. The sample
period is 8 May 2002 to 26 September 2018. Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The y -axis is in
annualized percentage terms.




                                                  30
                    Figure 2: IRS-Treasury and OIS-Treasury spreads


                        (a) 1y                                                (b) 5y

     1.5                                                   1.5

       1                                                     1

     0.5                                                   0.5

       0                                                     0

     -0.5                                                  -0.5

      -1                                                    -1
      2000      2005      2010      2015     2020           2000      2005      2010      2015     2020

                        (c) 10y                                              (d) 30y

     1.5                                                   1.5

       1                                                     1

     0.5                                                   0.5

       0                                                     0

     -0.5                                                 -0.5

      -1                                                    -1
      2000      2005      2010      2015     2020           2000      2005     2010      2015      2020


Notes: In these figures we report the time series of the USD denominated IRS-Treasury and OIS-Treasury
swap spreads, defined as the difference between the interest rate swap (IRS) rate or the overnight indexed
swap (OIS) rate and the maturity matched constant maturity Treasury (CMT) rate. Spreads for the 6-month
maturity are based on LIBOR. Spreads for maturities of 5 years and higher are based on IRS rates. We
overlay the (negative of the) USD maturity-matched U.S. CDS premium, i.e., the CDS premium multiplied by
(-1). The data frequency is weekly and based on Wednesday rates. All spreads are expressed in percentages.
The sample period is 8 May 2002 to 26 September 2018. Source: Bloomberg (OIS, IRS, LIBOR), FRED
(CMT), Markit (CDS).




                                                    31
                                         Figure 3: Macro factors




        8                                                          8
        6                                                          6
        4                                                          4
        2                                                          2
        0                                                          0
       -2                                                         -2
                1990        2000        2010        2020                   1990        2000        2010        2020

     -1.2
                                                                   6
     -1.4                                                          4
     -1.6                                                          2
                                                                   0
     -1.8
                1990        2000        2010        2020                   1990        2000        2010        2020


      1.5                                                        1.5

        1                                                          1

      0.5                                                        0.5

                 1990        2000       2010        2020                    1990        2000       2010        2020

Notes: In these figures we plot the dynamics of the macroeconomic state variables in our model: log
consumption growth (z1 ), output growth (z2 ), government expenditures-to-output ratio (z3 ), and inflation
(z4 ), and consumption volatility (v1 ) and inflation volatility (v2 ). All variables are annualized and represented
in percentage terms, except for the government expenditures-to-output ratio, which is represented in logs.
The sample period is 1982 to 2018. The data frequency is quarterly for z1 , z2 , and z3 , and monthly for z4 .
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis H.15 Report.




                                                        32
                                     Figure 4: Finance factors


    3


    2


    1


    0

            2004        2006        2008       2010        2012        2014       2016        2018

Notes: We plot the spread factors: s1 is the convenience yield, defined as the 1-month OIS-Treasury spread;
s2 captures the interbank credit and funding liquidity risk, defined as the 1-month LIBOR-OIS spread; s3 is
latent and captures the opportunity cost of collateral. The sample period is May 2002 to September 2018.
All variables are plotted at a monthly frequency, and are expressed in percentages. Source: Bloomberg (OIS,
LIBOR), FRED (CMT).




                                                    33
Figure 5: Model-implied risky zero-coupon yields and nominal Treasury yields




                          data                                data                                data
   6                      model
                                       6                      model
                                                                           6                      model

   4                                   4                                   4


   2                                   2                                   2


   0                                   0                                   0
       2005    2010     2015               2005    2010     2015               2005    2010     2015



                          data                                data                                data
   6                      model
                                       6                      model
                                                                           6                      model

   4                                   4                                   4


   2                                   2                                   2


   0                                   0                                   0
       2005    2010     2015               2005    2010     2015               2005    2010     2015

Notes: In these figures we plot the model-implied risky zero-coupon bond yields (green line with bullets) to-
gether with their 90% confidence bands, and compare them with the observed nominal zero-coupon Treasury
yields (solid black line) from Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007). We plot observed and model-implied
yields for maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 10y, 20y, and 30y. All variables are plotted at a monthly frequency and
are expressed in annualized percentage terms. The sample period is May 2002 to September 2018.




                                                     34
                   Figure 6: Model-implied and actual CDS premiums



 0.6                                                    0.6
                                        data                                                   data
                                        model                                                  model
 0.4                                                    0.4


 0.2                                                    0.2


   0                                                     0
   2010     2012      2014     2016      2018            2010      2012     2014      2016     2018


 0.6                                                    0.6
                                        data                                                   data
                                        model                                                  model
 0.4                                                    0.4


 0.2                                                    0.2


   0                                                     0
   2010     2012      2014     2016      2018            2010      2012     2014      2016     2018

Notes: In these figures we plot the model-implied (green line with bullets), their 90% confidence bands,
and observed (solid black line) CDS premiums. We plot observed and model-implied CDS premiums for
maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, and 10y. All variables are plotted at a monthly frequency and are expressed in
annualized percentage terms. The sample period is May 2002 to September 2018. Source: Markit.




                                                  35
                        Figure 7: Model-implied zero-coupon yields



                                                 2                                                        2
   6                                                        6

   4                                             1          4                                             1


   2                                             0          2                                             0

   0                                                        0
                                                 -1                                                       -1
         2005          2010         2015                          2005         2010          2015


                                                 2                                                        2
   6                                                        6

   4                                             1          4                                             1


   2                                             0          2                                             0

   0                                                        0
                                                 -1                                                       -1
         2005          2010         2015                          2005         2010          2015

Notes: In these figures we plot the model-implied zero-coupon yields for nominal bonds (gray line with
bullets), risky Treasury bonds (solid black line), and the "credit/safety" spread (green line with squares).
We plot model-implied zero-coupon yields for maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, and 10y. All variables are plotted at
a monthly frequency and are expressed in annualized percentage terms. The sample period is May 2002 to
September 2018. Source: Authors' computations.




                                                      36
                   Figure 8: Default intensity and credit risk premium


                                             (A) Default intensity

   0.2


  0.15


   0.1


  0.05


        0
        2008   2009    2010     2011     2012      2013    2014      2015    2016      2017     2018

         (B) Model-implied CDS premiums under the risk-neutral and physical measures

  0.5                                  0.5                                   1

  0.4                                  0.4                                  0.8

  0.3                                  0.3                                  0.6

  0.2                                  0.2                                  0.4

  0.1                                  0.1                                  0.2

   0                                    0                                    0
   2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018        2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018        2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018

Notes: In Panel (A), we plot the model-implied physical default intensity for U.S. credit risk from January
2008 to September 2018. In Panel (B), we plot the model implied CDS premiums for maturity 5 years under
the risk-neutral CDS and physical CDS  measures from January 2008 to September 2018. The y -axis is
expressed in annualized percentage terms. Source: Authors' computations.




                                                     37
              Figure 9: Credit/safety spread loadings: Risky - nominal rate



  0.2                                     1                                       0



  0.1                                     0                                   -0.005



    0                                     -1                                   -0.01
        1y   5y   10y     15y    20y           1y   5y    10y    15y    20y            1y   5y   10y    15y    20y

  0.4                                     0

                                                                                 0.2
                                        -0.2
  0.2                                                                          0.15
                                        -0.4
                                                                                 0.1
    0                                   -0.6
        1y   5y   10y     15y    20y           1y   5y    10y    15y    20y            1y   5y   10y    15y    20y

                                          1
                                                                                 0.5
 -0.4
                                         0.5
 -0.5                                                                             0

                                          0
 -0.6                                                                           -0.5
        1y   5y   10y     15y    20y           1y   5y    10y    15y    20y            1y   5y   10y    15y    20y


Notes: In these figures we examine the sensitivity of model-implied risky zero-coupon Treasury yields (which
incorporate the convenience yield) to all state variables over and above the sensitivity of model-implied nomi-
nal Treasury yields (which exclude the convenience yield). Specifically, we plot the difference of the sensitivity
loadings with respect to the state variables as a function of the maturity horizon, up to 20 years. The state
variables are log consumption growth (z1 ), inflation (z2 ), output growth (z3 ), government expenditures-to-
output ratio (z4 ), the convenience yield (s1 ), the LIBOR-OIS spread (s2 ), the opportunity cost of collateral
(s3 ), consumption volatility (v1 ), and inflation volatility (v2 ). Source: Authors' computations.




                                                         38
               Figure 10: Model-implied spread between OIS and CMT



   1                                   1                                    1
                          data                                data                                data
                          model                               model                               model
  0.5                                 0.5                                 0.5

   0                                   0                                    0

 -0.5                                -0.5                                -0.5

  -1                                   -1                                  -1
        2005    2010    2015                2005    2010    2015                2005    2010    2015


   1                                   1                                    1
                          data                                data                                data
                          model                               model                               model
  0.5                                 0.5                                 0.5

   0                                   0                                    0

 -0.5                                -0.5                                -0.5

  -1                                   -1                                  -1
        2005    2010    2015                2005    2010    2015                2005    2010    2015

Notes: In these figures we plot the model-implied (green line with bullets), their 90% confidence bands, and
observed (solid black line) OIS-Treasury spreads, where we use the constant maturity Treasury par rates.
We plot observed and model-implied OIS-CMT spreads for maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 10y, 20y, and 30y. All
variables are plotted at a monthly frequency and are expressed in annualized percentage terms. The sample
period is May 2002 to September 2018. Source: Bloomberg (OIS) and FRED (CMT).




                                                    39
               Figure 11: Model-implied spread between IRS and CMT



  1.5                                  1.5                                  1.5
                           data                                 data                                 data
   1                       model         1                      model         1                      model


  0.5                                  0.5                                  0.5

   0                                     0                                    0

 -0.5                                 -0.5                                 -0.5
        2005    2010     2015                2005    2010     2015                2005    2010     2015


  1.5                                  1.5                                  1.5
                           data                                 data                                 data
   1                       model         1                      model         1                      model


  0.5                                  0.5                                  0.5

   0                                     0                                    0

 -0.5                                 -0.5                                 -0.5
        2005    2010     2015                2005    2010     2015                2005    2010     2015

Notes: In these figures we plot the model-implied (green line with bullets), their 90% confidence bands, and
observed (solid black line) IRS-Treasury spreads, where we use the constant maturity Treasury par rates.
We plot observed and model-implied IRS-CMT spreads for maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 10y, 20y, and 30y. All
variables are plotted at a monthly frequency and are expressed in annualized percentage terms. The sample
period is May 2002 to September 2018. Source: Bloomberg (IRS) and FRED (CMT).




                                                    40
    Figure 12: Model-implied spread between OIS and CMT: Counterfactual




  0.5                                  0.5                                  0.5


   0                                     0                                    0


 -0.5                                 -0.5                                  -0.5


   -1                                   -1                                   -1
        2005    2010     2015                2005    2010     2015                 2005   2010     2015


  0.5                                  0.5                                  0.5


   0                                     0                                    0


 -0.5                                 -0.5                                  -0.5


   -1                                   -1                                   -1
        2005    2010     2015                2005    2010     2015                 2005   2010     2015

Notes: In these figures we compare the fitted OIS-CMT spreads (black line) with their conterfactual values
when U.S. credit risk is shut down (gray boxes). All rates are expressed on a par basis. We plot the OIS-CMT
spreads for maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 10y, 20y, and 30y. All variables are plotted at a monthly frequency and
are expressed in annualized percentage terms. The sample period is May 2002 to September 2018. Source:
Authors' computations.




                                                     41
        Figure 13: Model-implied spread between IRS and CMT: Counterfactual




   1                                  1                                   1


  0.5                                0.5                                0.5


   0                                  0                                   0


 -0.5                               -0.5                                -0.5
         2005   2010   2015                2005    2010    2015                2005   2010    2015


   1                                  1                                   1


  0.5                                0.5                                0.5


   0                                  0                                   0


 -0.5                               -0.5                                -0.5
         2005   2010   2015                2005    2010    2015                2005   2010    2015

Notes: In these figures, we compare the fitted IRS-CMT spreads (black line) with their conterfactual values
when U.S. credit risk is shut down (gray boxes). All rates are expressed on a par basis. We plot the IRS-CMT
spreads for maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 10y, 20y, and 30y. All variables are plotted at a monthly frequency and
are expressed in annualized percentage terms. The sample period is May 2002 to September 2018. Source:
Authors' computations.




                                                     42
          Table 1: Literature on negative IRS-Treasury and OIS-Treasury spreads


                                                       Focus           Type            Explanations
                                                                                                        d          ld
                                                                 y   y                          t s   an tios e yie sk
                                                               ur ur                          s
                                                                                            co de
                                                                                                     m ra
                                                                                                             nc    ri
                                                           e as reas        cs             g ng age nie eign
        ud
           y                                             r
                                                       -T S-T            iri eory       i n   i     r     e   r
     St                                              S                 p              nd dg ve nv ve
                                                   IR OI             Em Th          Fu He Le Co So
    Lou (2009)
    Klingler and Sundaresan (2018)
    Boyarchenko, Gupta, Steele, and Yen (2018)
    Klingler and Sundaresan (2019)
    Jermann (2019)
    The present study

Notes. This table summarizes the main studies explaining negative OIS-Treasury or IRS-Treasury swap
spreads. We describe the focus of the paper (IRS-Treasury or OIS-Treasury), the type of study (empirical
or theoretical), and the main explanation proposed by each study.




                                                  43
     Table 2: Descriptive statistics of USD interest and CDS rates. In this table, we report the summary statistics (mean,
     sd, p1, p50, p99) and the number of observations (Obs.) for the term structure of various U.S. interest and credit default
     swap (CDS) rates with maturities ranging between 3 months and 30 years. We use weekly observations based on Wednesday
     rates. Statistics are reported for USD denominated overnight index swap (OIS) rates (Panel A), USD denominated interest
     rate swap (IRS) rates, where maturities below one year correspond to London interbank offered (LIBOR) rates (Panel B),
     USD denominated constant maturity Treasury yields (Panel C), USD denominated zero coupon Treasury (ZCT) yields from
     Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) (Panel D), USD denominated CDS spreads (Panel E), and EUR denominated CDS
     spreads (Panel F). All rates are expressed in percentage terms. The sample period is May 8, 2002 through September 26,
     2018. Source: Bloomberg (OIS, IRS), Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) (ZCT), Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (CMT,
     LIBOR), Markit (CDS).



      Maturity    3m    6m      1y     3y     5y     7y    10y    20y    30y    3m     6m      1y     3y     5y     7y    10y    20y    30y


                 Panel A: USD OIS Rates                                         Panel B: USD LIBOR/IRS Rates

      Mean       1.40   1.44   1.54   2.07   2.54   1.67   2.31   2.39   2.48   1.66   1.83   1.81   2.33   2.79   3.13   3.46   3.89   3.97
      SD         1.66   1.67   1.67   1.53   1.43   0.49   0.71   0.49   0.51   1.67   1.62   1.64   1.48   1.37   1.30   1.25   1.22   1.21
      P1         0.08   0.09   0.09   0.22   0.53   0.82   1.00   1.24   1.30   0.23   0.32   0.26   0.46   0.79   1.19   1.42   1.70   1.78




44
      P50        0.68   0.73   0.88   1.57   2.24   1.76   2.22   2.33   2.44   1.12   1.24   1.26   1.87   2.54   2.91   3.23   3.80   3.93
      P99        5.32   5.37   5.41   5.39   5.45   2.68   4.04   3.45   3.59   5.50   5.52   5.51   5.48   5.55   5.61   5.70   5.91   5.94
      Obs.        856    856    856    856    856    333    530    366    366    853    853    856    856    856    856    856    856    856

                 Panel C: Constant Maturity Treasury Rates                      Panel D: Zero-coupon Rates

      Mean       1.25   1.37   1.49   1.99   2.48   2.87   3.23   3.81   3.95     ­      ­    1.50 1.73 1.99 2.50         2.93   4.04   4.07
      SD         1.56   1.60   1.55   1.37   1.22   1.11   1.04   1.06   0.93     ­      ­    1.53 1.44 1.34 1.19         1.12   1.06   0.91
      P1         0.01   0.04   0.10   0.32   0.64   1.04   1.54   1.90   2.29     ­      ­    0.11 0.22 0.34 0.67         1.07   2.05   2.49
      P50        0.52   0.66   0.89   1.52   2.23   2.79   3.12   3.96   4.13     ­      ­    0.90 1.22 1.53 2.23         2.83   4.36   4.18
      P99        5.12   5.17   5.09   5.02   5.03   5.06   5.14   5.55   5.58     ­      ­    5.04 5.00 4.95 4.95         5.03   5.86   5.82
      Obs.        856    856    856    856    856    856    856    856    856     ­      ­     856 856 856 856             856    856    856

                 Panel E: USD CDS Premiums                                      Panel F: EUR CDS Premiums

      Mean          ­   0.11   0.13   0.14   0.18   0.24   0.27   0.36   0.37     ­    0.13   0.14   0.16   0.22   0.29   0.32   0.43   0.44
      SD            ­   0.08   0.11   0.12   0.16   0.16   0.18   0.15   0.16     ­    0.10   0.12   0.14   0.18   0.18   0.21   0.18   0.19
      P1            ­   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.02   0.02   0.03   0.03     ­    0.01   0.01   0.01   0.01   0.02   0.02   0.03   0.03
      P50           ­   0.09   0.10   0.13   0.15   0.24   0.28   0.37   0.38     ­    0.11   0.12   0.14   0.19   0.27   0.33   0.41   0.42
      P99           ­   0.38   0.61   0.67   0.66   0.72   0.74   0.80   0.85     ­    0.50   0.63   0.64   0.66   0.72   0.74   0.80   0.85
      Obs.          ­    502    538    681    747    677    721    527    513     ­     575    608    720    755    685    729    557    572
              Table 3: Link between OIS-Treasury spreads and CDS premiums.
In this table, we report the results from a regression of monthly changes in OIS-Treasury spreads
( SS ) on monthly changes of the maturity-matched U.S. CDS premium (USD, CR restructuring
clause). The 3-month OIS-Treasury spread is matched with the 6-month CDS premium. Maturities
for OIS-Treasury spreads are 3/6 months, and 1/2/3/5/7/10/20/30 years to maturity. The sample
period is January 2010 to September 2018. All specifications include maturity and/or week fixed
effects. In row M at., we indicate maturity restrictions; in row Y EAR, we indicate sample period
restrictions. Standard errors are heteroscedasticity-robust (RO), clustered by time (CL) or adjusted
for cross-sectional dependence and serial dependence up to 3 weeks using Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors. We report the within R2 of the regression. Control variables include the CBOE VIX index,
the exchange rate of the USD against a basket of a broad group of major U.S. trading partners,
the West Texas Intermediate oil price index, the economic policy uncertainty index, the high-yield
and investment-grade bond indices, inflation, the TED spread, the 3-month LIBOR-OIS spread, the
3-month T-bill rate, the U.S. Treasury total cash balances, and CDS depth defined as the number
of dealer quotes used to compute the mid-market spread. ***, **, and * denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. CDS data is from Markit; OIS data is from Bloomberg; constant-
maturity Treasury rates are from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis H.15 report.
                         (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)       (7)     (8)     (9)      (10)      (11)       (12)
  VARIABLES              SS       SS      SS      SS      SS       SS        SS      SS      SS       SS        SS         SS

  CDS                   -0.07*** -0.08** -0.07*** -0.13* -0.07*** -0.08*** -0.06*** -0.13* -0.07*** -0.07***   -0.07***   -0.23***
                         (0.02)   (0.04)  (0.02) (0.08) (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02) (0.08) (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.08)
  SSt-1                                                   -0.09** -0.27*** -0.44*** -0.09* -0.16*** -0.16***   -0.16***    -0.13**
                                                           (0.04)  (0.04)   (0.05) (0.05) (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.06)
   V IX                                                                                        0.00    0.00       0.00       -0.00
                                                                                             (0.00)  (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)
   FX                                                                                        0.00**    0.00       0.00        0.00
                                                                                             (0.00)  (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)
   WTI                                                                                        -0.00   -0.00       -0.00      -0.00
                                                                                             (0.00)  (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)
   EP U                                                                                       -0.00   -0.00       -0.00       0.00
                                                                                             (0.00)  (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)
   IG                                                                                      -0.06*** -0.06**     -0.06**      -0.06
                                                                                             (0.02)  (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.04)
   HY                                                                                         -0.01   -0.01       -0.01      -0.02
                                                                                             (0.01)  (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)
                                                                                           -0.06*** -0.06***    -0.06**      -0.02
                                                                                             (0.01)  (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.05)
   T ED                                                                                     0.41*** 0.41***     0.41***    0.54***
                                                                                             (0.06)  (0.10)      (0.09)     (0.08)
   LIBOR - OIS 3m                                                                          -0.36*** -0.36***   -0.36***   -0.59***
                                                                                             (0.06)  (0.10)      (0.09)     (0.09)
   T B3                                                                                        0.09    0.09       0.09      0.17**
                                                                                             (0.06)  (0.10)      (0.08)     (0.07)
   CB                                                                                          0.00    0.00       0.00        0.00
                                                                                             (0.00)  (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)
   LIQ                                                                                       0.00**    0.00       0.00     0.01***
                                                                                             (0.00)  (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.01)

  OBS.                   591      347     938     411      935      935      923     411     935      935       935        411
  MATURITY FE            YES      YES     YES     YES      YES      YES      NO      YES     YES      YES       YES        YES
  QUARTER FE             NO       NO      NO      NO       NO       YES      NO      NO      YES      YES       YES        YES
  MATURITY-QUARTER FE    NO       NO      NO      NO       NO       NO       YES     NO      NO       NO        NO         NO
  CLUSTER TIME           NO       NO      NO      NO       NO       NO       NO      NO      NO       YES       NO         NO
  SE                     RO       RO      RO      RO       RO       RO       RO      RO      RO       CL       DK-3        RO
  MAT                   <=5      >=7      ALL     ALL     ALL      ALL      ALL     ALL     ALL       ALL      ALL         ALL
  YEAR                  >2009    >2009   >2009   >2014    >2009    >2009    >2009   >2014   >2009    >2009     >2009      >2014
  CONTROLS               NO       NO      NO      NO       NO       NO       NO      NO      YES      YES       YES        YES
  WITHIN R2              0.02     0.01    0.01    0.01     0.02     0.09     0.20    0.02    0.24     0.24      0.34       0.32




                                                          45
Table 4: Cash flows from swap-spread trading strategy: Assuming Treasury cannot default



                                                                Cash flows at time

    Strategy                               0                             t                            T


    Long Treasury bond                    -1                       CM T                     CM T + 1
    Repo financing cash flows              1                       -rt-1                   -rT -1 - 1

    Pay fixed on swap                      ­                     -CM S                         -CM S
    Receive floating on swap               ­                         ft-1                         fT -1


    Total                                  0                 St-1 - SS                     ST -1 - SS


Notes: This table illustrates the cash flows generated by a stylized form of a swap-spread trading strategy.
CM S and CM T denote the fixed swap and Treasury coupon rates. ft denotes the EFFR rate compounded
from the beginning of month t to the end of month t + 2, or LIBOR at time t, and rt denotes the three-
month repo rate determined at time t. For expositional simplicity, this table assumes that floating and fixed
payments are paid each period. SS denotes the swap spread and equals CM S - CM T . The term St denotes
the difference ft - rt .




                                                     46
 Table 5: Cash flows from swap-spread trading strategy: Assuming Treasury can default



                                                                  Cash flows at time

    Strategy                              0                       t                                     T


    Long Treasury bond                   -1                  CM T                ­              CM T + 1
    Repo financing cash flows             1                  -rt-1               ­             -rT -1 - 1

    Pay fixed on swap                     ­                -CM S                 ­                -CM S
    Receive floating on swap              ­                    ft-1              ­                   fT -1

    Pay CDS premia                        ­                 -CDS                 ­                -CDS
    Sell Treasury bond at default         ­                       ­         1-L                          ­
    Receive CDS payoff at default         ­                       ­             L                        ­
    Payoff repo loan at default           ­                       ­            -1                        ­
    Unwind swap at default                ­                       ­            U                         ­


    Total                                 0     St-1 - SS - CDS                U       ST -1 - SS - CDS


Notes: This table illustrates the cash flows generated by a stylized form of a swap-spread trading strategy.
CM S and CM T denote the fixed swap and Treasury coupon rates. ft denotes the EFFR rate compounded
from the beginning of month t to the end of month t + 2, or LIBOR at time t, and rt denotes the three-
month repo rate determined at time t. For expositional simplicity, this table assumes that floating and fixed
payments are paid each period. SS denotes the swap spread and equals CM S - CM T . The term St denotes
the difference ft - rt . Upon random default  before maturity T , the bond is worth 1 - L, but the CDS
hedge pays L and terminates. The swap contract is unwound at the current market value of U .




                                                     47
                  Table 6: Parameter estimates: Macroeconomic factors

  zt+1     =   (ct+1 , dt+1 , gt+1 , t+1 )
                                                      1/2                        1/2
  zt+1     =   µz + z zt + zv vt + z Vz,t z,t+1 + z z Vz,t-1 z,t

                                                                                                                              
                        0.0000                          0.78             -0.05               -0.03                    0
                  [-0.0003,0.0004]                   [0.69,0.84]       [-0.07,-0.04]      [-0.04,0.01]
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              
               
                     -0.0019              
                                                        0.39              0.21                 0.17                   0       
                                                                                                                              
                  [-0.0032,-0.0011]                  [0.29,0.43]        [0.16,0.28]        [0.14,0.24]
           =                             +                                                                                     zt
                                                                                                                              
               
                        0.0181                          0.00             -0.00                 0.98                   0
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              
                   [0.0134,0.0197]                   [-0.02,0.01]      [-0.01,0.00]        [0.97,0.99]                        
                                                                                                                              
                     -0.0007                                                                 -0.12
                                          
                                                        0.00              0.01                                    0.71
                                                                                                                              
                  [-0.0009,-0.0003]                  [-0.07,0.04]      [-0.00,0.04]      [-0.15,-0.08]         [0.62,0.76]



                                                                                                                           1/2
                                                                                        2.84        +     2.80 v1,t +
                                                                                                                 5.30 v2,t 
                            0                0                                        [2.58,3.66] [1.24,3.40] [3.01,7.08]
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                            0                0                                           2.38 + 0.11 v1,t + 1.39 v2,t 
                                                                        
                                                        
                 -                                                                    [1.53,2.64] [0.07,0.14] [1.00,1.97]
                                                         vt + 10-3 Diag 
                   4
                                                                                                                           
           +   10                                                                                                           z,t+1
                                                        
                            0                0
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                         0.13 + 1.79 v1,t + 4.92 v2,t 
                                                                        
                                                        
                                                                                      [0.10,0.25] [1.38,2.34] [3.12,6.19]
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                          5.45            -4.95
                                                                                                                           
                        [2.92,6.92]    [-6.21,-1.14]                                     0.12 + 0.40 v1,t + 0.10 v2,t
                                                                                      [0.09,0.22]       [0.32,0.44]          [0.05,0.90]


                                                                                             
                    -1.23                0.68               -0.80                0
                  [-1.44,-0.94]       [0.62,0.75]      [-0.92,-0.75]
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
                     0.44                0.75               -0.06                0           
                                                                                             
                   [0.36,0.62]        [0.43,1.07]       [-0.17,0.00]                          1/2
           +                                                                                  Vz,t-1 z,t
               
               
                    -0.01               -0.01               -0.68                0
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  [-0.09,0.00]        [-0.03,0.04]     [-0.73,-0.54]                         
                                                                                             
                                                                              -0.06
                                                                                             
                     0.05                0.01               0.17
                  [-0.02,0.10]        [-0.01,0.03]       [0.11,0.21]       [-0.09,-0.02]




  v1,t+1       ARG(1 , 1 , 1- 1
                            1 )               =        ARG( 2.43 ,               0.908 , 0.0377)
                                                               [1.04,5.99] [0.951,0.992]

  v2,t+1       ARG(2 , 2 , 1- 2
                            2 )               =        ARG( 2.43 ,               0.998 , 0.0008)
                                                               [0.75,5.43] [0.985,0.999]



Notes: We provide the estimates for the dynamics of the macroeconomic fundamentals zt . We set z to be
an identity matrix for identification reasons.




                                                                    48
  Table 7: Parameter estimates: Finance factors, default intensity, preferences


  st+1   =    µs + sv vt + s st + s s,t+1
                                                                                                                                       
                            -0.20                      -0.04                            0.61             -0.05             0.19        
                          [-0.33,0.09]             [-0.08,0.06]                      [0.43,0.68]      [-0.08,0.04]    [0.04,0.22]      
                                                                                                                                       
         = 10-4 
                                                                                                                                       
                            -0.00                      0.00            vt +            -0.20              0.94             0.09         st
                                                   [0.00,0.00]                                         [0.74,0.98]   [-0.10,0.23]
                                                                                                                                       
                          [-0.00,0.00]                                              [-0.31,0.03]                                       
                                                                                                                                       
                                                       -0.17                                             -0.02
                                                                                                                                       
                                0.20                                                    0.04                               0.97
                          [0.13,0.28]          [-0.23,-0.08]                         [0.03,0.19]      [-0.04,0.10]    [0.89,0.99]
                                                                          
                             0.17                  0              0
                          [0.12,0.24]
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                 -
              +10  4
                                                                           s,t+1
                                                                          
                                 0            3.17                0
                                            [2.32,4.11]                   
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                 0                 0           0.36
                                                           [0.13,0.73]

  ht     =    h + hc ct + hd dt + hg gt + hv1 v1,t + hv2 v2,t

         =       0.0009         +      0.13 ct +               0.00       dt +     0.88 gt +          0.0024     v1,t +      0.0001     v2,t
              [0.0003,0.0011]        [0.01,0.15]          [-0.01,0.02]           [0.47,1.11]       [0.0015,0.0033]        [0.0000,0.0003]

                       
  Ut     =    [(1 -  )Ct + µt (Ut+1 ) ]1/ ,                    µ(Ut+1 ) = Et (Ut+1 )
                                                                                    1/


              =        0.9984          ,    =           -3.91         ,   =       0.25
                    [0.9981,0.9990]                 [-4.90,-2.12]             [0.22,0.45]

  L      =    0.3



Notes: We provide the estimates for the dynamics of the financial variables st and the default intensity ht .
We set µs , sy to zero for parsimony. Risk aversion is 1 -  and intertemporal elasticity of substitution is
(1 - )-1 . We calibrate the value of L.




                                                                  49
     Table 8: Model-implied link between OIS-Treasury spreads and CDS premiums.
In this table, we report the model-implied results from a regression of monthly changes in OIS-
Treasury spreads ( SS ) on monthly changes of the maturity-matched U.S. CDS premiums de-
nominated in USD. Maturities for OIS-Treasury spreads are 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 20, and 30 years to
maturity. The sample period is January 2010 to September 2018. As in the data, results are based
on an unbalanced sample. All specificaltions include maturity fixed effects. In row M at., we indi-
cate maturity restrictions; in row Y EAR, we indicate sample period restrictions. Standard errors
are heteroscedasticity-robust. We report the within R2 of the regression. ***, **, and * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. Source: Authors' computations.

                                 (1)      (2)         (3)   (4)       (5)      (8)
               VARIABLES         SS       SS          SS    SS        SS       SS

               CDS               -0.02* -0.37*** -0.06*** -0.16*** -0.04*** -0.11*
                                 (0.01) (0.07)    (0.01)   (0.06)    (0.01)  (0.06)
               SSt-1                                                0.36*** 0.40***
                                                                     (0.04)  (0.06)

               OBS.         591           347      938       411      935      411
               MATURITY FE YES            YES      YES       YES      YES      YES
               MAT         <=5           >=7       ALL      ALL       ALL      ALL
               YEAR        >2009         >2009    >2009     >2014    >2009    >2014
               WITHIN R2    0.00          0.09     0.01      0.01     0.16     0.16




                                                 50
A      U.S. CDS premiums and credit risk

In this appendix, we discuss the relevance of alternative explanations for the magnitude of U.S. CDS pre-
miums as a measure of U.S. default risk. We review the available theory and evidence on the credit risk of
the U.S. and other safe-haven countries.

The main debate is whether U.S. CDS premiums reflect credit risk. Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2019)
attribute most of the U.S. CDS premium to the risk of fiscal default. They develop a model with a Bansal and
Yaron (2004) pricing kernel, an intertemporal government budget constraint, and a decline in government
revenues when taxes are too high, also known as the Laffer curve. A sequence of bad shocks to the expected
consumption growth leads to an increase in debt, and the latter can be sustained by increasing taxes, which
has its limit due to the Laffer effect. Reaching this limit leads to a credit event.

In contrast, Lando and Klingler (2018) attribute about 50% of the CDS premium of safe-haven countries to
regulatory frictions, as the uncollateralized risk exposures toward sovereign counterparties demand capital
charges, which can be offset by purchasing CDS protection on these counterparties. Through this channel,
demand for regulatory capital relief may artificially inflate CDS premiums. An important observation is
that the argument of regulatory frictions in CDS premiums critically depends on the presence of default
risk, without which there is no need for regulatory capital relief in the first place.

CDS premiums can reflect compensation for risks that are unrelated to default risk. For example, CDS
contracts may command a liquidity premium because they are less actively traded than US Treasuries.
Augustin (2014), Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2019), and Augustin, Sokolovski, Subrahmanyam, and
Tomio (2018) review a number of measures used to gauge the liquidity of the U.S. CDS market. For example,
Augustin, Sokolovski, Subrahmanyam, and Tomio (2018) report that the average gross (net) notional amount
of U.S. CDS contracts outstanding is about $18.72 billion ($3.24 billion), which places it among the 20 most
active sovereign CDS contracts. Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider (2019) compare the magnitude of the U.S.
CDS market size to that of the most liquid Italian contract. The average ratio of weekly net notional amounts
outstanding between U.S. and Italian CDS is 18%, and ranges between 6.5% in 2008 to 33% in late 2011.
According to the Bank for International Settlements, the overall sovereign CDS market was $1.458 trillion in
2018, which corresponds to about 17% of the overall market. More generally, for sovereign CDS contracts,
liquidity is also more evenly spread out across the term structure compared to corporate CDS contracts, for
which the liquidity is primarily concentrated in the 5-year maturity (Pan and Singleton, 2008). Based on
these observations, we can reasonably assume that U.S. CDS premiums are not entirely attributable to a
liquidity premium.

Another potential friction in CDS markets is associated with legal uncertainty. The Credit Determination
Committee (DC), a panel of 15 industry participants, decides on the realization of a credit event that
triggers the payout from CDS contracts. Many cases in the past, such as the defaults by Windstream,
Codere, Hovnanian, or Thomas Cook, have demonstrated that there is much leeway in deciding whether
a credit event has occurred or not. At present, there is a poor understanding of the incentives of the DC
and how the legal uncertainty introduced by their deliberations feeds into the pricing of CDS premiums.
Similarly, there is a risk of uncertain recovery that is determined by a bond auction with a cheapest-to-deliver
option (Chernov, Gorbenko, and Makarov, 2013).

Counterparty risk is an additional friction that could distort the U.S. CDS premium downwards as a measure
of U.S. default risk. Given that swap contracts are fully collateralized, there is little reason to believe that this
should be quantitatively important. Indeed, Arora, Gandhi, and Longstaff (2012), who study the impact of
counterparty risk on corporate CDS valuation, conclude that the credit risk of the counterparty would need
to increase by six percentage points to decrease the CDS premium by one basis point. Similar conclusions
of vanishingly small effects from counterparty risk are derived by Du, Gordy, Gadgil, and Vega (2016).

From an empirical perspective, the U.S. has defaulted before, both on external and domestic debt (Zivney
and Marcus, 1989; English, 1996; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2008). Such past experiences are relevant to the
increasing debt levels of the U.S. government. According to the U.S. Treasury, the total federal public debt
almost quadrupled over the last 20 years, ballooning from $5.526 trillion in the third quarter of 1998 to
$21.516 trillion in the third quarter of 2018.1 This recent figure corresponds to about 104% of the gross
domestic product (GDP). In their 2019 long-term budget outlook, the Congressional budget office foresees
large budget deficits in the years to come, with a central estimate of federal debt to GDP of 144% by 2049.
This is a magnitude consistent with the default trigger computations in Chernov, Schmid, and Schneider
(2019). Since 2002, the U.S. has consistently reported a deficit, with the most recent estimates for 2018
being around negative 3.8 percent.

Similarly, Standard & Poor's stripped the U.S. of the highest AAA credit rating in 2011, suggesting the
presence of credit risk. In modern times, we have also experienced effective defaults by high-quality sovereigns
despite relatively low CDS premiums. Ireland, which still enjoyed a AAA credit rating going into the global
financial crisis, saw its CDS premiums rise from about 2 bps in 2007 to north of 400 bps when it was bailed
out by the Eurozone countries in 2010 (see discussions around Figure 1 in Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl,
2014). Similarly, Spain received a AAA credit rating in 2003 when its CDS premiums fluctuated at around
3 to 4 bps. However, it was at the cusp of junk status in 2012 when it received financial support from the
Eurozone, and CDS premiums reached levels close to 600 bps.



B       Derivation of the real pricing kernel

Since utility is defined by a constant elasticity of substitution recursion and the certainty equivalent is
homogeneous of degree one, we can scale utility and take logs:
                                                                                    
                       log (Ut /Ct )  ut = -1 log (1 -  ) + µt ect+1 +ut+1             .

Taking a first-order Taylor approximation of ut around the point E [log µt ] = log µ, we obtain the log-
linearized form
                                                           e log µ 
        ut      -1 log (1 -  ) + e log µ + -1                              log µt ect+1 +ut+1 - log µ
                                                      [(1 -  ) + e log µ ]
                b0 + b1 log µt ect+1 +ut+1 ,

where
                                                                         -1
                                 b1   =   e log µ (1 -  ) + e log µ

                                 b0   =   -1 log (1 -  ) + e log µ - b1 log µ.


The state vector xt = (ct , t , dt , gt , wc,t , w,t , wy,t , wg,t , v1,t , v2,t ) describes the economy, where ct =
log(Ct+1 /Ct ) is log consumption growth, t is inflation, dt is log output growth, gt is the government
expenditure to output ratio, wt = [wc,t , w,t , wd,t , wg,t ] is the vector of moving average components, and
vt = [v1,t , v2,t ] is a vector of common stochastic variance processes.

Guess that the log scaled utility is affine in the state vector xt
                        ut   =   log u + Px xt = log u + Py yt + pv vt
                             =   log u + pc ct + p t + pd dt + pg gt + pv1 v1,t + pv2 v2,t ,
    1
    These estimates are from the U.S. Department of the Treasury and retrieved from FRED, the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. We focus on total public debt (GFDEBTN), total public debt as percent of gross
domestic product (GFDEGDQ188S), and the federal surplus or deficit as percent of gross domestic product
(FYFSGDA188S).


                                                        51
which implies that Px = Py , pv                  = [pc , p , pd , pg , 0, 0, 0, 0, pv1 , pv2 ] .

Next compute log ect+1 +ut+1 and log µt ect+1 +ut+1 , plug terms into the log-linarized scaled utility ut
and verify. Given the initial guess, this results in a system of seven equations, which can be solved using the
method of undetermined coefficients for the constant and the loadings of the log scaled utility on xt . For
the derivations, define the coordinate vectors ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 8) and evi (i = 1, 2) with all elements equal to
zero except element i, which is equal to one.

Step 1: Compute log ect+1 +ut+1 :

                log ect+1 +ut+1              =   ct+1 + ut+1 = e1 yt+1 + log u + Py yt+1 + pv vt+1

                                             =   log u + (Py + e1 ) µy + (Py + e1 ) y yt + (Py + e1 ) yv vt
                                                                        1/2
                                             +   (Py + e1 ) y Vy,t y,t+1 + pv vt+1 .

Step 2: Compute log µt ect+1 +ut+1 :
                                                                      1/
  log µt ect+1 +ut+1                  =    log Et ect+1 +ut+1                 = -1 log Et e(ct+1 +ut+1 )

                                      =    log u + (Py + e1 ) µy + (Py + e1 ) y yt + (Py + e1 ) yv vt
                                                                           2
                                                                              -vvj                     pvj vj
                                      +      (Py + e1 ) y,t (Py + e1 ) +           log 1 - pvj cvj +             vj,t ,
                                           2                             j =1
                                                                                                     1 - pvj cvj

where y,t = y Vy,t y .


Step 3: Plug into ut and verify:

           ut               b0 + b1 log µt ect+1 +ut+1
                                                                    2
                                                                          vvj
                    =       b0 + b1 log u + (Py + e1 ) µy -                   log 1 - pvj cvj        + b1 (Py + e1 ) y yt
                                                                   j =1
                                                                           
                                                                                         2
                                                                                              pvj vj
                    +       b1 (Py + e1 ) yv vt +          (Py + e1 ) y,t (Py + e1 ) +                  vj,t .
                                                         2                             j =1
                                                                                            1 - pvj cvj

Given the initial guess, this results in a system of seven equations:
                                                                
   log u        =       b0 + b1 log u + (Py + e1 ) µy +           (Py + e1 ) y I              1 A        y (Py + e1 )
                                                                2
                             2
                                   vvj
                        -              log 1 - pvj cvj
                            j =1
                                    

      pc        =       b1 (Py + e1 ) y e1
      p         =       u1 (Py + e1 ) y e2
      pd        =       b1 (Py + e1 ) y e3
      pg        =       b1 (Py + e1 ) y e4
                                                                                                                      pv1 v1
     pv1        =       b1 (Py + e1 ) yv ev1 +         (Py + e1 ) y I               1  B1          y (Py + e1 ) +
                                                     2                                                              1 - pv1 cv1
                                                                                                                      pv2 v2
     pv2        =       b1 (Py + e1 ) yv ev2 +         (Py + e1 ) y I               1  B2          y (Py + e1 ) +               ,
                                                     2                                                              1 - pv2 cv2




                                                                        52
where  defines the Kronecker product, the Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, and 1 is a column
vector of ones, and where we have defined the column vectors A, B1 , B2 as follows:

                                              A     =    [ac , a , ad , ag , 0, 0, 0, 0]
                                             B1     =    [bcv1 , bv1 , bdv1 , bgv1 , 0, 0, 0, 0]
                                             B2     =    [bcv2 , bv2 , bdv2 , bgv2 , 0, 0, 0, 0] .                             (A.1)


Since, the equations for pc , p , pd , and pg are linear, their solutions are given by
                                                                             -1
                                                    pc   =    -e1 b2
                                                                   1 [z - I]    c
                                                                             -1
                                                    p    =    -e2 b2
                                                                   1 [z - I]    c
                                                                             -1
                                                    py   =    -e3 b2
                                                                   1 [z - I]    c
                                                                            -1
                                                    pg   =    -e4 b2
                                                                   1 [z - I]   c .


The equations for pv are quadratic and have two roots. We choose the root such that lim cj pvj = 0 as
cj  0. We have that for j = 1, 2:
                                                             
           b1 vj - cvj (Py + e1 ) yv evj +                     (Py + e1 ) y I                1  Bj      y (Py + e1 )   - 1 pvj
                                                             2
                                                                        
                                                                       Bj

                                                             
          + cvj p2
                 vj + b1 (Py + e1 ) yv evj +                   (Py + e1 ) y I               1  Bj       y (Py + e1 ) = 0,
                                                             2
                Aj                                                           
                                                                            Cj


where the roots to the quadratic equation are determined by:
                                                                                    2
                                                           -Bj +/-            Bj        - 4A   
                                                                                            j Cj
                                              pvj    =                                             .
                                                                            2Aj

Finally, we have that
                                                                         
        log u    =       (1 - b1 )-1 b0 + b1 (Py + e1 ) µy +               (Py + e1 ) y I              1 A      y (Py + e1 )
                                                                         2
                              2
                                     vvj
                         -               log 1 - pvj cvj        .
                             j =1
                                      



Plugging terms into the expression for the marginal rate of substitution, we obtain the final solution to the
real pricing kernel

        mt,t+1       =    ¯ + ( - 1) e1 y yt + ( - 1) e1 yv vt
                          m
                             2
                                     ( - ) pvj vj  
                     -                            + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I                           1  Bj   y (Py + e1 ) vj,t
                          j =1
                                      1 - pvj cvj  2
                                                                            1/2
                     +    [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 )] y Vy,t y,t+1 + ( - ) pv vt+1 ,                                        (A.2)

where
                                                                                   2
                                                                                         vvj
                                 m
                                 ¯    =    log  + ( - 1) e1 µy + ( - )                       log 1 - pvj cvj
                                                                                  j =1
                                                                                          
                                           
                                      -      ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I                 1 A          y (Py + e1 ) .                  (A.3)
                                           2

                                                                      53
The numerical solution to the mean log certainty equivalent E [log µt ] = log µ depends on the approximated
constants from the log-linearization of the scaled log utility b0 and b1 , which themselves depend on the
mean log certainty equivalent log µ. Model consistency thus requires to solve a fixed-point equation for the
mean log certainty equivalent. More specifically, using a convergence criterion of 10e-12 , we solve for the
fixed-point equation log µ = f (log µ).



C      Valuation

B.1      Term structure of real interest rates

The price of an n-period real zero-coupon bond must satisfy the Euler equation Ptn = Et Mt,t+n . To
derive closed-form solutions for the term structure of real interest rates, we conjecture that log zero-coupon
bond prices pt are affine in the state vector xt
                                     pn        n
                                      t = log Pt = -An - By,n yt - Bv,n vt ,

where the coefficients of the vectors BY,n and Bv,n measure the sensitivity of real bond prices to the risk
factors and where n refers to the maturity of the bond. Since the real pricing kernel is an affine function of
the state vector, log bond prices are fully characterized by the cumulant-generating function of Xt . The law
of iterated expectations implies that Ptn satisfies the recursion
                                                                  -1
                                              Ptn = Et Mt,t+1 Ptn
                                                                +1   .

It can be shown that for all n, the scalar An and the components of the column vectors Byj ,n for j = 1, 2, . . . , 8
and Bvj ,n for j = 1, 2, are given by
                                                  2
           An    =   An-1 - m
                            ¯ + By,n-1 µy +             vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj - Bvj,n-1 cvj
                                                 j =1

                      1
                 -      ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - By,n-1         y I        1 A        y
                      2
                 ×     ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - By,n-1

        Byj ,n   =     By,n-1 - ( - 1) e1      y ej

        Bvj ,n   =     By,n-1 - ( - 1) e1      yv evj
                      ( - ) pvj vj     
                 +                    + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I     1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
                        1 - pvj cvj    2
                      1
                 -        ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - By,n-1 y I 1  Bj
                      2
                                                                            ( - ) pvj - Bvj ,n-1 vj
                 ×   y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - By,n-1 -                                             ,
                                                                         1 - ( - ) pvj - Bvj ,n-1 cvj

with initial conditions A0 = 0, By,0 = 0, and Bv,0 = 0, and where  defines the Kronecker product,             the
Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, 1 is a column vector of ones, ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 8) and evi (i = 1, 2)
are coordinate vectors with all elements equal to zero except element i = 1, the column vectors A, and Bj
for j = 1, 2 are defined in Equation (A.1), and m
                                                ¯ is defined in Equation (A.3).

It follows naturally that the term structure of real interest rates is given by:
                                      n
                                     yt   =    n-1 An + By,n yt + Bv,n vt .


                                                           54
B.2      Term structure of nominal interest rates

The price of an n-period nominal zero-coupon bond must satisfy the Euler equation Ptn = Et [Mt,t+n ], where
Mt,t+1 defines the nominal stochastic discount factor defined in logs as

                                   mt,t+1 = mt,t+1 - t+1 = mt,t+1 - e2 yt+1 ,

with the real pricing kernel mt,t+1 defined in Equation (A.2). To derive closed-form solutions for the term
structure of nominal interest rates, we conjecture that log zero-coupon bond prices pt are affine in the state
vector xt
                                   pn         n
                                     t = log Pt = -An - By,n yt - Bv,n vt ,

where the coefficients of the vectors By,n and Bv,n measure the sensitivity of nominal bond prices to the
risk factors and where n refers to the maturity of the bond. Since the nominal pricing kernel is an affine
function of the state vector, log bond prices are fully characterized by the cumulant-generating function of
xt . The law of iterated expectations implies that Ptn satisfies the recursion
                                                                  -1
                                              Ptn = Et Mt,t+1 Ptn
                                                                +1   .

It can be shown that for all n, the scalar An and the components of the column vectors Byj ,n for j = 1, 2, . . . , 8
and Bvj ,n for j = 1, 2, are given by
                                                         2
         An    =   An-1 - m
                          ¯ + [e2 + By,n-1 ] µy +              vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj - Bvj,n-1 cvj
                                                        j =1
                   1
               -     [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 ] y I             1 A
                   2
               ×   y [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 ]
      Byj ,n   =   [By,n-1 + e2 - ( - 1) e1 ] y ej
      Bvj ,n   =   [By,n-1 + e2 - ( - 1) e1 ] yv evj
                   ( - ) pvj vj     
               +                  + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I           1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
                     1 - pvj cvj    2
                   1
               -     [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 ] y I     1  Bj
                   2
                                                                        ( - ) pvj - Bvj ,n-1 vj
               ×   y [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 ] -                              ,
                                                                     1 - ( - ) pvj - Bvj ,n-1 cvj

with initial conditions A0 = 0, By,0 = 0, and Bv,0 = 0, and where  defines the Kronecker product,             the
Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, 1 is a column vector of ones, ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 8) and evi (i = 1, 2)
are coordinate vectors with all elements equal to zero except element i = 1, the column vectors A and Bj
for j = 1, 2 are defined in Equation (A.1), and m
                                                ¯ is defined in Equation (A.3).

It follows naturally that the term structure of nominal interest rates is given by:
                                      n
                                     yt   =    n-1 An + By,n yt + Bv,n vt .



B.3      Term structure of risky treasury yields

U.S. default risk is driven by a default intensity ht defined as

                   ht   =   h + hc ct + hd dt + hg gt + hv1 v1,t + hv2 v2,t = h + hz zt + hv vt ,              (B.1)



                                                         55
such that hz = [hc , h , hd , hg ] and hv = [hv1 , hv2 ] . We adopt the convention that hy = [hz , 0, 0, 0, 0] ,
and hy = [hy , 0, 0, 0] . We connect the default intensity to Ht , the conditional default probability of a given
reference entity at day t via Ht  P rob ( = t |   t; Ft ) = 1 - e-ht , where Ft denotes all the available
information available at time t, with the exception of credit events. This implies that the probability of
survival (no credit event) until time t is:
                                                                    t
                              St  P rob ( > t | Ft ) = S0                   (1 - Hj ) , t  1.                 (B.2)
                                                                 j =1

To price risky zero coupon Treasury bonds, we take into account the convenience yield s1,t with dynamics
defined in Equation (3), and loss given default L. Using the law of iterated expectations, it is possible to
show that risky bond prices follow the recursion
                                                                                              -1
               Ptn     =   Et Mt,t+1 es1,t+1 [I ( > t + 1) + (1 - L) · I (t <   t + 1)] · Ptn
                                                                                            +1

                                                                -1
                       =   Et Mt,t+1 es1,t+1 [1 - LHt+1 ] · Ptn
                                                              +1
                                  n
                                         mt+j -1,t+j -L·ht+j +s1,t+j
                           Et e   j =1                                  ,

where we follow Duffie and Singleton (1999) by applying a first order Taylor approximation of log(1 - LHt )
around 0 such that log(1 - LHt )  -L · ht . Since all elements of the bond pricing equation are affine
functions of the extended state vector, log bond prices are fully characterized by the cumulant-generating
function of xt . The law of iterated expectations implies that Ptn satisfies the recursion

                                          Ptn = Et Mt,t+1 e-L·ht+1 +s1,t+1 Ptn
                                                                             +1
                                                                               -1
                                                                                  .

To derive closed-form solutions for the term structure of risky Treasury rates, we conjecture that log prices
of risky zero-coupon bonds pt are affine in the extended state vector xt = [yt , s , vt ] = [yt , vt ] :

                                          pn        n
                                           t = log Pt = -An - By,n yt - Bv,n vt .

where the coefficients of the vectors By,n and Bv,n measure the sensitivity of risky bond prices to the risk
factors and where n refers to the maturity of the bond. It can be shown that for all n, the scalar An and
the components of the column vectors Byj ,n for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11 and Bvj ,n for j = 1, 2, are given by

   An    =   An-1 + L · h - m
                            ¯ + e2 + L · hy - e9 + By,n-1                       µy
              2
         +          vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj - L · hvj - Bvj ,n-1
             j =1

              + Bs1 ,n-1 + 1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 vs3 vj cvj
             1
         -     ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy - e9 + By,n-1                         y I   1 A
             2
         ×   y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy - e9 + By,n-1
              2
         -            Bs1 ,n-1 + 1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 vs3 vj vvj cvj
             j =1


Byj ,n   =        e2 + L · hy - e9 + By,n-1 - ( - 1) e1                  y ej

Bvj ,n   =    e2 + L · hy - e9 + By,n-1 - [( - 1) e1 ] yv evj
             ( - ) pvj vj     
         +                   + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I         1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
               1 - pvj cvj    2
             1
         -       ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy - e9 + By,n-1 y I                         1  Bj
             2

                                                               56
         ×   y        ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy - e9 + By,n-1

                   ( - ) pvj - L · hvj - Bvj ,n-1 + Bs1 ,n-1 + 1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 vs3 vj vj
         -
             1 - ( - ) pvj - L · hvj - Bvj ,n-1 + Bs1 ,n-1 + 1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 vs3 vj cvj

         +         Bs1 ,n-1 + 1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 vs3 vj vj ,

with initial conditions A0 = 0, By,0 = 0, and Bv,0 = 0, and where  defines the Kronecker product,              the
Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, 1 is a column vector of ones, ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 11) and evi (i = 1, 2)
are coordinate vectors with all elements equal to zero except element i = 1, m¯ is defined in Equation (A.3),
and the column vectors A and Bj for j = 1, 2 are given by

                                   A         =     [ac , a , ad , ag , 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1]
                                  Bj         =       bcvj , bvj , bdvj , bgvj , 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0       .               (B.3)

It follows naturally that the term structure of risky interest rates is given by:
                                              n
                                             yt      =     n1 An + By,n yt + Bv,n vt .



B.4      Term structure of LIBOR rates

We work with hypothetical zero-coupon LIBOR bonds Ln        t discounted at the continuously compounded yield
 n                                                     n           n
 t (defined at the monthly frequency), such that Lt = exp (- t · n), where n  12 corresponds to LIBOR
rate maturities of up to 12 months. To price LIBOR bonds, we take into account the convenience yield s1,t
and bank risk s2,t , with dynamics defined in Equation (3), and loss given default L. The LIBOR rate is
                  1
defined as t = yt   + s1,t + s2,t . Using the law of iterated expectations, it is possible to show that LIBOR
bond prices follow the recursion
                                                                n
                                                                       mt+j -1,t+j -L·ht+j -s2,t+j
                                        Ln
                                         t               Et e   j =1                                  .

Following the logic developed for risky Treasury bonds in appendix B.3, it is straightforward to show that
the log price of a risky n-period zero coupon LIBOR bond is affine in the extended state space xt :

                                                 log Ln    ¯    ¯         ¯
                                                      t = -An - By,n yt - Bv,n vt .                                       (B.4)

where the constant A  ¯n and the coefficients of the column vectors B
                                                                    ¯y,n and B ¯v,n measure the sensitivity of
LIBOR bond prices to the risk factors and where n refers to the maturity of the bond. It can be shown that
                      ¯n and the components of the column vectors B
for all n, the scalar A                                               ¯y ,n for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11 and B
                                                                                                         ¯v ,n for
                                                                        j                                  j
j = 1, 2, are given by
   ¯n
   A     =    ¯n-1 + L · h - m
              A                                      ¯y,n-1
                             ¯ + e2 + L · hy + e10 + B                                µy
               2
         +                                             ¯v ,n-1
                     vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj - L · hvj - B j
              j =1

              +B¯s1 ,n-1 vs1 v + B
                                 ¯s2 ,n-1 - 1 vs2 v + B
                                                      ¯s3 ,n-1 vs3 v cv
                              j                    j                j  j

              1                                                         ¯y,n-1
         -      ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy + e10 + B                                          y I   1 A
              2
         ×    y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy + e10 + B     ¯y,n-1
               2
         +           ¯s1 ,n-1 vs1 v +
                     B                   ¯s2 ,n-1 - 1 vs2 v + B
                                         B                    ¯s3 ,n-1 vs3 v vv cv
                                   j                       j                j  j  j
              j =1

 ¯y ,n
 B       =                          ¯y,n-1 - ( - 1) e1
                e2 + L · hy + e10 + B                                          y ej
   j




                                                                         57
 ¯v ,n
 B       =                          ¯y,n-1 - ( - 1) e1
                e2 + L · hy + e10 + B                                 yv evj
   j

              ( - ) pvj vj     
         +                    + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I          1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
                1 - pvj cvj     2
              1                                                      ¯y,n-1
         -        ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy + e10 + B         y I                     1  Bj
              2
         ×    y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + L · hy + e10 + B    ¯y,n-1
                                       ¯v ,n-1 + B
                 ( - ) pvj - L · hvj - B          ¯s1 ,n-1 vs1 v + B¯s2 ,n-1 - 1 vs2 v + B
                                                                                         ¯s3 ,n-1 vs3 v v
                                         j                      j                     j                j  j
         -                                          ¯s1 ,n-1 vs1 v + B
                                         ¯v1 ,n-1 + B                 ¯s2 ,n-1 - 1 vs2 v + B
                                                                                           ¯s3 ,n-1 vs3 v cv
              1 - ( - ) pv - L · hv - B
                                j           j                                 j                    j            j   j

         +                      ¯s2 ,n-1 - 1 vs2 v + B
               ¯s1 ,n-1 vs1 v + B
               B                                     ¯s3 ,n-1 vs3 v v
                             j                    j                j j




                        ¯0 = 0, B
with initial conditions A        ¯y,0 = 0, and B
                                               ¯v,0 = 0, and where  defines the Kronecker product,             the
Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, 1 is a column vector of ones, ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 11) and evi (i = 1, 2)
are coordinate vectors with all elements equal to zero except element i = 1, m¯ is defined in Equation (A.3),
and the column vectors A and Bj are defined in Equation (B.3). It follows naturally that the term structure
of risky LIBOR rates is given by:
                                        n
                                        t       =     n-1 A
                                                          ¯n + B
                                                               ¯y,n yt + B
                                                                         ¯v,n vt .



B.5      Term structure of IRS rates

To price IRS rates, we take into account the convenience yield s1,t , bank risk s2,t , and cost of collateral s3,t ,
with dynamics defined in Equation (3). The formula for an n-period IRS rate is given by
                                                                         -1
                                                    n/                        n/
                                       n
                                    IRSt =                 j,t - j,t                  j,t    ,
                                                    j =1                       j =1

                                                    1
where the one-month LIBOR rate is defined as t = yt   + s1,t + s2,t ,  defines the time interval between two
successive coupon periods, and where the expressions for  and  are defined as
                                                           · 3
                   n,t = Et emt,t+n +s3,t+n e                t+(n-1)         and n,t = Et emt,t+n +s3,t+n .

To derive closed-form solutions for the term structure of IRS rates, we conjecture that the expressions for
 and  are exponentially affine in the extended state vector xt = [yt , s , vt ] = [yt , vt ] :

                          n,t = eAn +By,n yt +Bv,n vt and n,t = eAn +By,n yt +Bv,n vt .

It can be shown that for all n, the scalars An and An , and the components of the column vectors Byj ,n and
Byj ,n for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11, and Bvj ,n Bvj ,n for j = 1, 2, follow the same recursion and are given by
                                                                       2
         An   =           ¯ - e2 - By,n-1 - e11
                   An-1 + m                                    µy -          vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                                                      j =1

                   +Bs1 ,n-1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 + 1 vs3 vj cvj
                   1
              +      ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 - e11                        y I   1 A
                   2
              ×    y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 - e11
                    2
              -           Bs1 ,n-1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 + 1 vs3 vj vvj cvj
                   j =1



                                                               58
      Byj ,n   =       ( - 1) e1 - e2 - By,n-1 - e11              y ej

      Bvj ,n   =       ( - 1) e1 - e2 - By,n-1 - e11              yv evj
                   ( - ) pvj vj     
               -                   - ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I        1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
                     1 - pvj cvj    2
                   1
               +       ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 - e11 y I  1  Bj
                   2
               ×   y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n-1 - e11

                        ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1 + Bs1 ,n-1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 + 1 vs3 vj vj
               +
                   1 - ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1 + Bs1 ,n-1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 + 1 vs3 vj cvj

               -       Bs1 ,n-1 vs1 vj + Bs2 ,n-1 vs2 vj + Bs3 ,n-1 + 1 vs3 vj vj ,

where  defines the Kronecker product,             the Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, 1 is a column
vector of ones, ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 11) and evi (i = 1, 2) are coordinate vectors with all elements equal to zero
except element i = 1, m ¯ is defined in Equation (A.3), and the column vectors A and Bj are defined in
Equation (B.3).

While the expressions  and  have the same recursions, they have different starting conditions. For n,t ,
the recursion starts at 0, with initial condition given by A0 = 0, and all elements of By,0 = 0 and Bv,0 = 0,
except for Bs3 ,0 = 1. For n,t , the recursion starts at n =  (i.e.,  = 3 for quarterly coupon payments),
with starting condition given by:
                                                             3
                                          ,t      =      e· t Et emt,t+ +s3,t+ .

Since log Et emt,t+ +s3,t+ = A + By, yt + Bv, vt , and                     3
                                                                           t   =   1
                                                                                        A              ¯v,3 vt , the initial con-
                                                                                             ¯y,3 yt + B
                                                                                        ¯3 + B
                                                                                   3
dition for n,t is given by:

                             ¯      ¯         ¯                                        Ainit + B init          init
                                                                                                        yt + Bv,      vt
          ,t       =    e 3 A3 + 3 By,3 yt + 3 Bv,3 vt +A +By, yt +Bv, vt = e                   y,                         ,
                       init
where the constant A        and the elements of the column vectors Byinit
                                                                     j ,
                                                                          for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11 and Bvinit
                                                                                                         j ,
                                                                                                              for
j = 1, 2 are given by:

                                               init
                                                                  ¯
                                              A          =         A3 + A
                                                                 3
                                                                 ¯
                                              Byinit
                                                j ,
                                                         =         Byj ,3 + Byj ,
                                                                 3
                                                                 ¯
                                              Bvinit
                                                j ,
                                                         =         Bv ,3 + Bvj , .
                                                                 3 j


B.6      Term structure of OIS rates

To price OIS rates, we take into account the convenience yield s1,t and cost of collateral s3,t , with dynamics
defined in Equation (3). The formula for an n-period OIS rate is given by
                                                                        -1
                                                  n/                           n/
                                           n
                                        OISt =           o     o
                                                         j,t - j,t
                                                                                      o
                                                                                      j,t
                                                                                                ,
                                                  j =1                         j =1




                                                                 59
                                                 1
where the one-month OIS rate is defined as ot = yt + s1,t ,  defines the time interval between two successive
coupon periods, and where the expressions for o and o are defined as
                                                        
                o
                n,t = Et e
                           mt,t+n +s3,t+n
                                          exp                 ot+n-j            and o
                                                                                    n,t = Et e
                                                                                               mt,t+n +s3,t+n
                                                                                                              .
                                                       j =1


To derive closed-form solutions for the term structure of OIS rates, we conjecture that the expressions for
o and o are exponentially affine in the extended state vector xt = [yt , s , vt ] = [yt , vt ] :
                                     o   o         o                                  o           o
                           o
                           n,t = e
                                   An +By,n yt +Bv,n vt
                                                        and o
                                                            n,t = e
                                                                    An +By,n yt +Bv,n vt
                                                                                         .

It can be shown that for all n, the scalars Ao      o                                             o
                                             n and An , and the components of the column vectors Byj ,n and
 o                                     o      o
By j ,n
        for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11, and Bvj ,n
                                             Bvj ,n
                                                    for j = 1, 2, follow the same recursion and are given by

                                                                          2
         Ao
          n     =   Ao
                     n-1 + m
                                     o
                           ¯ - e2 - By,n -1 - e11               µy -                                     o
                                                                                vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                                                         j =1
                       o                o                o
                    +Bs       v
                        1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                     + Bs      v
                                         2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                      + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                 + 1 vs3 vj cvj
                    1                                            o
                +     ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n       -1 - e11   y I                       1 A
                    2
                                                                   o
                ×   y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n        -1 - e11
                     2
                            o                o                o
                -          Bs      v
                             1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                          + Bs      v
                                              2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                           + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                      + 1 vs3 vj vvj cvj
                    j =1
       o                               o
      By j ,n
                =    ( - 1) e1 - e2 - By,n -1 - e11                y ej
       o                               o
      Bvj ,n
                =    ( - 1) e1 - e2 - By,n -1 - e11               yv evj
                    ( - ) pvj vj     
                -                   - ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I          1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
                      1 - pvj cvj     2
                    1                                        o
                +       ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n -1 - e11  y I  1  Bj
                    2
                                                               o
                ×   y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n    -1 - e11

                                      o          o                o                o
                         ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                              + Bs      v
                                                  1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                                               + Bs      v
                                                                   2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                                                + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                                           + 1 vs3 vj vj
                +
                                     o          o                o                o
                    1 - ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                             + Bs      v
                                                 1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                                              + Bs      v
                                                                  2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                                               + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                                          + 1 vs3 vj cvj
                      o                o                o
                -    Bs      v
                       1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                    + Bs      v
                                        2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                     + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                + 1 vs3 vj vj


where  defines the Kronecker product,             the Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, 1 is a column
vector of ones, ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 11) and evi (i = 1, 2) are coordinate vectors with all elements equal to zero
except element i = 1, m ¯ is defined in Equation (A.3), and the column vectors A and Bj are defined in
Equation (B.3).

While the expressions o and o have the same recursions, they have different starting conditions. For o      n,t ,
the recursion starts at 0, with initial condition given by Ao                             o            o
                                                              0 = 0, and all elements of By,0 = 0 and Bv,0 = 0,
             o
except for Bs 3 ,0
                   = 1. For on,t , the recursion starts at n =  (i.e.,  = 3 for quarterly coupon payments),
with starting condition given by:
                                                         
                                                                  
                                              mt,t+ +s3,t+ +            ot+-j             o   o       o
                         o
                         ,t      =    Et  e                      j =1             = eA +By, yt +Bv, vt ,




                                                                60
where the expressions for Ao   o         o
                            , By, , and Bv, are obtained recursively. Observe that


  o
  ,t       =   eot Et emt,t+1 +s3,t+1 eot+1 Et+1 emt+1,t+2 +s3,t+2 . . . eot+-1 Et+-1 emt+-1,t+ +s3,t+                                 ,
                              oinit
and define o
           n,t to be equal to n,t   characterized as

                                        oinit
                                        n,t         =   Et eot +mt,t+1 +s3,t+1 oinit
                                                                               n-1,t+1 ,


It can be shown that for all n = 1, 2, 3, . . . , 
                                                          o         o              o
                                                         Aninit +By,n
                                                                   init           init
                                                                            yt +Bv,n          vt
                                            o init
                                            n,t    =e                                              ,                               (B.5)
                                                               oinit
where the scalar Aon
                    init
                         and components of the column vectors By j ,n
                                                                                                            oinit
                                                                      for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11 (except for Bs1 ,n
                                                                                                                  )
      oinit
and Bvj ,n are given by:
                                                                                    2
     Ao
      n
        init
               =    A1 + Ao init
                          n-1 + m
                                           oinit
                                 ¯ - e2 - By,n -1 - e11                     µy -                                     oinit
                                                                                            vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                                                                   j =1
                       oinit            oinit            oinit
                     +Bs      v
                        1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                     + Bs      v
                                         2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                      + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                 + 1 vs3 vj cvj
                    1                                      oinit
               +      ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n -1 - e11                                 y I        1 A
                    2
                                                           oinit
               ×    y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n -1 - e11
                     2
                             oinit            oinit            oinit
               -            Bs      v
                              1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                           + Bs      v
                                               2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                            + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                       + 1 vs3 vj vvj cvj
                    j =1

      oinit                            oinit
     Byj ,n
               =     ( - 1) e1 - e2 - By,n -1 - e11                y e1 + Byj ,1
      oinit                            oinit
     Bs1 ,n
               =     ( - 1) e1 - e2 - By,n -1 - e11                y e9 + Bs1 ,1 + 1
      oinit                            oinit
     Bvj ,n
               =     ( - 1) e1 - e2 - By,n -1 - e11                yv evj + Bvj ,1
                    ( - ) pvj vj     
               -                    - ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I         1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
                      1 - pvj cvj    2
                    1                                        oinit
               +        ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n -1 - e11 y I  1  Bj
                    2
                                                           oinit
               ×    y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 - By,n -1 - e11

                                        oinit       oinit            oinit            oinit
                           ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,j -1
                                                 + Bs      v
                                                     1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                                                  + Bs      v
                                                                      2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                                                   + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                                              + 1 vs3 vj vj
               +
                                     oinit      oinit            oinit            oinit
                    1 - ( - ) pvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                             + Bs      v
                                                 1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                                              + Bs      v
                                                                  2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                                               + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                                          + 1 vs3 vj cvj
                      o                o                o
               -     Bs      v
                       1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                    + Bs      v
                                        2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                     + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                + 1 vs3 vj vj ,
                                                                                                                               o   o
with starting condition o    init
                            1,t   = eot Et emt,t+1 +s3,t+1 . Since Et emt,t+1 +s3,t+1                               = o
                                                                                                                      1,t = e
                                                                                                                              A1 +B1   xt
                                                                                                                                            ,
      1                1
ot = yt + s1,t , with yt = A1 + B1 xt , we have that:
                                                                        o               o                          o
                   oinit
                   1,t        =   eot Et emt,t+1 +s3,t+1 eA1 +A1 +(By,1 +By,1 +e9 )                    yt +(Bv,1 +Bv, 1 ) vt

                                       o        o              o
                                      A1init + By,
                                                 init           init
                                                         xt +(Bv,    ) vt
                              =   e                1              1
                                                                             ,

where the constant Ao  1
                         init                                         oinit
                              and the elements of the column vectors Byj ,1
                                                                            for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11 (except for
 oinit        oinit
Bs1 ,1 ) and Bvj ,1 for j = 1, 2 are given by:
                                                 oinit
                                                A1         =   A1 + Ao
                                                                     1



                                                                   61
                                                 oinit                   o
                                                Byj ,1
                                                           =   Byj ,1 + By j ,1

                                                 oinit                   o
                                                Bs1 ,1
                                                           =   Bs1 ,1 + Bs1 ,1
                                                                               +1
                                                 oinit                   o
                                                Bvj ,1
                                                           =   Bvj ,1 + Bvj ,1
                                                                               .



B.7        Term structure of CDS premiums

To price CDS premiums, we take into account the cost of collateral s3,t , with dynamics defined in Equation
(3), the hazard rate defined in Equation (B.1), and the corresponding survival probabilities defined in
Equation (B.2). The formula for an n-period CDS premium is given by
                                                                                           -1
                            n                n/             n
                n               c     c            c             j        j      c     c
           CDSt = L ·          j,t - j,t          j ,t +            -          (j,t - j,t ) ,
                          j =1               j =1         j =1
                                                                          

where the floor function · rounds to the nearest lower integer,  defines the time interval between two
successive coupon periods, and where the expressions for c and c are defined as
                                                         St+n-1                                        St+n
                        c
                        n,t = Et e
                                   mt,t+n +s3,t+n
                                                                       and c
                                                                           n,t = Et e
                                                                                      mt,t+n +s3,t+n
                                                                                                            .
                                                           St                                           St

The law of iterated expectations implies that c       c
                                              j,t and j,t satisfy the recursions


           c
           n,t = Et e
                      mt,t+1 +s3,t+1
                                     (1 - Ht+1 ) c         c
                                                 n-1,t+1 , n,t = Et e
                                                                      mt,t+1 +s3,t+1
                                                                                     (1 - Ht+1 ) c
                                                                                                 n-1,t+1 ,


starting at n = 1 for c                       c                                  c    c
                      n,t and at n = 0 for n,t . To evaluate the expressions for  and  , we conjecture
that they are exponentially affine functions of the extended state vector xt :
                                   c     c            c                            c    c         c
                   c
                   n,t      =    eAn +(By,n )   yt +(Bv,n ) vt    and c
                                                                      n,t = e
                                                                              An +(By,n )   yt +(Bv,n ) vt   .

It can be shown that for all n, the scalars Ac      c                                             c
                                             n and An , and the components of the column vectors Byj ,n and
 c                                    c
Byj ,n
       for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11, and Bvj ,n
                                            for j = 1, 2, follow the same recursion and are given by

     Ac
      n     =    Ac
                  n-1 - h + m
                                           c
                            ¯ - e2 + hy - By,n -1 - e11                  µy
                  2
                                                       c
            -           vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj - hvj + Bvj ,n-1
                 j =1

                   c                c                c
                 +Bs      v
                    1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                 + Bs      v
                                     2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                  + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                             + 1 vs3 vj cvj
                 1                                           c
            +      ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + hy - By,n -1 - e11                   y I        1 A
                 2
                                                             c
            ×    y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + hy - By,n -1 - e11

                  2
                          c                c                c
            -            Bs      v
                           1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                        + Bs      v
                                            2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                         + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                    + 1 vs3 vj vvj cvj
                 j =1

   c                                     c
  Byj ,n
            =     ( - 1) e1 - e2 + hy - By,n -1 - e11                   y ej
   c                                     c
  Bvj ,n
            =     ( - 1) e1 - e2 + hy - By,n -1 - e11                  yv evj
                 ( - ) pvj vj  
            -                 - ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I                           1  Bj    y (Py + e1 )
                  1 - pvj cvj  2


                                                                  62
                  1                                           c
              +     ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + hy - By,n -1 - e11              y I        1  Bj
                  2
                                                              c
              ×   y ( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) - e2 + hy - By,n -1 - e11

                                       c          c                c                c
                    ( - ) pvj - hvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                               + Bs      v
                                                   1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                                                + Bs      v
                                                                    2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                                                 + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                                            + 1 vs3 vj vj
              +
                                         c          c                c                c
                  1 - ( - ) pvj - hvj + Bvj ,n-1
                                                 + Bs      v
                                                     1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                                                  + Bs      v
                                                                      2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                                                   + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                                                              + 1 vs3 vj cvj
                    c                c                c
              -    Bs      v
                     1 ,n-1 s1 vj
                                  + Bs      v
                                      2 ,n-1 s2 vj
                                                   + Bs3 ,n-1
                                                              + 1 vs3 vj vj ,

where  defines the Kronecker product,             the Hadamar product, I is the identity matrix, 1 is a column
vector of ones, ei (i = 1, 2, . . . 11) and evi (i = 1, 2) are coordinate vectors with all elements equal to zero
except element i = 1, m ¯ is defined in Equation (A.3), and the column vectors A and Bj are defined in
Equation (B.3).

Even though the expressions for c and c follow the same recursion, they have different initial conditions.
The initial condition for c is given by log c           c        c         c                         c
                                               0,t = A0 + By,0 yt + Bv,0 vt , where the scalar A0 = 0 and the
                                 c                                       c                                 c
elements of the column vectors Byj ,0 = 0 for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11, and Bv,0 = 0 for j = 1, 2, except for Bs3 ,0
                                                                                                                 = 1.
The initial condition for c is given by:
                                                                   c    c       c
                                  c
                                  1,t = Et e
                                             mt,t+1 +s3,t+1
                                                            = eA1 +By,1 yt +Bv,1 vt ,
where the scalar Ac                                       c                                   c
                  1 and components of the column vectors Byj ,1 for j = 1, 2, . . . , 11 and Bvj ,1 for j = 1, 2
are given by:
                                           2                                              2
       Ac
        1     =    ¯ + [e11 - e2 ] µY -
                   m                             vvj log 1 - ( - ) pvj + vs3 vj cvj -           vs3 vj vvj cvj
                                          j =1                                           j =1
                   1
              +      [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) + e11 - e2 ] y I          1 A
                   2
              ×    y [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) + e11 - e2 ]
     c
    By j ,1
              =    [( - 1) e1 + e11 - e2 ] y ej
     c
    Bvj ,1
              =    [( - 1) e1 + e11 - e2 ] yv evj
                   ( - ) pvj vj     
              -                   - ( - ) (Py + e1 ) y I          1  Bj y (Py + e1 )
                     1 - pvj cvj    2
                   1
              +      [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) + e11 - e2 ] y I     1  Bj
                   2
                                                                     ( - ) pvj + vs3 vj vj
              ×    y [( - 1) e1 + ( - ) (Py + e1 ) + e11 - e2 ] +                            - vs3 vj vj .
                                                                  1 - ( - ) pvj + vs3 vj cvj


D       Estimation
We provide two different state-space representations. The first one, shown in Section C.1, is used when
macroeconomic fundamentals are only used in the estimation. The second one, shown in Section C.2, is an
extended state-space representation for which we can (potentially) jointly use macroeconomic fundamentals
and asset data.


C.1      State-space representation

The underlying state transition dynamics run at a monthly frequency. We first provide the case in which
all observables are available at the monthly frequency. The corresponding state-transition dynamics are


                                                           63
shown in Section C.1.1 and the measurement equation is presented in Section C.1.2. In the presence of
mixed-frequency observables, i.e., some observables are available at the quarterly frequency, we explain how
to adjust the state space in Section C.1.3 with an illustrative example. Finally, in Section C.1.4, we explain
the availability of data and provide our state-space representation that we estimate.



C.1.1        State transition dynamics

Define xt = [zt , wt , vt ] . We describe                  the joint dynamics of xt below
                                                                                                                                                                 
    z1,t+1             µz 1        z11                       z12        z13             z14    1      0     0       0    zv11          zv12         z1,t
  z2,t+1   µz2   z21                                         z22        z23             z24    0      1     0       0    zv21          zv22         z2,t         
                                                                                                                                                                 
  z3,t+1   µz3   z31                                         z32        z33             z34    0      0     1       0    zv31          zv32         z3,t         
                                                                                                                                                                 
  z4,t+1   µz4   z41                                         z42        z43             z44    0      0     0       1    zv41          zv42         z4,t         
                                                                                                                                                                 
  w1,t+1                0       0                            0          0               0      0      0     0       0     0             0           w1,t         
           =                  +                                                                                                                                  
  w2,t+1                0       0                            0          0               0      0      0     0       0     0             0           w2,t         
                                                                                                                                                                 
  w3,t+1                0       0                            0          0               0      0      0     0       0     0             0           w3,t         
                                                                                                                                                                 
  w4,t+1                0       0                            0          0               0      0      0     0       0     0             0           w4,t         
                                                                                                                                                                 
  v1,t+1   v cv   0                                          0          0               0      0      0     0       0    v1             0           v1,t         
                      1     1
    v2,t+1          v2 cv2                        0          0          0               0      0      0     0       0     0            v2           v2,t
      xt+1             µ                                                                                                                                xt


                                                                                                                                                                 
        1      0      0           0         0         0     0    0      0       0             11      0        0        0        0     0    0   0   0        0
  
        0      1      0           0         0         0     0    0      0       0    
                                                                                              21      22       0        0        0     0    0   0   0        0   
                                                                                                                                                                 
  
        0      0      1           0         0         0     0    0      0       0    
                                                                                              31      32       33       0        0     0    0   0   0        0   
                                                                                                                                                                 
  
        0      0      0           1         0         0     0    0      0       0    
                                                                                              41      42       43       44       0     0    0   0   0        0   
                                                                                                                                                                 
      w11     w12   w13         w14         0         0     0    0      0       0    
                                                                                    ×         0       0        0        0        0     0    0   0   0        0   
 +                                                                                                                                                               
  
      w21     w22   w23         w24         0         0     0    0      0       0    
                                                                                              0       0        0        0        0     0    0   0   0        0   
                                                                                                                                                                 
  
      w31     w32   w33         w34         0         0     0    0      0       0    
                                                                                              0       0        0        0        0     0    0   0   0        0   
                                                                                                                                                                 
  
      w41     w42   w43         w44         0         0     0    0      0       0    
                                                                                              0       0        0        0        0     0    0   0   0        0   
                                                                                                                                                                 
      0       0     0           0           0         0     0    0      1       0             0       0        0        0        0     0    0   0   1        0   
      0       0     0           0           0         0     0    0      0       1             0       0        0        0        0     0    0   0   0        1
                                   A                                                                                         B


                                                                                                                        1/2
                 V               0          0              0     0          0       0    0     0           0
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                     z1 ,t+1
                                                                                                                                                
                   1,t                                                                                              
                 0              V2,t        0              0     0          0       0    0     0           0                         z2 ,t+1    
                                                                                                                                                
                 0               0         V3,t            0     0          0       0    0     0           0                         z3 ,t+1    
                                                                                                                                                
                 0               0          0             V4,t   0          0       0    0     0           0                         z4 ,t+1
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                
                  0              0          0              0     0          0       0    0     0           0                           0
                                                                                                                                                
              ×                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                              
                  0              0          0              0     0          0       0    0     0           0        
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                       0        
                                                                                                                                                
                  0              0          0              0     0          0       0    0     0           0        
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                       0        
                                                                                                                                                
                  0              0          0              0     0          0       0    0     0           0        
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                       0        
                                                                                                                                                
                  0              0          0              0     0          0       0    0    v1 ,t        0                         v1 ,t+1
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                    
                  0              0          0              0     0          0       0    0    0           v2 ,t                      v2 ,t+1
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                   Vt                                                                 t+1


for i  {1, 2, 3, 4} and j  {1, 2},

                           Vi,t        =    ai + bi1 v1,t + bi2 v2,t ,                  vj ,t = vj c2
                                                                                                    vj + 2cvj vj vj,t




                                                                                64
with zi ,t+1  N (0, 1) and vj ,t+1 being a zero mean unit variance shock.                   In vector notations, we express
the state space by
                                                                                                                  
     zt+1            µz           z 4×4 I4×4 zv 4×2            zt                           I4×4      04×4   04×2
   wt+1  =           0     +  04×4         04×4    04×2   wt  +                             w 4×4     04×4   04×2  (C.1)
     vt+1           v cv           02×4    02×4   v 2×2        vt                           02×4      02×4   I2×2
      xt+1               µ                                                    xt                      A
                                                                                             1/2
                                                                                                            
                  z 4×4         04×4        04×2     Vz,t 4×4          04×4        04×2               z,t+1
               ×  04×4          04×4        04×2  ×  04×4              04×4        04×2             ×  0    .
                                                                                           
                  02×4          02×4        I2×2      02×4             02×4        v,t 2×2            v,t+1
                                                                                           
                                                    
                                B                                        Vt                               t+1




C.1.2        Measurement equation

For ease of illustration, assume that the observables are available at a monthly frequency. Define ot =
[ct , dt , gt , t ] . Then, the measurement equation becomes
                                            ot =  xt + ut ,    ut  N (0, u )                                         (C.2)
where  = [1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]    and u is a measurement error (diagonal) variance-covariance matrix.



C.1.3        Dealing with the mixed-frequency issue

When some observables are available at a quarterly frequency, we need to adjust both measurement and
transition equations to deal with the mixed-frequency issue. We provide an example whereby the dimension
of zt , wt , and vt are reduced to half for ease of illustration. We assume that the first observable is available at
a quarterly while the second observable is available at a monthly frequency. We introduce the superscript q
                                                                                       q
to indicate if the observable is available at the quarterly frequency. Thus, ot = [z1   ,t , z2,t ] . Also for simplicity,
we do not allow for measurement errors. There are two cases to consider.

           q
    1. If z1 ,t is expressed in growth rates, adjust the measurement loading  and state vector to
                                                                                           
                                                                                z1,t
                                                                               z1,t-1 
                                                                                           
                                                                               z1,t-2 
                                                                                           
                                                                               z1,t-3 
                                                                                           
                                                                               z1,t-4 
                                                                                           
                               1   2      2   1
                                                                               z2,t        
                               3   3
                                      1   3   3
                                                  0   0  0  0  0  0                        
                       =                                               , xt =   z 2 ,t - 1
                                                                                           .                         (C.3)
                              0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0                           
                                                                               z2,t-2 
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                               z2,t-3 
                                                                                           
                                                                               z2,t-4 
                                                                                           
                                                                               w1,t 
                                                                                           
                                                                               w2,t 
                                                                                               v1,t
        We can relate the mixed-frequency observables to the state vector by
                                     q            z1,t +2z1,t-1 +3z1,t-2 +2z1,t-3 +z1,t-4
                                    z1 ,t
                             ot =            =                        3                       =  xt .                (C.4)
                                    z2,t                            z2,t


                                                              65
          q
   2. If z1 ,t is expressed in levels, adjust the measurement loading  and state vector to
                                                                                       
                                                                                z1,t
                                                                              z1,t-1 
                                                                                       
                                                                              z1,t-2 
                                                                                       
                                                                              z1,t-3 
                                                                                       
                                                                              z1,t-4 
                                                                                       
                              1   1    1
                                                                              z2,t     
                              3   3    3
                                           0   0  0  0  0  0   0  0                    
                      =                                               , xt =  z2,t-1 
                                                                             
                                                                                       .                          (C.5)
                              0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0                           z2,t-2 
                                                                                       
                                                                              z2,t-3 
                                                                                       
                                                                              z2,t-4 
                                                                                       
                                                                              w1,t 
                                                                                       
                                                                              w2,t 
                                                                                                     v1,t
       We can relate the mixed-frequency observables to the state vector by
                                              q              z1,t +z1,t-1 +z1,t-2
                                             z1 ,t
                                   ot =               =                3                =  xt .                   (C.6)
                                             z2,t                     z2,t


C.1.4     Implementation

We use quarterly consumption growth (cq                                  q
                                               t ), output growth (dt ), and log government expenditure-to-
               q
output ratio (gt ), and monthly inflation (t ) in the estimation. Except for consumption growth data, we are
using the highest available frequency. Our choice of using quarterly consumption growth avoids modeling
measurement errors in monthly consumption growth (see Schorfheide, Song, and Yaron (2018) for a detailed
discussion), which significantly reduces the dimension of the state vector leading to a much more tractable
estimation problem. Note that cq            q                                             q
                                     t and dt are expressed in growth rates, but t and gt are expressed in
levels. Following the idea described in Section C.1.3, we modify the measurement equation loading  and
state vector Xt to equate the observables to our state variables
                                        z1,t +2z1,t-1 +3z1,t-2 +2z1,t-3 +z1,t-4 
                                cq
                             
                                   t                            3
                              dq   t 
                                        z2,t +2z2,t-1 +3z2,t-2 +2z2,t-3 +z2,t-4 
                        ot =  gt   q    = 
                                                                3
                                                      z3,t +z3,t-1 +z3,t-2      
                                                                                .                      (C.7)
                                                                3
                                  t                            z4,t
The most efficient characterization of the state vector is
                      z1,t , z1,t-1 , z1,t-2 , z1,t-3 , z1,t-4 , z2,t , z2,t-1 , z2,t-2 , z2,t-3 , z2,t-4 ,
              xt =                                                                                            .   (C.8)
                               z3,t , z3,t-1 , z3,t-2 , z4,t , w1,t , w2,t , w3,t , w4,t , v1,t , v2,t
The coefficient matrices in (C.1) are adjusted accordingly to match the dimension of (C.8). It is easy to
deduce the form of  from (C.7) and (C.8).

Because of the conditionally linear structure of our state-space form, we can directly apply the Rao-
Blackwellization particle filter as in Schorfheide, Song, and Yaron (2018). The details are omitted for
brevity.



C.2     State-space representation: Extended form

We now introduce an extended state-space representation in which we additionally introduce s factors which
are crucial elements for asset prices. We allow the s factors to depend on the lagged values of z and  factors
to model inter-dependence.


                                                                66
C.2.1        State transition dynamics

    z1,t+1      µ1                  z11             z12        z13        z14            1           0       0       0            0            0         0         zv11           zv12       z1,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    z2,t+1      µ2                  z21             z22        z23        z24            0           1       0       0            0            0         0         zv21           zv22       z2,t    
    z3,t+1      µ3                  z31             z32        z33        z34            0           0       1       0            0            0         0         zv31           zv32       z3,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    z4,t+1      µ4                  z41             z42        z43        z44            0           0       0       1            0            0         0         zv41           zv42       z4,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    w1,t+1       0                   0               0          0          0             0           0       0       0            0            0         0          0              0         w1,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    w2,t+1       0                   0               0          0          0             0           0       0       0            0            0         0          0              0         w2,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    w3,t+1   =   0        +          0               0          0          0             0           0       0       0            0            0         0          0              0         w3,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    w4,t+1       0                   0               0          0          0             0           0       0       0            0            0         0          0              0         w4,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    s1,t+1     µs1                  sz11            sz12       sz13       sz14           0           0       0       0           s11        s12         s13        sv11           sv12       s1,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    s2,t+1
               µ
                                    sz21            sz22       sz23       sz24           0           0       0       0           s21        s22         s23        sv21           sv22       s2,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                 s
               µ 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     

    s3,t+1       s3
                           
                                    sz31            sz32       sz33       sz34           0           0       0       0           s31        s32         s33        sv31           sv32   
                                                                                                                                                                                             s3,t    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    v1,t+1      c
               v1 v1
                                     0               0          0          0             0           0       0       0           0          0           0          v1              0         v1,t    
    v2,t+1     v2 cv2                0               0          0          0             0           0       0       0           0          0           0           0             v2         v2,t


                                            1            0       0         0         0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0
                                                                                                                                                        
                                            0            1       0         0         0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0   
                                            0            0       1         0         0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                            0            0       0         1         0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                           w11          w12     w13       w14        0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                           w21          w22     w23       w24        0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                    +      w31          w32     w33       w34        0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                           w41          w42     w43       w44        0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    0
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                           1            1       1         1          1           1       1       1       1       0     0       1    1
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                           1            1       1         1          1           1       1       1       0       1     0       1    1
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                     
                                           1            1       1         1          1           1       1       1       0       0     1       1    1   
                                                                                                                                                        
                                           0            0       0         0          0           0       0       0       0       0     0       1    0   
                                           0            0       0         0          0           0       0       0       0       0     0       0    1


               11                               0                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             0              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
               21                              22                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             0              0       
               31                              32                                 33                                     0                     01×4          01×3             0              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
               41                              42                                 43                                    44                     01×4          01×3             0              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
               0                                0                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             0              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
               0                                0                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             0              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
×              0                                0                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             0              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
               0                                0                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             0              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  - (11 + 21 + 31 + 41 ) + sz11      - (22 + 32 + 42 ) + sz12             - (33 + 43 ) + sz13                        -44 + sz14                01×4        [s1 , 0, 0]    -1 + sv11      -1 + sv12
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  - (11 + 21 + 31 + 41 ) + sz21      - (22 + 32 + 42 ) + sz22             - (33 + 43 ) + sz23                        -44 + sz24                01×4        [0, s2 , 0]    -1 + sv21      -1 + sv22
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  - ( +  +  +  ) +                   - (22 + 32 + 42 ) + sz32             - (33 + 43 ) + sz33                        -44 + sz34                01×4        [0, 0, s3 ]    -1 + sv31      -1 + sv22   
     11   21   31   41     sz 31                                                                                                                                                                     
               0                                0                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             1              0       
                 0                              0                                 0                                      0                     01×4          01×3             0              1


                                                                                                                                                   1/2 
                          V1,t       0          0        0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                      z1 ,t+1
                                                                                                                                                                              
                           0        V2,t        0        0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                      z2 ,t+1        
                           0         0      V3,t         0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                      z3 ,t+1
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                              
                           0         0       0          V4,t    0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                      z4 ,t+1
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                              
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                        0
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                              
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                        0
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                              
                     ×     0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                        0            ,
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                           
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0               0          0                        0
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                              
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           1       0       0               0          0                      s1 ,t+1
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                              
                       
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       1       0               0          0          
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                               s2 ,t+1        
                                                                                                                                                                              
                       
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       0       1               0          0          
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                               s3 ,t+1        
                                                                                                                                                                              
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0       v1 ,t              0                      v1 ,t+1        
                           0         0       0           0      0     0    0     0           0       0       0       0                 v2 ,t                   v2 ,t+1

for i  {1, 2, 3, 4}, l  {1, 2, 3} and j  {1, 2},
                             Vi,t      =        ai + bi1 v1,t + bi2 v2,t ,                       vj ,t = vj c2
                                                                                                             vj + 2cvj vj vj,t

with zi ,t+1  N (0, 1), sl ,t+1  N (0, 1), and vj ,t+1 being a zero mean unit variance shock.

In vector notations, we      express the state space by
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                  zt+1                 µz            z 4×4                                           I4×4               04×3                zv 4×2   zt
               wt+1                    0        04×4                                                 04×4               04×3                04×2     wt
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                             =                +                                                                                                                                               (C.9)
               st+1                    µs       sz 3×4                                               03×4               s 3×3               sv 3×2   st                          
                  vt+1                v cv            02×4                                           02×4               02×3                v 2×2    vt
                      xt+1                          µ                                                                                                                    xt



                                                                                 67
                                                                                                               
        I4×4         04×4      04×3   04×2           z 4×4                     04×4    04×3         04×2
        w 4×4        04×4      04×3   04×2           04×4                      04×4    04×3         04×2       
      +                                    ×                                                                   
        J3×4         J3×4      I3×3   J3×2   -J3×4 · z 4×4 + sz 3×4            03×4    s 3×3    -J3×2 + sv 3×2 
        02×4         02×4      02×3   I2×2           02×4                      02×4    02×3         I2×2
                         A                                                       B

                                                                           1/2
                                                                                         
                          Vz,t 4×4          04×4        04×3    04×2               z,t+1
                                                                        
                          04×4              04×4        04×3    04×2                0    
                        ×
                          03×4
                                                                                 × s,t+1  .
                                                                                         
                                            03×4        I3×3    03×2    
                         
                           02×4             02×4        02×3    v,t 2×2            v,t+1
                                                   Vt                                  t+1




C.2.2      Measurement equation

Consider various different maturities of the risky Treasury zero-coupon yields (T), interest rate swap premi-
ums (I), CDS premiums (C), and OIS spreads (O). We introduce new notations to relate the observed rates
to our state variables, given our solution coefficients. Define
                                T                  T ~T ~ T                ~T   ~ T ~t )
                               ym,t   =   T (AT                  ~t ) = T (A
                                              m , Bm , Am , Bm , x          m , Bm , x                            (C.10)
                                C                  C ~C ~ C
                               ym,t   =   C (AC
                                              m , Bm , Am , Bm , x
                                                                 ~t )
                                I
                               ym,t   =   I (AI    I   ~I ~ I ~t )
                                              m , Bm , Am , Bm , x
                                O         I   O    O ~O ~ O
                               ym,t   =    (Am , Bm , Am , Bm , x~t )
to match the m-maturity rate of the observable to our state variables x                  ~t . We provide the derivation of
solution coefficients Aj    j   ~j ~ j                                  j
                       m , Bm , Am , Bm and an expression for  (·) in Appendix C for j  {T, I, C, O }. We
select the maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 7y, 10y, and 15y in the estimation, which are collected in
                                   j                             j ~j ~ j
                                                    j (Aj
                                                                                         
                                     y1,t                 1 , B1 , A1 , B1 , x  ~t )
                                   .  
                                   .                               .
                                                                   .
                                                                                         
                                   .  
                                                                   .                     
                                                                                         
                             j     j          j j              j     ~j     ~ j
                            yt =  ym,t  =   (Am , Bm , Am , Bm , x                 ~t )  .                         (C.11)
                                                                                         
                                   .                               .
                                                                                         
                                   .   .                           .
                                                                   .
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                                      j            j    j      j     ~j     ~ j
                                     y15 ,t          ( A15 , B 15 , A 15  , B 15 , ~
                                                                                   x t )
                T    C    I                            O
We consider yt    , yt , yt in the estimation and use yt as out-of-sample validation. We have defined s1,t and
s2,t as observables in the main body of our paper. Define vectors es1 and es2 that select s1,t and s2,t from
x
~t , respectively. Put together,
                                                s1,t            es1
                                                          =           x
                                                                      ~t                                          (C.12)
                                                s2,t            es2
disciplines the dynamics of the s factors. In sum, our state-space representation is comprised of state
transition equations (C.9) and measurement equations (C.11) for j  {T, C, I } and (C.12). There are two
ways in which we can proceed.

    1. A joint estimation of macroeconomic observables and prices:
       We augment our measurement equations with (C.7) and adjust the state transition equation (C.9)
       to deal with mixed-frequency observations as explained in Section C.1.3. While the joint estimation
       approach can be appealing, it is computationally challenging since we have to increase the dimension
       of our state vector substantially. More importantly, because the system no longer preserves the
       conditionally linear structure, e.g., (C.11), we cannot apply the solution proposed by Schorfheide,
       Song, and Yaron (2018), and thus the non-linear filtering algorithm can be highly inefficient.


                                                               68
   2. Two-stage estimation in which macroeconomic observables and prices are separated:
      For this, we treat the filtered estimates of z  ^t and w
                                                             ^t from the first stage estimation, which only involves
      macroeconomic data, as observables for the second stage estimation. Among our state vector x                 ~t , we
      are assuming that zt , wt , s1,t , s2,t are observed factors and treating s3,t , v1,t , v2,t as latent factors. We
      can then partition the state vector into

                                                             xo,
                                                       ~t = (~
                                                       x       t  ~l,
                                                                 ,x t )                                                                              (C.13)

       where the superscript o and l indicate "observed" and "latent" respectively. The non-linearing filtering
       technique only deals with x ~lt in the state transition equation (C.9), since the other variables are
       observed. In this case, the measurement equations are (C.11) for j  {T, C, I } and (C.12).



C.2.3      Particle filter

We use a particle-filter approximation of the likelihood function and embed this approximation into a fairly
standard random walk Metropolis algorithm. In the subsequent exposition, we omit the dependence of all
densities on the parameter vector . In slight abuse of notations, we denote all observables with
                                               C,    T,    I,
                                     yt =     yt  , yt  , yt  , s1,t , s2,t                                                                          (C.14)


                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                       l,(i)     (i)
                                                                  xl
The particle filter approximates the sequence of distributions {p(~           T
                                                                    t |y1:t )}t=1 by a set of pairs x
                                                                                                    ~t                                         , t           ,
                                                                                                                                                       i=1
        l,(i)                             (i)
where  x
       ~t    is the ith particle vector,  t is its weight, and N is the number of particles. As a by-product,
the filter produces a sequence of likelihood approximations p  ^(yt |y1:t-1 ), t = 1, . . . , T .

                                                                      l,(i)
    · Initialization: We generate the particle values x
                                                      ~0                       from the unconditional distribution. We set
       (i)
      0 = 1/N for each i.
                                                                                                        l,(i)                           l,(i)
    · Propagation of particles: We simulate (C.9) forward to generate x         ~t                   ~t-1 and ob-
                                                                                      conditional on x
              o                 l,(i) l,(i)   o                                                             l,(i)
      served x                xt |x
             ~t-1 . We use q (~      ~t-1 , x
                                            ~t-1 , yt ) to represent the distribution from which we draw x ~t .
    · Correction of particle weights: Define the unnormalized particle weights for period t as
                                                                    l,(i)               l,(i)     l,(i)
                                    (i)          (i)       p(yt |x
                                                                 ~t          ~o
                                                                            ,xt )p(~
                                                                                   xt           |x      ~o
                                                                                                 ~t-1 , x t-1 )
                                   ~t     =     t-1 ×                   l,(i)       l,(i)
                                                                                                                      .
                                                                   q (~
                                                                      xt        |x      ~o
                                                                                 ~t-1 , x t-1 , yt )

                                                                                                l,(i)           l,(i) l,(i) o
                    (i)                                                               p(yt |x
                                                                                            ~t          ~o
                                                                                                       ,xt )p(~
                                                                                                              xt     |x
                                                                                                                      ~t-1 ,x ~t-1 )
       The term t-1 is the initial particle weight and the ratio                                     l,(i) l,(i) o                     is the impor-
                                                                                                q (~
                                                                                                   xt     |x~t-1 ,x~t-1 ,yt )
       tance weight of the particle.
       The approximation of the log likelihood function is given by
                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                (i)
                                      ^(yt |y1:t-1 ) = log p
                                  log p                    ^(yt-1 |y1:t-2 ) + log                           ~t            .
                                                                                                     i=1

    · Resampling: Define the normalized weights
                                                                               (i)
                                                         (i)                  ~t
                                                       t       =            N      (j )
                                                                            j =1 ~t
                                                                l,(i)         (i)
       and generate N draws from the distribution {x~ t ,  t }Ni=1 using multinomial resampling. In slight
                                                                                       l,(i)     (i)
       abuse of notation, we denote the resampled particles and their weights also by x
                                                                                      ~t     and t , where
        (i)
       t = 1/N .



                                                               69
