                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE EFFECT OF CHANGES IN THE SKILL PREMIUM ON COLLEGE DEGREE
                  ATTAINMENT AND THE CHOICE OF MAJOR

                                        Ran Abramitzky
                                          Victor Lavy
                                         Maayan Segev

                                      Working Paper 26420
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26420


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We are grateful to Alvaro Calderon, Chris Becker, Giacomo De Giorgi, Jaime Arellano-Bover,
Nicky Irvine Halterman and Tom Zohar for most useful comments. We thank the Central Bureau
of Statistics in Israel and Avi Simchon for allowing restricted access to the data used in this
study. We benefited from comments from participants at Stanford, Tel Aviv University,
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Hebrew University, University of Geneve, and the
Lisbon conference on economics of education, January 2019. Lavy acknowledges financial
support from the European Research Council through ERC Advance Grant 323439. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ran Abramitzky, Victor Lavy, and Maayan Segev. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Changes in the Skill Premium on College Degree Attainment and the Choice
of Major
Ran Abramitzky, Victor Lavy, and Maayan Segev
NBER Working Paper No. 26420
November 2019
JEL No. J01,J16,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the impact of financial incentives on higher education decisions and the choice of
major. We rely on a reform whereby Israeli kibbutzim shifted from their traditional policy of
equal sharing to productivity-based wages. We use for identification the staggered
implementation of this reform in different kibbutzim. In this setting of very low initial returns to
education, we find that the dramatic increase in the rate of return and its sharp variation across
fields of study led to a large increase in the probability of receiving a Bachelor degree, especially
in STEM fields of study that are expected to yield higher financial returns. For men this increase
was largely in computer science and engineering, and for women in biology, chemistry and
computer science. Our findings suggest that investment in higher education and the choice of
major are responsive to increases in the return to education for both men and women.


Ran Abramitzky                                    Maayan Segev
Department of Economics                           Hebrew University
Stanford University                               Department of Economics
579 Jane Stanford Way                             Jerusalem Israel, Sele 93704
Stanford, CA 94305                                Israel
and NBER                                          maayan.segev@mail.huji.ac.il
ranabr@stanford.edu

Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26420
1.        Introduction
According to economic models of optimal human capital investment (Becker, 1964;
Ben-Porath, 1967; Weiss, 1995), higher rate of return to education would lead to higher
investment in education. However, two sets of recent studies yield evidence that is not
consistent with this prediction. First, the dramatic increase in the earnings premium
for skilled labor that took place over recent decades (Heckman et al., 2008) did not
seem to induce Americans to acquire significantly greater skills (Altonji et al., 2012;
Eberly and Athreya, 2019; Turner, 2004). Second, while descriptive studies (Long
et al., 2015; Montmarquette et al., 2002) found positive elasticities of choice of major
with respect to expected earnings,1 recent studies suggest no causal response in the
choice of major to variation in returns across field of study (Beffy et al., 2012; Wiswall
and Zafar, 2015).2     3


       In this paper, we examine the effect of changes in the rate of return to education on
college degree attainment and on field of study choice by exploiting a unique episode.
Starting the late 1990s, kibbutzim (plural of kibbutz) egalitarian communities in Israel
shifted away from their decades-long policy of equal sharing of incomes to productivity-
based wages that reflect the market rate of return. The pay reform in kibbutzim
   1
      See Altonji et al. (2016), for an extensive survey of studies on the relationship between the rate
of return to schooling and the choice of field of study.
    2
      For example, Wiswall and Zafar (2015) based on lab experimental variation in information about
the returns to schooling, and Beffy et al. (2012) based on variation in the returns to schooling induced
by business cycle fluctuations, find that variation in the return to schooling plays a small role in the
choice of field of study in university. This evidence could suggest that the elasticity of demand for
schooling with respect to the skill premium is small (Altonji and Zimmerman, 2017; Heckman and
LaFontaine, 2010).
    3
      There is also an extensive literature, past and more recent, that focuses on the role of perceived
financial and non-financial returns on college enrollment decisions. These studies often use surveys
to elicit students' beliefs about the benefits of university education and about intention to engage in
university schooling. For example, Boneva and Rauh (2017) finds based on a sample of secondary
school students that perceived pecuniary and non-pecuniary benefits explain a large share of the
variation in intentions to enroll in university education. The perceived non-pecuniary factors have
a larger effect than pecuniary returns, in particular expected job satisfaction, parental approval,
and perceptions about social life after secondary school are most important. Other recent examples
include Arcidiacono et al. (2012), Manski (2004) and Zafar (2013). Providing evidence from another
context, Delavande and Zafar (2019) investigate the determinants of students' university choice in
Pakistan, with a focus on monetary returns, nonpecuniary factors enjoyed at school, and financial
constraints. They estimate a life-cycle model of students' university choice and find that expected
earnings play a small (though statistically significant) role. Instead, nonpecuniary outcomes, such as
the school's ideology, are the major determinants.


                                                   1
increased the average financial return to education from close to zero to about 8% per
year of schooling on average, as well as the relative returns to schooling across majors.
Our setting is unique because the pay reform introduced for the first time financial
considerations to the choice of field of study. Before the reform, all college majors had
the same (zero) monetary return given the equal sharing practice in kibbutzim. After
the reform, college majors have heterogeneous returns, with majors such as STEM
yielding higher return than humanities, as in the rest of Israel. Overall, this unique
episode allows us to study the education decisions in reality setting of low financial
incentives.
   Our setting and research design also shed light on the broader debate over the ad-
vantages and disadvantages of more egalitarian vs. capitalist systems (see Abramitzky,
2018, for discussion of this debate and the kibbutzim as important social experiments
in voluntary socialism). We study here one potential disadvantage of egalitarian so-
cieties, namely that they offer low returns to schooling and may discourage academic
achievement. Specifically, our setting allows us to study young adults who grew up
in a more egalitarian society than the US, and who suddenly faced an increase in the
financial returns to schooling in their 20's. This setting also allows us to study how
women who grew up in an egalitarian environment respond to changes in the returns
to schooling, and whether their responses differ from those of men.
   We use newly-available administrative data from Israel's Central Bureau of Eco-
nomics Research on the field of study of adult kibbutz members to test how this pay
reform influenced kibbutz members' college attainment and the choice of major during
college. Kibbutzim that did not reform are not a plausible control group for kibbutzim
that did because they tended to be financially stronger. Instead, we use kibbutzim
that reformed later as a control group for kibbutzim that reformed earlier. The timing
of the reform was not related to the economic and financial strength of the kibbutz in
years prior to the reforms. We use difference-in-differences approaches, comparing the
field of study of adult kibbutz members in kibbutzim that implemented the pay reform
early to adults in kibbutzim that reformed at a later date, before and after the early
reforms. We show evidence that these two groups (the treatment and control group)
were indistinguishable in both their observable background characteristics and their

                                           2
pre-reform academic outcomes. A similar identification strategy used by Abramitzky
and Lavy (2014) showed that the increase in the returns to schooling induced high
school students to improve their high school and matriculation achievements.
   Unlike in the abovementioned evidence from the US and elsewhere, in the kibbutz
context of low initial returns we find that young adults respond to the change in re-
turns to schooling by increasing their rate of BA degree attainment and by choosing
fields of studies in college and university that are expected to yield higher financial
returns, mainly STEM subjects. As expected, these effects are most evident for in-
dividuals who had the pre-determined pre-requisite high school achievements. Men
increase their academic degrees in engineering, physics, and computer science. Women
also respond to the changes in returns, both by selecting fields that are traditionally
dominated by women such as biology and by choosing fields that are commonly per-
ceived to be attended by men such as computer science. This finding that women are
also responsive to changes in returns is in contrast to recent studies that show low
responsiveness by females to the increase in the relative market prices of majors with
high returns to skills during the 80's (Gemici and Wiswall, 2014; Zafar, 2013). In the
context of young adults who grew up in egalitarian communities, we show that before
the pay reform men and women kibbutz members chose majors with lower return
relative to others in Israel, and that after the reform they closed much of this gap.
   Our findings are robust to using alternative identification strategies. For example,
we use an alternative non-kibbutz control group based on the population of young
adults in Tel-Aviv, perhaps the most competitive labor market in the country with a
concentration of highly skilled workers. We get similar results in this different natural
experiment even though this control group had much better pre-reform outcomes.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly presents the back-
ground of the kibbutzim, their traditional lifestyle, the causes of privatization and
the structure of the pay reform and of the Israeli higher education system. Section 3
describes the data and restrictions we impose to define the study sample. Section 4
presents the empirical framework and identification strategy. Section 5 presents pre-
liminary graphical results comparing the outcomes of kibbutzim that reformed early
with kibbutzim that reformed late. Section 6 presents the results on the effect of the

                                           3
reform on college attainment and choice of major, as well as placebo estimates, and
Section 7 concludes.



2.        Background

2.1       The Kibbutz, the Pay Reform and its Impact on the Re-
          turn to Education
The traditional kibbutzim are collective communities in Israel that have provided their
members with a high degree of income equality for almost a century. Today, there
are around 120,000 kibbutz members, and they account for about 2.5% of the Jewish
population in Israel. Traditionally, all kibbutzim were based on equal wages for all
their members, regardless of their economic or other contribution to the community.
For an overview of the history and economics of kibbutzim, see Abramitzky (2018).4
Unlike members of many other communally based living arrangements, kibbutz mem-
bers were never at the margin of society. They have always interacted with the rest of
the population and played an important role in Israeli society. This lies in contrast to
many other communes, whose members have often been more marginal and isolated
from the outside world.
       Kibbutz members who held a job outside the kibbutz shared their salaries equally
with other members. This meant that the monetary return to schooling in the kibbutz
was very low, close to zero.5 In this paper, we study a pay reform that kibbutzim
adopted beginning in the late 1990s, moving from pay based on equal sharing to
`market based' differential wages. In this new system, compensation was based on
members' productivity. These pay reforms were a response to a major financial crisis
in the late 1980s.6 Kibbutzim, like many other businesses in Israel, found themselves
   4
     See also Abramitzky (2011, 2008); Near (1997, 1992).
   5
     Under the kibbutz system where members earned the same salary regardless of their education
level, economic theory would predict that individuals will under invest in education. In the context
of kibbutzim, it was noted that kibbutz-raised children often lacked ambition and a sense of personal
achievement (Bettelheim, 1969; Gavron, 2000).
   6
     Beyond the financial crisis, a decline in the world price of cotton, a major source of income for
kibbutzim, was another blow. The capital-intensive nature of kibbutz agriculture meant the high
interest rates now required to borrow and invest in capital equipment were even more damaging.


                                                  4
with huge debts they could not repay.7 Even though some of the loans were rescheduled
or erased, living conditions still fell substantially in many kibbutzim, leading to higher
exit rate during the late 1980s and early 1990s, and to a discussion about major reforms
of traditional kibbutz life style and ideology.
    Kibbutzim started to shift away from equal sharing for the first time in their
history. Kibbutzim that were hit less by the crisis and remained richer were much
more likely to maintain equal sharing (Abramitzky, 2018, 2008). For that reason, we
do not use kibbutzim that did not reform as a control group for kibbutzim that did.
Instead, we use kibbutzim that reformed later as a control group for kibbutzim that
reformed earlier. We find that the timing of the reform was not related to the economic
and financial strength of the kibbutz in years prior to the reforms. This is additional
important evidence that the timing of the pay change was not endogenously related
to factors that affect or are related to schooling decisions of kibbutz members.8 The
similarity we later demonstrate between the characteristics and pre-reform outcomes
in these two groups is not surprising given that the timing of the pay reform was
mostly determined by non-confounding factors such as the age distribution of kibbutz
members, the leadership skills, and how long it took the kibbutz to reach a consensus
for the reform (that required a super majority).
Kibbutzim were not alone in this. Many Israeli businesses went bankrupt, and the cooperative
moshav villages were severely impacted as well. Kibbutzim were also hit by the fallout from the
financial crisis in other sectors of the economy. The shares of the major Israeli banks crashed, and
kibbutzim that had invested in them faced large losses.
   7
     In the decade before the financial crisis, kibbutzim borrowed on a large scale. They found it easy
to raise capital by obtaining high-interest loans, which remained cheap to repay given inflation was
running as high as 400 percent per annum. They borrowed to expand their industries; they borrowed
to enlarge members' rooms and facilitate the move of children back into their parents' homes; they
borrowed to improve their dining halls, swimming pools, and theaters. However, eventually the Israeli
government decided to take action to slow the rampant inflation. It put in place a comprehensive
stabilization program, which succeeded in bringing inflation under control. This made the high
nominal interest rates faced by kibbutzim high in real terms too, and left many kibbutzim, like many
other businesses in Israel, overwhelmed by debt.
   8
     We ran a regression where the dependent variable is an indicator of early (=1) versus late
(=0) reform against an index of the economic strength of the kibbutz in 1995, while controlling
for the kibbutz characteristics (age, size, average household size, all measured pre-reform). The
parameter estimate on economic strength of the kibbutz is 0.127 (se=0.104), indicating no meaningful
or statistically significant correlation between these two variables. Data limitation permitted using
a sample of 44 out of 62 kibbutzim that reformed early or late. However, we find the missing data is
not selective with respect to the timing of reform; the regression coefficient of missing data indicator
on time of reform is -0.062 (0.115).


                                                   5
      Kibbutzim began encouraging members to seek high-paying jobs outside the kib-
butz and to establish small businesses within the kibbutz. Outsiders were hired to
replace the kibbutz workers in the less-skilled work they had left. To be sure, since the
1960s the kibbutz had tolerated some kibbutz members who were professionals such as
teachers, doctors, professors, painters, and designers working outside the kibbutz, but
"until now [the late 1990s] it had been seen as a deviation from the norm, tolerated
in order to ensure the self-fulfillment and happiness of the individual or the welfare
of the neighboring town" (Near, 1997, p. 353). In the period we study, about 25% of
kibbutz members worked outside their kibbutz.
      In reformed kibbutzim, members' wages reflected market wages. For members
who held jobs outside their kibbutzim, their wages was simply the wage they received
from their employers. For those who worked inside the kibbutz, market wages were
calculated based on the wages of non-kibbutz workers in similar occupations and with
similar education, skill, and experience.
      Each kibbutz member paid a `tax' that was deducted from her gross wages. These
funds were used to maintained a safety net that supported older members and those
with very low wage (i.e. a minimum wage). In practice, this meant that a member
whose earnings were above the safety net amount would pay a "community tax" for the
communal services she received and for the mutual aid and assistance. The member
would keep the rest of her earnings for herself and her family. An important point to
emphasize is that throughout the period we study, from late 1990's to date, adults in
kibbutzim made free educational choices.
      Abramitzky and Lavy (2014) show that the move from equal wages to differen-
tial pay signaled strongly to members in kibbutzim an increase in the monetary rate
of return to schooling by introducing productivity-related wage differences within a
kibbutz for the first time. The change was from a near zero rate of return to a post-
reform return similar to the rest of Israel, which is estimated by various studies at
about 8% per year of schooling (Frish, 2007). However, we are aware of the possibility
that the return to schooling increased by less than 8% per year of schooling for several
reasons. First, monetary rewards are not the only reason people acquire education.9
  9
      See Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011) for a recent paper that makes this point convincingly.


                                                  6
Nonmonetary incentives such as prestige and care about the collective likely encour-
aged kibbutz members to pursue education in the pre-reform period. Peer pressure
and collective bargaining over responsibilities within the community may also have
played a role. Second, the option to leave the kibbutz at any time meant that the
pre-reform return to education was higher than zero, and some members might have
acquired education to improve their wages upon exit or leverage that for (potentially
non-monetary) benefits within the kibbutz.10
       We find that, once the reform took place, there are no differences in the return
to schooling for kibbutz members (who worked outside the kibbutz) and non-kibbutz
members (see Table A1 for Mincerian earning regressions for the year 2010 for reformed
kibbutzim).11 For example, the return to a BA degree over high school dropout is 52
percent for non-kibbutz labor market participants and 55 percent for kibbutz members
who work outside the kibbutz. This pattern holds for both men and women.
       Abramitzky and Lavy (2014) also show that the pay reform was highly salient
to members as it has been the most discussed topic in kibbutzim since its start,
being hotly debated and voted on by members in kibbutzim. Upon implementation,
kibbutz members received detailed information about the new sharing rule and about
the link between earnings and productivity and the role played in this regard by
market forces. Booklets elaborating on the reforms were distributed to all members.
Kibbutzim emphasized that each member was responsible for his own livelihood and
the livelihood of his family. Another way to view the pay reform is through the lens
of taxation, as it essentially reduced the income tax rate in kibbutzim from 100% to
similar tax rates in Israel.
  10
     However, it is important to note that kibbutzim developed various mechanisms that limited the
attractiveness of the exit option. For example, bequests were not allowed, and members could not
take their share of the assets of the kibbutz with them. Moreover, Abramitzky and Lavy (2014) show
that exit rates during the period we study were relatively low and nearly identical in kibbutzim that
reformed early and late.
  11
     Our paper estimates the effect of the pay reform on expected and not actual earnings because the
latter is not available in the administrative data we use in the protected lab. In fact, the Israeli Tax
Authority that provides the earnings data does not have earnings information on kibbutz members
who work inside the kibbutz because the kibbutz pays taxes as an aggregate economic unit based on
the sum of income of all its members and therefore it does not report to the tax authority individual
level income. However, over a quarter of kibbutz members work outside the kibbutz and their
employer does report to the tax authority their incomes and therefore they appear in our data.



                                                   7
2.2       The Higher Education System in Israel
In Israel, most students begin their academic studies between the ages of 21 and 24,
because of 2-3 years of compulsory military service after high school. The higher
education system in Israel includes nine research universities that confer bachelor,
master and doctoral degrees in all field of studies (one of them confers only graduate
and PhD degrees), and 62 colleges that grant only bachelor degrees (some of these
also give master degrees).12 These colleges are similar to four-year community colleges.
All the universities and most the colleges are publicly founded, Bachelor degree cost
approximately 3,500-4,500 US$ per year (10%-15% of the average annual wage). The
research universities have higher admission requirements than colleges, in terms of
both Israeli matriculation exams-bagrut diploma and psychometric (similar to the
SAT) admission test. In order to receive a completed bagrut, it is necessary to pass a
series of national exams. These exams cover core and elective subjects. Most academic
colleges also require a bagrut, though some look at specific bagrut diploma components
without requiring full certification. For a given field of study, it is typically more
difficult to be admitted to a university than to a college.



3.        Data
Our datasets are derived from the Ministry of the Interior population registry and
are made available to us at a protected research lab at the Israeli Central Bureau of
Statistics (CBS). These datasets contain an individual identifier, gender, date of birth,
number of siblings, country of birth, parent's country of birth, and year of immigration
(if relevant).
       We merge this data with information from several additional administrative data
sources. First are the 1995 and 2008 censuses, from which we obtain the information on
current residence that allows us to identify those who lived in kibbutzim at the relevant
years. Data from the Ministry of Education provides us with student-level information
on parental schooling, ethnicity and country of birth, as well as information on high
  12
   A 1991 reform sharply increased the supply of postsecondary schooling in Israel by creating
publicly funded regional and professional colleges.


                                              8
school attendance, year of graduation, years of schooling, matriculation eligibility and
matriculation exams test scores. The high school data is available only for cohorts
that graduated high school from 1995 onwards. From the National Council for Higher
Education, we obtained administrative data files containing information about all
individuals that obtained a BA or higher academic degree from any post-secondary
institution in the country, including the institution, field of study (one or two majors)
and year of graduation. This data is available for all cohorts that we examine in this
study. The Institution for the Research of the Kibbutz and the Cooperative Idea,
University of Haifa, publishes reports about the dates in which the pay reform started
in each kibbutz. This data was also used in Abramitzky and Lavy (2014) and it allows
us to sort the kibbutzim into early and late reformers.
       Our sample includes 32 kibbutzim that reformed early, in 1998, 1999, and 29 that
reformed later, in 2004, 2005. All members of these kibbutzim that were age 22-27 in
1995, 1996 (pre-reform) or in 2001, 2002 (post-reform) form our first sample. We will
explain in the empirical strategy section the rationale for these sample selection rules.
       We focus our analysis on two college related outcomes: obtaining a B.A. diploma
and the field of study. Based on CBS categorization of field of study, we group the BA
degrees to humanities, social sciences, and sciences. This division is our main focus on
assessing the effect of the return to schooling on the choice of field of study. However,
we also look into a more detailed classification of field of study within these categories.
In particular, in social science we examine whether there was a stronger effect on
higher-return fields such as economics, business, and law, and in sciences we estimated
specific treatment effects on the following aggregates: (1) biology, chemistry, pre-
health sciences, (2) STEM (math, engineering, physics, computer science, statistics),
(3) computer science (as its own category) (4) engineering. These more detailed
definitions of fields of study are particularly interesting for the discussion of results by
gender.
       We also make use of data that we obtained from the office of the Chief Economist
in the Israeli Ministry of Finance that rank all field of study by expected average
earnings in the labor market for BA holders.13 These means are computed based on
  13
       The ranking is based on unconditional mean earnings across majors without any controls for


                                                 9
the population of employees in Israel in 2013. We use this ranking as an alternative
dependent variable (to the division of degrees to the categories described in the pre-
vious paragraph), which allows us to examine whether the pay reform induced young
adults in kibbutzim to choose majors with higher wages.14



4.      Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy takes advantage of the staggered implementation of the reforms
in different kibbutzim. We choose the kibbutzim that implemented the pay reform in
1998, 1999 as the treatment group and the kibbutzim that adopted it in 2004, 2005
as the control group. To estimate the effect of the pay reform on university schooling
attainment and the choice of field of study, we compare the treatment group to the
control group, before and after the early reform (but before the late reform). We
cannot rule out anticipation of a reform in kibbutzim that reformed later. However,
anticipation effects would attenuate our results, because it would imply that students
in the control group perceived some possible increase in the returns to education as
well and increased their investment in schooling accordingly.
     Our sample includes individuals aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002 (affected cohort) and in
1995, 1996 (unaffected cohort), who lived in a kibbutz before the reform. We follow
each cohort for 4 years. The rationale for these samples is that 22-32 is the age range
where the majority of Israeli earns their BA degree (which typically takes three years).
Indeed, Figure 1 suggests that only about 10% manage to earn a BA degree before the
age of 24, and only about 10-15% earn their BA degree after the age of 32. Figure 2
illustrates the timeline of the early and late reforms, and of the affected and unaffected
cohorts.
     Using the pre-reform and post-reform cohorts, we implement a difference-in-differences
methodology. As the first difference (`after' treatment), we compare individuals aged
differences in observables.
   14
      Data from the Israel Tax Authority includes yearly payroll data and the number of months
worked during the relevant year. Unfortunately, this information cannot be used to evaluate the
effect of the reform on the wages since the salary is the same for all members of a kibbutz before the
reform, while after the pay reform, the report from the Israel Tax Authority includes earnings data
only for members of kibbutzim that are employed outside the kibbutz.


                                                 10
22-27 in 2001, 2002 in kibbutzim that reform early (1998, 1999) vs. late (2003, 2004).
As the second difference (`before' treatment), we compare individuals aged 22-27 in
1995, 1996 in kibbutzim that reform early vs. late.
   We estimate the following regression equation:


 Yikc = c + 1 (EarlyRef ormk ) + 2 (Af f ectedCohortc XEarlyRef ormk ) +              ikc   (1)


where Yikc is the BA degree attainment of student i in kibbutz k in cohort c. c
are cohort fixed effects (for individuals age 22-27 in 1995, 1996, and 2001, 2002).
(EarlyRef ormk ) denotes a kibbutz that implemented the reform early, and the in-
teraction of interest (Af f ectedCohortc XEarlyRef ormk ) is whether the individuals
belonged to the affected (younger) cohort and were members of a kibbutz that re-
formed early. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the kibbutz level..
   We also run "controlled" specifications where we add kibbutz fixed effects and
a vector of the individual's background characteristics. We therefore estimate the
following model:


       Yikc = k + c + 1 (Af f ectedCohortc XEarlyRef ormk ) + 2 Xikc +          ikc         (2)


where k are kibbutz fixed effects, c are cohort fixed effects, and Xikc are individual i's
characteristics including gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic dummies (originate
from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, the former Soviet Union (FSU), Ethiopia and
other countries). All other variables are same as in equation (1).
   The identifying assumption in the difference-in-differences strategy is that the exact
timing of the reform is unrelated to potential of academic outcomes. This assumption
implies that older cohorts of early and late reformed kibbutzim should have had simi-
lar average college/university schooling outcomes. Since the early pay reforms were in
1998, for all individuals who completed their military service and are in their 20's, the
exposure is a decreasing function of their date of birth. Particularly, all individuals
age 30 years or older were less likely to be affected by the reforms because they have
fewer years left to benefit from this investment once the pay reforms began. Hence,



                                           11
the effect of the pay reform should be closer to 0 for cohorts that are 30 years or older
around the date of the reform and increasing for younger cohorts. The appendix in-
cludes estimation results from a sample that includes somewhat older cohorts, but for
the practical reasons discussed earlier, we cannot include much older cohorts. There-
fore, the identification strategy is based on a comparison of college outcomes between
potentially affected and unaffected age groups (several cohorts) from kibbutzim that
reformed early and a comparison from respective groups in kibbutzim that reformed
late. These comparisons yield a difference in differences estimate can be interpreted
as the causal effect of the reform, under the assumption that in the absence of the
reform, the increase in college schooling would not have been systematically different
for individuals from early- and late-reforming kibbutzim. We provide three related
pieces of evidence in support of this assumption.
   First, we show that individuals in the treatment and control groups are similar
in terms of both their mean background characteristics and their pre-reform mean
college schooling outcomes. Here we test directly whether the individuals in the treat-
ment and control groups are statistically indistinguishable in terms of their observed
characteristics. To address this issue, we check whether the treatment status (early
reformed kibbutzim) is correlated with individuals' pre-determined variables such as
age and ethnicity. We perform these tests for pre-reform cohorts (individuals aged
22-27 in 1995, 1996) and for the post-reform cohorts (individuals age 22-27 in 2001,
2002). We look at post-reform cohorts here just to show that the types of people
in early- and late- reformed kibbutzim look similar even after the early reform. For
the pre-reform cohorts, we also check whether their college attainment outcomes are
similar.
   Table 1 provides evidence on the balancing tests and presents the mean individual
characteristics for the pre and post samples, by treatment status. Columns 1, 2 and 3
present pre-reform means of the treatment and control groups and the difference be-
tween them respectively. Columns 5, 6 and 7 present post-reform means of treatment
and control group and the difference between them respectively.
   Student background characteristics are similar in the treatment and control groups,
both for pre and post cohorts. For example, focusing first on the pre-reform cohorts,

                                           12
we see that number of siblings are very similar in control and treatment, with 2.7
children per family. The differences in number of siblings presented in column 3
are -0.002 (p-val=0.983) and the respective difference for the post reform cohorts
presented in column 7 are 0.034 (p-val=0.736). Note that these differences are not
statistically different from zero and they are very small relative to the respective means.
The differences in proportion ethnicity Africa/Asia and ethnicity Europe/America
are very small, -0.001 (p-val=0.972) and 0.016 (p-val=0.689) respectively; in the post
period they are -0.014 (p-val=0.436) and 0.049 (p-val=0.102) respectively. The similar
proportion of these two important ethnic groups in the treatment and control groups
suggest that students in the two groups had similar academic potential, both before
and after the pay reform, because these two characteristics are strong predictors of
socio-economic status. Similarly, small and non-significant differences are also seen
in all the other background characteristics. We therefore view the results presented
in Table 1 as an indication of good balancing, meaning that, within cohorts, the
treatment and control group are indistinguishable in their observables.
   While Table 1 looks at pre-determined variables, Table 2 provides a first look at
how the reforms changed the outcomes. This table shows that among pre-reform
cohorts, there is no significant difference in the proportion of BA degree attainment
between early- and late-reformed kibbutzim. There are also no significant differences
between the two groups in the proportion of BA degrees by field (humanities, social
science and science studies). These suggest similarities between the early- and late-
reformed kibbutzim in their pre-reform outcomes, suggesting that kibbutzim that
reformed late are a compelling control group for kibbutzim that reformed early. The
last four columns Table 2 show post-reform outcomes, and thus already show results
rather than balancing. Overall, Table 1 and Table 2 shows that while the pre- and post-
reform cohorts have similar characteristics and similar pre-reform outcomes, after the
reform there is an increase in BA attainment, especially in the sciences, by members
of early-reformed kibbutzim.
   Next, we show in Table 3 that early- and late-reform kibbutzim were on the same
time trend of educational college outcomes. The unit of observation in this analysis is a
kibbutz-year. In Panel A, we estimate a linear time trend model, testing whether there

                                            13
is an interaction of the linear trend with being an early reformed kibbutz (treatment).
In Panel B, we estimate a model with a series of cohort dummies and include in the
regression an interaction of each of these cohort dummies with the treatment indicator.
The table suggests a secular positive time trend attainment of BA degrees, with a slope
of 0.003 that is significant in both models. This positive trend is seen also in Figure 3,
which suggests that the trend was positive. However, the interaction term between the
trend slope and the treatment status (panel A) is small and not significantly different
from zero, suggesting that the control and treatment groups were on the same time
trend before the pay reform was implemented. The estimates from the specification
that replaces the linear time trend with year dummies, presented in panel B, lead to
the same conclusion of no pre-reform time trends.



5.      Preliminary Results: Graphical Representation
        of the Evidence
Figure 4, 5 and 6 illustrate the main finding of the paper that the pay reform affected
BA degree attainment. Figure 4 shows the proportion of individuals aged 22-27 who
received a BA degree for two samples: kibbutzim that reformed early, and kibbutzim
that reformed late. The means for these samples are presented for 1990, 1995, 2001
and 2007. Comparing first early and late reform kibbutzim before the pay reform took
place, the rates of receiving a BA degree in 1990 and 1995 are similar. By 2001, the
pay reform took place in the early-reformed kibbutzim group. Consistent with the
increase in the return to schooling, by 2001 early-reformed kibbutzim opened a gap
of 4 percentage points in BA degree attainment. This gap is eliminated in 2007, once
the reform also took place in late reformed kibbutzim.
     Figure 5 and Figure 6 further investigate these results, by providing a graphical
representation of the estimates of the leads and lags of the impact of the pay reform
obtained via the estimation of the mean differences in proportion receiving a BA
degree (Figure 5) and the earnings (Figure 6) between kibbutzim that reformed early
(treatment group) and late (control group). The first red vertical line denotes the


                                           14
time of the early reform and the second red line denotes the time of the late reform.
The horizontal axis measures the years since the early reform. None of the coefficients
in the years leading to the reform are significant, suggesting that the evolution of
BA attainment and earnings were similar before the early implementation of the pay
reform. Following the early reform, individuals in early-reformed kibbutzim open a
gap relative to individuals in late-reformed kibbutzim, and this gap disappears after
late reform.



6.      Results

6.1     Pre and Post Cross Section Regressions
Table 4 shows that the pay reform induced kibbutz members to obtain more BA
degrees, mainly in fields with higher expected earnings. Panel A report treatment-
control differences in outcomes before and after the reform. The estimates from the
pre-reform cross section regression show no difference in BA degree attainment be-
tween individuals in early- and late-reformed kibbutzim (this difference is -0.005 with
standard error 0.011). Notably, there is no significant difference between individuals
in early- and late-reformed kibbutzim in any field of study: namely -0.005 (se=0.005)
in humanities, 0.006 (se=0.007) in social sciences, and -0.007 (se=0.007) in sciences.
Within these fields, there are no significant differences across subfields (for example,
0.000 (se=0.003) in computer science and -0.002 (se=0.004) in engineering).
     In contrast, the post-reform cross section regression estimates show significant
improvements in outcomes of individuals in early-reformed kibbutzim relative to those
in late-reformed kibbutzim. Individuals from kibbutzim that reformed early had a
higher overall BA attainment (difference of 0.029 with a standard error of 0.011),
and opened a significant gap in sciences (estimate of 0.031 (se=0.007)). Each of the
sub-fields in sciences experienced a statistically significant expansion, for example, in
computer science 0.014 (se=0.003) and in engineering 0.007 (se=0.004). In humanities
and social sciences, in contrast, there remained no difference between early and late-
reformed kibbutzim (-0.001 (se=0.005) in humanities and -0.002 (se=0.007) in social


                                           15
sciences).


6.2    Simple and Controlled Difference-in-Differences (DID)
       Regressions
Panel B of Table 4 presents simple and controlled difference-in-differences estimates.
We find a positive effect of the pay reform on BA degree completion, especially in
STEM subjects. Focusing on the controlled difference-in-differences estimation, the
first column shows that the BA degree completion rate is up by 3.3 percentage points
(se=0.016). Given that the post-reform control mean was 0.082, the pay reform in-
creases the BA degree completion rate by 40%. Column 2 shows that there is no
effect in humanity majors and column 3 shows a very small and insignificant decrease
of 0.9 percentage points (coefficient= -0.009, se=0.010) in social sciences majors. Col-
umn 5 shows that the BA degree completion rate in sciences is up by 3.8 percentage
points (se=0.010), from a post-reform control mean of 0.022, meaning the increase in
BA degree completion is driven by the sciences. The difference-in-differences treat-
ment estimates within sciences suggest that the effect is present in a wide range of
subjects, including biology and chemistry, computer science and engineering. Figure
7 presents the difference-in-differences estimates and confidence intervals by field of
study, illustrating the effect on Science/STEM subjects and the lack of effect on other
majors.
   Our finding of over 3 percent expansion in BA degree certification, mostly in STEM
subjects, seems to mostly reflect an expansion at the extensive margin, though there
could be intensive margin substitution at play as well. People who would otherwise
have no BA might now complete a BA degree in STEM subjects, a pure extensive
margin expansion. But another feasible scenario is that some have moved from no BA
certification to BA certification in non-STEM subjects in parallel to people switching
from BA in non-STEM to BA in STEM. A third possibility is a combination of the
two above scenarios. We cannot distinguish clearly between these three possibilities.
However, our findings (reported below) show that most of the effect is derived from
those with a math prerequisite, suggesting that the first scenario is the most consistent


                                           16
with our findings.
   The positive and significant treatment effect estimates are similar in the simple
and controlled DID, which is a result of the treatment-control similarity in background
characteristics and pre-reform outcomes. Indeed, the estimates from the cross-section
treatment-control comparison from the period after the early reform, presented in the
previous section, are similar to the DID estimates.


6.3    Treatment Effect Estimates by Gender
In Table 5, we present results by gender. Looking at evidence separately for men and
women is important for several reasons. First, there is a large gender gap in earnings,
and we can examine how this earning inequality is related to differential responses by
gender to changes in the financial return to schooling. Secondly, there is a growing
literature suggesting that women shy away or are deterred from occupations that
are traditionally dominated by men, such as STEM fields (Arcidiacono et al., 2012;
Bronson, 2015; Gemici and Wiswall, 2014; Kugler et al., 2017).
   Examining differences by gender in kibbutzim is especially interesting. Gender
equality has always been an important principle in kibbutzim. For example, the
traditional communal sleeping arrangement in kibbutzim, whereby children lived in
special residences outside of their parents' homes, at least in principle, promoted
gender equality by freeing women from their traditional role in society of raising the
children. At the outset of kibbutzim, women were often a small minority, responsible
for child care, and generally employed in traditional "women's jobs" in services rather
than in agriculture. However, they strove for gender equality and established early
on their right to work in agricultural and defense jobs, and kibbutzim established
communal responsibility for child care. In light of this strive of kibbutzim for gender
equality, we might expect women in kibbutzim to be as responsive to the changes in
financial returns to schooling.
   Gender equality in kibbutzim was more important in theory than in practice,
however, and the nannies in kibbutzim were all women. Similarly, other occupations
in kibbutzim followed the stereotypical gender divide: women were more often in


                                          17
charge of cooking, doing the laundry, and educating the children; and men worked in
the fields and were in charge of the economy. Women were also underrepresented in
kibbutz leadership, and they tended to be quieter in general meetings. In this sense,
lingering gender roles in the kibbutz might reduce women's responsiveness to financial
returns to schooling.
       Overall, the evidence in Table 5 shows that women, not just men, are highly
responsive to changes in financial returns to schooling, with some gender differences
across field of study choice.15 The estimated effect on BA attainment is 0.033 for men
and 0.034 for women. The gain for men is against a control mean of 0.039 in the
post-reform cohorts, and for women it is against a mean of 0.132 in the post-reform
cohort. Therefore, the treatment effect is proportionally much larger for men (more
than doubling the rate) than for women (a 26 percent increase). The gain among
men is mostly in science (0.024), mostly in STEM, with a small but statistically
insignificant increase in humanities (and no change in social sciences). For women the
pattern is somewhat different: there is a 0.055 increase in science majors coupled with
a decrease of 0.020 in social science, mainly in economics and law (and no change in
humanities). Within science majors, the increase is concentrated in biology, chemistry
and pre-medical studies, but it is also evident in expansion in STEM subjects, mainly
computer science. There is no effect in engineering. Women respond to the pay reform
beyond simply expanding university schooling at the extensive margin. Instead, they
increase their choice of some subjects (those subjects we show below to be more
financially rewarding) at the expense of field of studies with lower monetary rate of
return. The attendance effects are larger for men but the choice-of-major effects are
larger for women Figure 8 provides a graphical representation of treatment-control
differences by fields of study, pre- and post-reform. It is interesting to note that an
earlier paper Abramitzky and Lavy (2014) found that, during high school, female
kibbutz students were not very responsive to the reform. In contrast, here we find
that young adult women were highly responsive to the increase in financial returns to
schooling.
  15
    We note that the treatment-control samples by gender are also well balanced in terms of back-
ground characteristics and, for the pre-treatment cohort, also in terms of outcomes. These balancing
tables are presented in online appendix Table A2.


                                                18
6.4       Treatment Effect Estimates on Expected Wages
We next map fields of studies into expected earnings and show a positive effect of the
reform on majors with higher expected earnings.16               17


       Table 6 shows that the effect of the pay reform is skewed towards BA degrees in
fields with higher expected earnings. We define three different measures of expected
wages. The first is actual expected wages in Israeli Shekels, the second is a dummy
indicator for fields of study with above 75th percentile wages and the third a dummy
indicator for fields of study with above median wages For each of these outcomes,
we present pre and post cross section regression estimates and simple and controlled
difference-in-differences estimates. We show evidence based on the full sample as well
as for men and women separately. Focusing on the difference in differences estimates,
we find that the pay reform expanded BA degree attainment in fields of study in the
top quartile of the wage distribution, both for men and for women. The likelihood of
obtaining an academic degree in fields with expected wages in the upper quartile of
wage distribution, presented in columns 4-6, increased by 2.0 percent points for men,
and by 1.1 percent points for women.
       In columns 1-3, we present the estimates on expected wages as the dependent
variable. The effect in the full sample suggests that the pay reform increased expected
wages by 309.4 NIS a month, about $100. This gain accounts for about 4 percent of
monthly expected earnings. The gain for men is 377.5 NIS and for women it is only
marginally lower at 265.6 NIS. Because mean expected wages for women is lower,18
this absolute increase in expected earnings translates to higher proportional increase
for women.
  16
      Ideally, we would also like to test whether the increase in education attainment translates into
differences in earnings for these same individuals. Unfortunately, the administrative data on earnings
does not include information on earnings of kibbutz members who work inside their kibbutz.
   17
      The large variation in earnings in Israel by post-secondary field of study are not unusual. Kirke-
boen et al. (2016) examine the labor-market payoffs to post-secondary education in Norway, including
field and institution of study, and show that different fields of study have substantially different labor-
market payoffs, even after accounting for institution and peer quality. The payoffs they estimate to
field of study are much larger than the effect on earnings of attending a more selective university.
   18
      Our data on expected wage is not available by gender. However, related evidence from the Labor
Force Survey 2017 suggest that a higher proportion of women work less than full time which lowers
expected earnings.




                                                    19
6.5    Validation of the Causal Interpretation and Robustness
       Checks
We next show evidence of two sets of placebo treatment effect on pre-reform out-
comes that were measured before the reform was implemented. First, since data on
matriculation high school outcomes is only available for the post-reform cohort, we
can only estimate treatment effect based on post-reform cross section regression. This
may be less of a limitation than initially perceived because we have shown that the
pre-reform treatment-control differences are practically zero. We use four end of high
school outcomes: receiving a matriculation diploma, number of matriculation credit
units, matriculation units in English and matriculation units in math. These results
are presented in Table 7 for the full sample (columns 1-3), for men (columns 4-6) and
for women (columns 7-9). All 12 controlled cross section estimates that are presented
in columns 3, 6, and 9 are small and not statistically different from zero. Second,
In Table 8 we present evidence from a placebo test in which we use a difference-in-
differences model to compare two older cohorts who were less likely affected by the
reform, namely individuals aged 22-27 in 1989, 1990 and in 1995, 1996. We note that
the simple and the controlled difference in differences estimates are similar, again reaf-
firming that the control and treatment groups are balanced in characteristics even in
older cohorts. This result suggests that there were no differential trends in background
characteristics of the treatment and the control groups, in line with the evidence we
have shown in the previous section of no differential trends in outcomes. We also
note that there are only small differences in the cohort leading to the reform. The
differences on BA degree attainment in any field is 0.004 (se=0.014) in comparison to
0.033 (se=0.016) in Table 4 panel B. The estimate on BA degree attainment in science
fields is 0.005 (se=0.009) in comparison to 0.038 (se=0.010) in Table 4 panel B. The
two estimates in each pair are either marginally statistically different (first pair) or
statistically different (second pair).
   We perform another validation check by estimating the effect for two sub-samples,
those in our sample who earned a matriculation diploma and those who did not. Since
a matriculation diploma is a pre-requisite for admission to universities, we expect the


                                           20
effect that we presented in Tables 4, 6 to originate from the sub-sample of those
who hold a matriculation diploma. We present these heterogeneity results in Table
9. The sample is split almost evenly between those who have and those who do
not have a matriculation diploma. The estimates show that indeed all the effect on
university degree attainment comes from those who attained a matriculation diploma.
For example, the effect on BA attainment in the sample of matriculation diploma
holders is 0.057 (se=0.030) and it is only 0.019 (se=0.014) in the sample without
a matriculation diploma. The difference between the two groups in the effect on
expected earnings is even more striking: 1078 NIS (se=397) versus 142 NIS (se=110).
   Another informative robustness check originates from the fact that most of the
effect is on science majors. In Israel, admission is for a specific department, not for
the University as a whole. Admission to science-related departments typically requires
high-level math in high school. The high school matriculation program is offered
at three levels: basic, intermediate and advance. The latter is a pre-requisite for
admission to engineering and computer science programs at all universities and most
colleges that offer these programs. In Table 10, we present results for the two sub-
samples defined by level of math in high school. We group the basic and intermediate
math levels together and keep students with advance math in a second sample. As
expected, Table 10 shows that most of the effect originates from students in the
advance math sample. For example, the effect on BA attainment in the advanced
math sample is 0.182 (se=0.060) while it is only 0.016 (se=0.019) in the basic and
intermediate math sample. The effect on BA attainment in science in the advanced
math sample is 0.194 (se=0.048) versus 0.021 (se=0.012) in the basic and intermediate
math sample. The effect on expected earnings in the two sub-samples is 3238 NIS
(se=397) versus 257 NIS (se=202).
   The analysis so far was based on a sample that included individuals age 22-27. For
robustness, in Tables A8-A14 in online appendix we replicate all our results reported
above for the sample of individuals aged 23-28. These tables present treatment effect
estimates for the full sample and by gender, and balancing tests for the full sample
and by gender. Overall, the treatment estimates obtained from this alternative age
group are similar to those reported above based on the 22-27 age group.

                                          21
      Our evidence is not changed when using alternative identification strategies and
where carrying multiple robustness checks. For example, we also use an alterna-
tive non-kibbutz control group based on the population of young adults in Tel-Aviv,
perhaps the most competitive labor market in the country with a concentration of
highly skilled workers. We get similar results in this different controlled experiment
even though this control group had much better pre-reform outcomes.19 Therefore,
unlike the first set of estimates that were based on late reforming kibbutzim as a
control group and reflected only post-reform differences with perfect pre-reform bal-
ancing, the results using Tel-Aviv as a control group reflected partial narrowing of
the pre-reform gap between treatment and control. These divergent patterns in the
difference-in-differences estimates indicate that our treatment estimates are not driven
by convergence to the mean following random shocks to outcomes in the treated kib-
butzim.



7.       Conclusions
This paper provides quasi-experimental evidence on the effect of changes in the skill
premium on the propensity of young adults to obtain a BA degree from a university
and on their choice of field of study.
      Our empirical setting provides a compelling natural experiment with a large dis-
crete increase in the financial return to schooling, from very low rate of return to
the level of the market-wide rate of 8-9 percent return to a year of schooling. Our
setting thus provides a rare opportunity to study individuals who grew up in a more
egalitarian society than the US, and who suddenly faced an increase in the financial
returns to schooling as young adults for the first time. In particular, this setting also
allows us to study how women who grew up in an environment that strives for both
income and gender equality respond to changes in the returns to schooling.
      Our findings suggest that the response of skill investment to the returns to school-
ing may vary across societies. Altonji et al. (2008) summarize this evidence in the
US context as "the anemic response of skill investment to skill premium growth," and
 19
      The results are presented in Tables 11-12 and in online appendix tables A3-A7.


                                                 22
concluded that "the earnings premium for skilled labor has increased dramatically
in recent decades. Yet, Americans are not acquiring significantly greater skills in re-
sponse to this change." Our findings show, in the context of low initial returns, a
large response to changes in the return to schooling, both in terms of attainment of
BA university degrees and in terms of choice of field of study. The response is mainly
driven by individuals who had the high school pre-requisites for admission to univer-
sities and to STEM fields of study. Both men and women shifted their choice of field
of study towards majors with higher expected earnings. The effect on earnings is not
substantially different by gender so we do not expect it to lead to a substantial change
in expected gender gap in earnings. However, more work on the occupation choice
after schooling is needed in order to assess the effect on the actual gender earning gap
later in life.
    In the context of people who grew up under equal sharing and who faced very low
returns to education, we find that people are responsive in their choices of majors
to changes in the return to schooling, and that women are not less responsive than
men and may in fact switch to typically male-dominated majors that are expected
to yield higher earnings. This vigorous response can perhaps be explained by the
starting point of zero financial return to schooling in the pre-reform period. During
this period, the majority of people who had the pre-requisites to be admitted to STEM
subjects might have preferred to enroll in less financially rewarding majors or to not
go to college at all. Once returns increased, members who had already satisfied the
pre-requisites to enroll in STEM subjects, namely those who had studied math in high
school at the highest level, enrolled in STEM subjects in large numbers. This could
be one explanation for the difference between our findings and the `anemic' response
to the increase in the skill premium in the US, where most people with such potential
had already been engaged in STEM majors even before the increase in skill premium.
    A natural question that arises is the external validity of our findings. The context
is surely different from a typical environment like the US due to the equal sharing and
commune life style that preceded the pay reform. This structural change manifests
itself as a sharp and large change in the return to schooling that is rarely observed in
modern times. Nevertheless, we believe that our findings are informative given recent

                                           23
events such as the transition from centrally planned to market economies following
the collapse of the Soviet Union (Brainerd, 1998),20 the abolition of village collectives
in China in the 1980s, the labor market liberalization in Vietnam in the 1980s (Moock
et al., 2003; Svejnar, 1999), and the effect of skill biased technical change that sharply
increased the skill premium in the United States and many other developed countries
over the past decades (see the survey by Autor et al., 2008).




  20
     Several studies document the increase in the return to schooling in Central and Eastern European
(CEE) countries following the fall of the Iron Curtain. Fleisher et al. (2005), review this literature and
conclude that returns to education increased markedly during the transition, both in CEE economies
and in Russia. Orazem and Vodopivec (1997), compare the wages of different skill groups in Slovenia
before and after the collapse of communism, and find that returns to schooling increased sharply
during the early phases of the transition. Similar results are obtained by M¨    unich et al. (2005), who
study the case of the Czech Republic, Andr´    en et al. (2005), for Romania and Flabbi et al. (2008),
for several CEE countries.


                                                   24
References
Abramitzky, R. (2008) The Limits of Equality: Insights From the Israeli Kibbutz. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 123, 1111­1159. URL: https://academic.oup.com/qje/
  article-lookup/doi/10.1162/qjec.2008.123.3.1111.

-- (2011) Lessons From the Kibbutz on the Equality-Incentives Trade-off. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 25, 185­208. URL: http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/jep.25.1.185.

-- (2018) The Mystery of the Kibbutz : Egalitarian Principles in a Capitalist World. Prince-
  ton University Press. URL: https://press.princeton.edu/titles/11178.htmlhttp://gen.lib.
  rus.ec/book/index.php?md5=FED821153D8CECEF8E41D1A5969E36C1.

Abramitzky, R. and Lavy, V. (2014) How Responsive Is Investment in Schooling to Changes
  in Redistributive Policies and in Returns? Econometrica, 82, 1241­1272. URL: http:
  //doi.wiley.com/10.3982/ECTA10763.

Altonji, J. G., Arcidiacono, P. and Maurel, A. (2016) The Analysis of Field Choice in
  College and Graduate School: Determinants and Wage Effects. Handbook of the Eco-
  nomics of Education, 5, 305­396. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/B9780444634597000075?via%3Dihub.

Altonji, J. G., Bharadwaj, P. and Lange, F. (2008) The Anemic Response of Skill Investment
  to Skill Premium Growth -- VOX, CEPRs Policy Portal. URL: https://voxeu.org/article/
  anemic-response-skill-investment-skill-premium-growth.

-- (2012) Changes in the Characteristics of American Youth: Implications for Adult Out-
  comes. Journal of Labor Economics, 30, 783­828. URL: https://www.journals.uchicago.
  edu/doi/10.1086/666536.

Altonji, J. G. and Zimmerman, S. (2017) The Costs of and Net Returns to College Major.
  NBER Working Paper, 23029. URL: https://doi.org/10.3386/w23029.

Andr´en, D., Earle, J. S. and Sapatoru, D. (2005) The Wage Effects of Schooling Under
  Socialism and in Transition: Evidence From Romania, 1950-2000. Journal of Compara-
  tive Economics, 33, 300­323. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0147596705000181?via%3Dihub.

Arcidiacono, P., Hotz, V. J. and Kang, S. (2012) Modeling College Major Choices Using
  Elicited Measures of Expectations and Counterfactuals. Journal of Econometrics, 166,
  3­16. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304407611001151?via%
  3Dihub.

Autor, D. H., Katz, L. F. and Kearney, M. S. (2008) Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality:
  Revising the Revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 300­323. URL: http:
  //www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/10.1162/rest.90.2.300.

Becker, G. S. (1964) Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
  Reference to Education. University of Illinois. URL: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1496221.

Beffy, M., Foug`
               ere, D. and Maurel, A. (2012) Choosing the Field of Study in Postsecondary
  Education: Do Expected Earnings Matter? Review of Economics and Statistics, 94,
  334­347. URL: http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/10.1162/REST a 00212.


                                            25
Ben-Porath, Y. (1967) The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.
  Journal of Political Economy, 75, 352­365. URL: https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/
  doi/10.1086/259291.

Bettelheim, B. (1969) The Children of the Dream. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Boneva, T. and Rauh, C. (2017) Socio-Economic Gaps in University Enrollment: The Role
  of Perceived Pecuniary and Non-Pecuniary Returns. HCEO Working Papers, 2017-080.

Brainerd, E. (1998) Winners and Losers in Russia's Economic Transition. The American
  Economic Review, 88, 1094­1116. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/116862.

Bronson, M. A. (2015) Degrees Are Forever: Marriage, Educational Investment, and Life-
  cycle Labor Decisions of Men and Women. Working paper, Georgetown University, De-
  partment of Economics.

Delavande, A. and Zafar, B. (2019) University Choice: The Role of Expected Earnings,
  Nonpecuniary Outcomes, and Financial Constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 127,
  2343­2393. URL: https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/701808.

Eberly, J. and Athreya, K. (2019) Risk, the College Premium, and Aggregate Human Capital
  Investment. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 13-02R.

Flabbi, L., Paternostro, S. and Tiongson, E. R. (2008) Returns to Education in the Eco-
  nomic Transition: A Systematic Assessment Using Comparable Data. Economics of Ed-
  ucation Review, 27, 724­740. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0272775708000150?via%3Dihub.

Fleisher, B. M., Sabirianova, K. and Wang, X. (2005) Returns to Skills and the Speed
  of Reforms: Evidence from Central and Eastern Europe, China, and Russia. Journal
  of Comparative Economics, 33, 351­370. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0147596705000168?via%3Dihub.

Frish, R. (2007) The Return to Schooling The Causal Link Between Schooling and Earn-
  ings. URL: https://www.boi.org.il/deptdata/mehkar/papers/dp0703h.pdf.

Gavron, D. (2000) The Kibbutz : Awakening from Utopia. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefi
  eld.

Gemici, A. and Wiswall, M. (2014) Evolution of Gender Differences in Post-Secondary Hu-
  man Capital Investments: College Majors. International Economic Review, 55, 23­56.
  URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/iere.12040.

Heckman, J. J. and LaFontaine, P. A. (2010) The American High School Graduation Rate:
  Trends and Levels. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92, 244­262. URL: http://www.
  mitpressjournals.org/doi/10.1162/rest.2010.12366.

Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L. J. and Todd, P. E. (2008) Earnings Functions and Rates of
  Return. Journal of Human Capital, 2, 1­31. URL: http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/
  doi/10.1086/587037.

Kirkeboen, L. J., Leuven, E. and Mogstad, M. (2016) Field of Study, Earnings, and Self-
  Selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1057­1111. URL: https://academic.
  oup.com/qje/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/qje/qjw019.

                                          26
Kugler, A. D., Tinsley, C. H. and Ukhaneva, O. (2017) Choice of Majors: Are Women Really
  Different from Men? NBER Working Paper, 23735. URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/
  w23735.
Long, M. C., Goldhaber, D. and Huntington-Klein, N. (2015) Do Completed College Majors
  Respond to Changes in Wages? Economics of Education Review, 49, 1­14. URL: https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S027277571500103X?via%3Dihub.
Manski, C. F. (2004) Measuring Expectations. Econometrica, 72, 1329­1376. URL: http:
 //doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00537.x.
Montmarquette, C., Cannings, K. and Mahseredjian, S. (2002) How do Young People Choose
 College Majors? Economics of Education Review, 21, 543­556. URL: https://www.
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272775701000541?via%3Dihub.
Moock, P. R., Patrinos, H. A. and Venkataraman, M. (2003) Education and Earnings in a
 Transition Economy: the Case of Vietnam. Economics of Education Review, 22, 503­
 510. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272775703000396?via%
 3Dihub.
M¨
 unich, D., Svejnar, J. and Terrell, K. (2005) Returns to Human Capital Under The Com-
 munist Wage Grid and During the Transition to a Market Economy. Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 87, 100­123. URL: http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/10.1162/
 0034653053327559.
Near, H. (1992) The Kibbutz Movement: A History, Vol. 1: Origins and Growth, 1909-1939.
  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
-- (1997) The Kibbutz Movement : A History. Volume 2, Crisis and Achievement 1939-1995.
  London: Valentine Mitchell.
Orazem, P. F. and Vodopivec, M. (1997) Value of Human Capital in Transition to Market:
  Evidence from Slovenia. European Economic Review, 41, 893­903. URL: https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0014292197000469?via%3Dihub.
Oreopoulos, P. and Salvanes, K. G. (2011) Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of School-
  ing. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, 159­184. URL: http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/
  10.1257/jep.25.1.159.
Svejnar, J. (1999) Labor Markets in the Transitional Central and East European Economies.
  In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, chap. 42, 2809­2857. Elsevier. URL: https:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1573446399300286?via%3Dihub.
Turner, S. (2004) Going to College and Finishing College. Explaining Different Educational
  Outcomes. In College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How
  to Pay for It (ed. C.M. Hoxby), 1362. Chicago:: University of Chicago Press.
Weiss, A. (1995) Human Capital vs. Signalling Explanations of Wages. Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 9, 133­154. URL: http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/jep.9.4.133.
Wiswall, M. and Zafar, B. (2015) Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification
 Using an Information Experiment. The Review of Economic Studies, 82, 791­824. URL:
 https://academic.oup.com/restud/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/restud/rdu044.
Zafar, B. (2013) College Major Choice and the Gender Gap. Journal of Human Resources,
  48, 545­595. URL: http://jhr.uwpress.org/lookup/doi/10.3368/jhr.48.3.545.

                                           27
              Figure 1: Distribution of BA Attainment By Age at Graduation
              (a) Full Sample PDF                                       (b) Full Sample CDF
20




                                                           1


                                                           .8
15




                                                           .6
10




                                                           .4
5




                                                           .2


                                                           0
0




      20        25       30         35      40       45         20       25       30         35       40        45
                              Age                                                      Age



                     (c) Male PDF                                             (d) Male CDF
20




                                                           1


                                                           .8
15




                                                           .6
10




                                                           .4
5




                                                           .2


                                                           0
0




      20        25       30         35      40       45         20       25       30         35       40        45
                              Age                                                      Age



                 (e) Female PDF                                               (f) Female CDF
20




                                                           1


                                                           .8
15




                                                           .6
10




                                                           .4
5




                                                           .2


                                                           0
0




      20        25       30         35      40       45         20       25       30         35       40        45
                              Age                                                      Age

N otes: Figure 1 presents a PDF and CDF of the age at graduation for 1990-2015 Israeli Jews aged 18-45. Panel (a)
& (b) present the distribution for the full sample (n=502,996), Panel (c) & (d) for Male (n=215,538) and Panel (e) &
(f) for Female (n=287,458).
S ource: Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel.




                                                          28
                                 Figure 2: Timeline of the Pay Reform




N otes: This figure presents the timeline of the pay reform for the selected treatment and control groups and the affected
and unaffected cohorts relative to the time of the early and late reform. The treatment group includes kibbutzim that
reformed early (1998, 1999) and the control group includes kibbutzim that reformed late (2004, 2005). The pre-reform
cohort includes individuals who are aged 22-27 three years before the pay reform of the treatment group and nine
years before the pay reform of the control group (aged 22-27 in 1995 and 1996 for the 1998, 2004 and 1999, 2005
reform, respectively). The post-reform cohort includes individuals who are aged 22-27 three years after the reform
of the treatment group and three years before the reform of the control group (aged 22-27 in 2001 and 2002 for the
1998, 2004 and 1999, 2005 reform, respectively). In order to calculate the outcomes of higher education, we follow
each cohort for four years. For the pre-reform cohort (aged 22-27 in 1995, 1996) we follow four years until 1998, 1999
(at the end of the followup period they were aged 26-31). For the post-reform cohort (aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002) we
follow four years until 2004, 2005.




                                                           29
     Figure 3: Pre- and Post-Reform Time Trend of BA Degree Attainment Rate.
                            Treatment vs Control Group.


                   12
                                                                Early Reform
                                                                Late Reform

                   10
                   8
               %
                   6




                                                                         Early Reform
                   4




                        -5      -4         -3      -2         -1        0         1        2          3
                                     Time Passage Relative To Year of Early Reform (Years)

N otes: BA degree attainment rate for 22-27-year-old. The red vertical line represents the year of the early reform.



                              Figure 4: Proportion Receiving BA Degree
                   15




                                                           Early Reform: 1998-99
                                                           Late Reform: 2004-05
                   10
               %
                   5
                   0




                             1990                  1995                                 2001   2007
                                                             Year
N otes: This figure presents the proportion of BA degree recipients of individuals who were aged 22-27 in four different
years (before the early reform: 1990, 1995, after the early reform and before the late reform: 2001, after the late
reform: 2007) for treatment group (early reform: 1998, 1999) and control group (late reform: 2004, 2005). In order to
calculate the proportion, we follow each cohort for four years until the age of 26-31 and examine how many received a
BA degree during the follow-up period.




                                                           30
  Figure 5: Treatment-Control Differences in Proportion Receiving BA Degree, By
                                       Year


                                     8




                                                                                                                 Late Reform
                                                                                    Early Reform
                               4     6
               Percentage Points
               0       2             -2
                                     -4




                                                        -5   -4   -3     -2 -1    0     1     2   3     4     5    6    7    8   9   10
                                                                       Time Passage Relative To Year of Early Reform (Years)

N otes: This figure presents treatment (early reform: 1998, 1999) - control (late reform: 2004, 2005) differences in the
proportion of BA degree recipients of individuals who were aged 22-27 in each year, from five years before the early
reform until ten years after it. The vertical bands represent 95% confidence interval.



              Figure 6: Treatment-Control Wage Differences at 2014, By Year
                                     3000




                                                                                  Early Reform




                                                                                                                 Late Reform
                                     2500
                                     2000
                                     1500
               New Israeli Shekels
                                     1000
                                     500
                                     0
                                     -1500 -1000 -500




                                                        -5   -4   -3     -2 -1    0     1     2   3      4    5    6    7    8   9   10
                                                                       Time Passage Relative To Year of Early Reform (Years)

N otes: This figure presents treatment (early reform: 1998, 1999) - control (late reform: 2004, 2005) wage differences
at 2014 of individuals who were aged 22-27 in each year, from five years before the early reform until ten years after
it. The vertical bands represent 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                                   31
 Figure 7: Treatment-Control Differences by Fields of Study, Pre- and Post- Reform
                      (a) Pre-Reform                                                                                             (b) Post-Reform
              Any Field of Study                                                                                                                                Any Field of Study


                 Humanities                                                                                                Humanities


                        Social Sciences                                                                             Social Sciences


                    Econ, Business, Law                                                                     Econ, Business, Law


                 Sciences                                                                                                                                        Sciences


        Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci                                                                                                         Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci


        Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat                                                                                                             Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat


                  Computer Science                                                                                                                  Computer Science


                    Engineering                                                                                                                Engineering

-4       -2                 0              2               4                 6                        -4            -2                  0              2               4                6
                                Percentage Points                                                                                           Percentage Points




                                                               (c) Difference-in-Differences
                                                                                                            Any Field of Study


                                                                          Humanities


                                                         Social Sciences


                                                    Econ, Business, Law


                                                                                                                Sciences


                                                                                               Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci


                                                                                                 Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat


                                                                                             Computer Science


                                                                                        Engineering

                                              -4               -2                0              2               4                 6
                                                                                     Percentage Points


N otes: The points in this figure presents treatment-control differences (Panel A,B) and controlled difference-in-
differences (panel C) estimates shown in Table 4. The horizontal bands represent 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                          32
 Figure 8: Treatment-Control Differences by Fields of Study, Pre- and Post- Reform
     (a) Male, Pre-Reform Cohorts                                                    (b) Male, Post-Reform Cohorts
                            Any Field of Study                                                                                                          Any Field of Study


                       Humanities                                                                          Humanities


                         Social Sciences                                                           Social Sciences


                        Econ, Business, Law                                                Econ, Business, Law


                                   Sciences                                                                                                   Sciences


             Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci                                                                         Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci


                  Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat                                                                                     Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat


                        Computer Science                                                                                       Computer Science


                            Engineering                                                                                             Engineering

-4          -2                 0               2            4       6        -4               -2                0               2                   4                 6
                                    Percentage Points                                                                Percentage Points




     (c) Female, Pre-Reform Cohorts                                                (d) Female, Post-Reform Cohorts
                 Any Field of Study                                                                                            Any Field of Study


                             Humanities                                                      Humanities


                                          Social Sciences                                 Social Sciences


                                   Econ, Business, Law                            Econ, Business, Law


                 Sciences                                                                                                                   Sciences


            Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci                                                                                       Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci


        Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat                                                                                Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat


                             Computer Science                                                                                 Computer Science


                             Engineering                                                     Engineering

       -4              -2              0            2           4   6        -4               -2                0               2                   4                 6
                                    Percentage Points                                                                Percentage Points


N otes: The points in this figure present treatment-control differences estimates shown in Table 5. The horizontal
bands represent 95% confidence interval.




                                                                        33
 Table 1: Balancing Tests of Individuals' Characteristics, by Treatment Group, Pre-
                                 and Post- Reform
                                    Pre-Reform                                          Post-Reform
                       Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1995, 1996                 Individuals Aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002
                       Proportions          Balancing Tests (T-C)           Proportions         Balancing Tests (T-C)
                  Treatment Control           Coeff      p-val         Treatment Control          Coeff      p-val

                      (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)

Male                 0.555       0.548        0.006       0.764           0.546      0.544         0.003      0.896
                    [0.497]     [0.498]                                  [0.498]    [0.498]
Age                 24.366      24.410        -0.043      0.508          24.573     24.499         0.074      0.317
                    [1.665]     [1.671]                                  [1.710]    [1.689]
Number of            2.757       2.759        -0.002      0.983           2.645      2.611         0.034      0.736
Siblings            [1.291]     [1.290]                                  [1.170]    [1.029]
Ethnic Origin:       0.171       0.172        -0.001      0.972           0.093      0.107        -0.014      0.436
Africa/Asia         [0.377]     [0.377]                                  [0.290]    [0.309]
Ethnic Origin:       0.000       0.003        -0.003      0.318           0.000      0.006        -0.006      0.133
Ethiopia            [0.000]     [0.052]                                  [0.000]    [0.080]
Ethnic Origin:       0.032       0.025        0.007       0.484           0.017      0.021        -0.005      0.475
FSU Countries       [0.176]     [0.155]                                  [0.128]    [0.145]
Ethnic Origin:       0.179       0.162        0.016       0.689           0.166      0.117         0.049      0.102
Europe/America      [0.383]     [0.369]                                  [0.372]    [0.321]
Ethnic Origin:       0.562       0.553        0.009       0.881           0.654      0.662        -0.009      0.830
Israel              [0.496]     [0.497]                                  [0.476]    [0.473]
Ethnic Origin:       0.056       0.086        -0.030      0.284           0.071      0.086        -0.015      0.495
Other               [0.230]     [0.280]                                  [0.257]    [0.281]

Observations         1035        1096            -          -             1025       1078            -           -
Kibbutzim             32          29             -          -              32         29             -           -
Notes: This table presents means and means-difference of characteristics of individuals in treatment kibbutzim (re-
formed early 1998, 1999) and control kibbutzim (reformed late 2004, 2005) who are aged 22-27 at the beginning of
the follow-up periods: pre-reform, 1995, 1996 (untreated) and post-reform, 2001, 2002 (treated). Columns 1-3 present
pre-reform means of treatment and control groups and the difference between them, respectively. Columns 5-7 present
post-reform means of treatment and control groups and the difference between them, respectively. All estimated co-
efficients are based on a regression of the characteristics as a dependent variable and the treatment indicator is the
explanatory variable. Standard deviations presented in brackets. p-values in italics. Difference in means significant at
***1% **5% *10%.




                                                          34
     Table 2: Outcomes Means and Treatment-Control Differences, Pre- and Post-
                                    Reform
                                             Pre-Reform                                   Post-Reform
                                Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1995, 1996          Individuals Aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002
                              Treatment Control      Difference (T-C)       Treatment Control       Difference (T-C)
                                                     Coeff      p-val                               Coeff      p-val

                                (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)

Any Field                       0.041     0.046      -0.005       0.405       0.110      0.082       0.029    0.025**
                               [0.197]   [0.209]                             [0.313]    [0.274]
  Humanities Any Field          0.013     0.017      -0.005       0.318       0.017      0.018      -0.001     0.867
                               [0.111]   [0.131]                             [0.128]    [0.132]
  Social Sciences Any Field     0.017     0.011       0.006       0.230       0.040      0.042      -0.002     0.802
                               [0.131]   [0.104]                             [0.196]    [0.200]
   Economics, Business,         0.008     0.004       0.004       0.183       0.011      0.016      -0.005     0.211
   Law                         [0.088]   [0.060]                             [0.103]    [0.125]
  Sciences Any Field            0.011     0.017      -0.007       0.134       0.054      0.022       0.031   0.000***
                               [0.103]   [0.131]                             [0.225]    [0.148]
   Biology, Chemistry,          0.006     0.009      -0.003       0.453       0.020      0.006       0.013   0.009***
   Pre-Health Sci              [0.076]   [0.095]                             [0.138]    [0.080]
   Math, Eng, Physics,          0.005     0.008      -0.003       0.318       0.034      0.016       0.018    0.024**
   Computer Sci, Stat          [0.069]   [0.090]                             [0.182]    [0.125]
   Computer Science             0.001     0.001       0.000       0.318       0.019      0.005       0.014   0.000***
                               [0.031]   [0.030]                             [0.135]    [0.068]
   Engineering                  0.002     0.004      -0.002       0.318       0.017      0.009       0.007     0.243
                               [0.044]   [0.060]                             [0.128]    [0.096]

Observations                    1035      1096          -           -         1025       1078          -          -
Kibbutzim                        32        29           -           -          32         29           -          -
Notes: This table presents means and means-difference of outcomes of individuals in treatment kibbutzim (reformed
early 1998, 1999) and control kibbutzim (reformed late 2004, 2005) who are aged 22-27 at the beginning of the follow-up
periods: pre-reform, 1995, 1996 (untreated) and post-reform, 2001, 2002 (treated). Columns 1-3 present pre-reform
means of treatment and control groups and the difference between them, respectively. Columns 5-7 present post-reform
means of treatment and control groups and the difference between them, respectively. The dependent variable is an
indicator of whether the student completed a BA degree in the areas of study indicated by the outcome. All estimated
coefficients are based on a regression of the outcomes as a dependent variable and the treatment indicator is the
explanatory variable. Standard deviations presented in brackets. p-values in italics. Difference in means significant at
***1% **5% *10%.




                                                             35
  Table 3: Treatment-Control Differences in Pre-Reform Time Trends in Academic
                              Outcomes, 1989-1995
                                  BA                  Humanities            Social Sciences           Sciences
                                Any Field             Any Field               Any Field              Any Field
                              (1)       (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)

A. Linear Trend Model
Treatment                    0.005       -        0.013***         -        -0.002      -         -0.006       -
                            (0.007)      -         (0.004)         -       (0.004)      -        (0.005)       -

Time Trend                 0.003*** 0.003***      0.002*** 0.002***        0.002*** 0.002***      -0.001     -0.001
                            (0.001)  (0.001)       (0.000)  (0.000)         (0.001)  (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)

Treatment X Time Trend       0.000     0.000      -0.002*** -0.002***       0.001     0.001       0.001      0.001
                            (0.001)   (0.001)      (0.001)   (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)

B. Cohort Dummies Model
Treatment            0.004               -         0.009*          -        0.000       -         -0.004       -
                    (0.010)              -         (0.005)         -       (0.006)      -        (0.006)       -

Treatment X 1990             -0.001    0.000        -0.001       -0.001     0.002     0.001       -0.001     -0.001
                            (0.013)   (0.013)      (0.007)      (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.009)

Treatment X 1991             0.010     0.010        0.003        0.004      0.005     0.004       0.002      0.002
                            (0.013)   (0.013)      (0.007)      (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.009)

Treatment X 1992             0.010     0.010        0.000        0.001      0.005     0.004       0.005      0.005
                            (0.013)   (0.013)      (0.007)      (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.009)

Treatment X 1993             -0.009    -0.008       -0.009       -0.008     -0.001    -0.002      0.000      0.001
                            (0.013)   (0.013)      (0.007)      (0.007)    (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.009)

Treatment X 1994             -0.012    -0.011     -0.016**      -0.014**    -0.001    -0.002      0.005      0.005
                            (0.013)   (0.013)      (0.007)       (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.008)

Treatment X 1995             -0.012    -0.012      -0.012*      -0.011*     0.005     0.003       -0.004     -0.004
                            (0.013)   (0.013)      (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.007)   (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.008)

Kibbutz Fixed Effects         NO        YES          NO          YES         NO       YES          NO        YES
Notes: This table presents results from OLS regressions where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether the
student completed a BA degree (columns 1 and 2), completed a BA degree in humanities (columns 3 and 4), completed
a BA degree in social sciences (columns 5 and 6), completed a BA degree in sciences (columns 7 and 8). The sample
includes individuals aged 22-27 in each year from 1989 to 1995 (pre reform). The treatment group includes kibbutzim
that reformed in 1998, 1999, and the control group includes kibbutzim that reformed in 2004, 2005. In the regressions
results reported in panel A, outcomes are allowed to vary according to a linear time (cohort) trend that differs in
treatment and control kibbutzim. The regression in panel B includes cohort dummies. Standard errors clustered at
the kibbutz level are presented in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.




                                                           36
                                    Table 4: Effect of Pay Reform on BA Degree Attainment, by Field of Study
                                                        (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1995, 1996 and in 2001, 2002)

                                                                                             BA Degree by Field of Study

                                                          Humanities           Social Sciences                                        Sciences

                                           Any Field      Humanities         Social     Economics,     Sciences Any    Biology,      Math, Eng,     Computer     Engineering
                                                          Any Field      Sciences Any    Business,         Field      Chemistry,      Physics,       Science
                                                                             Field         Law                        Pre-Health     Comp Sci,
                                                                                                                          Sci          Stat
                                               (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)            (9)

     A. Cross Section Regressions
     Pre-Reform                               -0.005         -0.005          0.006         0.004           -0.007        -0.003         -0.003        0.000          -0.002
                                             (0.011)        (0.005)         (0.007)       (0.004)         (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.003)        (0.004)
     Mean of Dependent Var. (Control)        0.046           0.017           0.011         0.004           0.017         0.009          0.008         0.001          0.004


     Post-Reform                            0.029***         -0.001          -0.002        -0.005        0.031***       0.013***      0.018***      0.014***        0.007*
37




                                             (0.011)        (0.005)         (0.007)       (0.004)         (0.007)        (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.003)        (0.004)
     Mean of Dependent Var. (Control)        0.082           0.018           0.042         0.016           0.022         0.006          0.016         0.005          0.009


     B. Difference-in-Differences
     Simple                                 0.034**          0.004           -0.008        -0.009        0.038***       0.016***      0.022***      0.014***        0.009*
                                            (0.016)         (0.008)         (0.010)       (0.006)         (0.010)        (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.005)

     Controlled                             0.033**          0.004           -0.009       -0.010*        0.038***       0.017***      0.020***      0.014***         0.008
                                            (0.016)         (0.008)         (0.010)       (0.006)         (0.010)        (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.005)

     Observations                             4233           4233            4233           4233           4233           4233          4233           4233          4233

     Notes: This table presents the estimated coefficients of interest of difference-in-differences regressions, comparing cohorts of individuals aged 22-27 in pre/post reform
     period. The treatment and the control groups consists of individuals who lived in early (1998, 1999) and late (2004, 2005) reformed kibbutzim respectively (See Figure
     1). The dependent variable is an indicator of whether the student completed a BA in the areas of study indicated by the outcome. The simple difference-in-differences
     regressions include only cohort dummies. The controlled difference-in-differences regressions include cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed effects and the following student
     demographic controls: gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from FSU, Ethiopia, Israel, and other
     countries). Standard errors clustered by kibbutz are presented in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                            Table 5: Effect of Pay Reform on BA Degree Attainment by Field of Study and Gender
                                                        (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1995, 1996 and in 2001, 2002)

                                                                                                   BA by Field of Study

                                                          Humanities            Social Sciences                                        Sciences

                                           Any Field      Humanities         Social      Economics,     Sciences Any    Biology,     Math, Eng,      Computer     Engineering
                                                          Any Field      Sciences Any     Business,         Field      Chemistry,     Physics,        Science
                                                                             Field          Law                        Pre-Health    Comp Sci,
                                                                                                                           Sci         Stat
                                               (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)            (9)

     Male
     A. Cross Section Regressions
     Pre-Reform                               0.006           -0.003         0.002          0.004           0.007          0.002         0.005         0.002          0.002
                                             (0.011)         (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.005)         (0.008)        (0.003)       (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.005)
     Mean of Dependent Var. (Control)         0.018           0.010          0.005          0.003           0.003          0.002         0.002         0.000          0.002

     Post-Reform                            0.041***          0.006          0.003          0.001         0.033***         0.005       0.027***      0.014***       0.020***
                                             (0.011)         (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.005)         (0.008)        (0.003)       (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.005)
     Mean of Dependent Var. (Control)         0.039           0.003          0.020          0.012           0.015          0.002         0.014         0.003          0.005

     B. Difference-in-Differences
     Simple                                  0.035**          0.009          0.001          -0.003         0.026**         0.004       0.022**        0.013**       0.018**
                                             (0.016)         (0.007)        (0.010)        (0.008)         (0.011)        (0.005)      (0.010)        (0.006)       (0.008)

     Controlled                              0.033**          0.009          0.001          -0.004         0.024**         0.003       0.021**        0.012**       0.018**
38




                                             (0.017)         (0.007)        (0.010)        (0.008)         (0.011)        (0.005)      (0.010)        (0.006)       (0.008)

     Observations                             2321            2321            2321          2321            2321           2321          2321          2321           2321

     Female
     C. Cross Section Regressions
     Pre-Reform                               -0.018          -0.007         0.012          0.005         -0.024**         -0.009       -0.014*        -0.002         -0.006
                                             (0.020)         (0.010)        (0.013)        (0.007)         (0.012)        (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.005)
     Mean of Dependent Var. (Control)          0.079          0.026          0.018          0.004           0.034           0.018        0.016         0.002          0.006

     Post-Reform                              0.014           -0.009         -0.007        -0.012*         0.030**        0.022**        0.008        0.013**         -0.008
                                             (0.020)         (0.010)        (0.013)        (0.007)         (0.012)        (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.005)
     Mean of Dependent Var. (Control)         0.132           0.035          0.067          0.020           0.030          0.012         0.018         0.006          0.014

     D. Difference-in-Differences
     Simple                                   0.032           -0.002         -0.019        -0.016*        0.053***        0.032***      0.021*        0.015**         -0.002
                                             (0.028)         (0.015)        (0.019)        (0.009)         (0.017)         (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.007)        (0.008)

     Controlled                               0.034           -0.001         -0.02         -0.018*        0.055***        0.033***      0.023*        0.018**         -0.002
                                             (0.028)         (0.015)        (0.019)        (0.010)         (0.017)         (0.013)      (0.012)       (0.008)        (0.008)

     Observations                             1913            1913            1913          1913            1913           1913          1913          1913           1913
     Notes: This table presents the estimated coefficients of interest of difference-in-differences regressions, comparing individuals aged 22-27 in pre/post reform period (See
     Figure 1). Treatment group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. control group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 2004, 2005. the dependent variable is
     an indicator of whether the student completed a BA in the areas of study indicated by the outcome. The simple difference-in-differences regressions includes only cohort
     dummies. The controlled difference-in-differences regressions includes cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed effects and the following student demographic controls: number of
     siblings, a set of ethnic dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from FSU, Ethiopia, Israel and other countries). Standard errors clustered by
     kibbutz are presented in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively.
                           Table 6: Effect of Pay Reform on BA Degree Attainment by Expected Wages and Gender
                                                        (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1995, 1996 and in 2001, 2002)

                                                                                 BA Degree by Expected Wages

                                    Expected Wages                                  Field of Studies With                                Field of Studies With
                                                                              Expected Wages Above 3rd Quartile                      Expected Wages Above Median

                          All             Male            Female              All             Male            Female              All             Male            Female
                          (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)             (5)               (6)               (7)             (8)               (9)

     A. Cross Section Regressions
     Pre-Reform      -0.697               74.53            -92.38            -0.002           0.005            -0.012            -0.003           0.004            -0.013
                    (78.37)               (117)           (99.33)           (0.006)          (0.008)          (0.010)           (0.009)          (0.010)          (0.015)

     Post-Reform       321.3***         474.3***           138.3            0.013**         0.026***           -0.002           0.029***         0.028***         0.030**
                        (78.88)          (118.5)          (99.25)           (0.006)          (0.008)          (0.010)            (0.009)          (0.010)         (0.015)
39




     B. Difference-in-Differences
     Simple             322***          399.7**            230.7            0.015*           0.021*            0.010            0.032***         0.024*           0.043**
                        (111.2)         (166.5)           (140.4)           (0.009)          (0.011)          (0.014)            (0.012)         (0.014)          (0.022)

     Controlled        309.4***         377.5**           265.6*            0.015*           0.020*            0.011            0.032***          0.022           0.046**
                         (112)           (170)            (143)             (0.009)          (0.011)          (0.014)            (0.013)         (0.014)          (0.022)

     Observations        4233             2321             1912              4233             2321             1912               4233             2321             1912
     Notes: This table presents the estimated coefficients of interest of difference-in-differences regressions, comparing cohorts of individuals aged 22-27 in pre/post reform
     period (See Figure 1). Treatment group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. Control group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 2004, 2005. In columns
     1-3 the dependent variable is continuous and the measurement unit is New Israeli Shekels per month. 1US dollar is currently equal to approximately 3.7 shekels. the
     dependent variable in columns 4-9 is an indicator of whether the student completed a BA in a field of studies with expected wages between the different quartile. The
     simple difference-in-differences regressions includes only cohort dummies. The controlled difference-in-differences regressions includes cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed
     effects and the following student demographic controls: gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from
     FSU, Ethiopia, Israel and other countries). Standard errors clustered by kibbutz are presented in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
     levels respectively.
                       Table 7: Placebo Experiments, Effects on Pre-Determined High School Matriculation Outcomes
                                                                   (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002)

                                                   Full Sample                                          Male                                             Female

                                    Treatment        Control       Controlled         Treatment        Control      Controlled         Treatment        Control       Controlled
                                      Mean            Mean         Differences          Mean            Mean        Differences          Mean            Mean         Differences
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)            (6)               (7)             (8)             (9)

     Matriculation Certificate         0.525          0.554           -0.030            0.486           0.502          -0.019             0.567           0.608          -0.042
                                      (0.500)        (0.497)         (0.028)           (0.500)         (0.501)        (0.039)            (0.496)         (0.489)        (0.032)

     Matriculation Credit Units        20.57          20.93           -0.412            19.69           20.25          -0.663             21.50           21.63          -0.199
40




                                      (8.149)        (7.832)         (0.555)           (8.699)         (8.389)        (0.798)            (7.424)         (7.151)        (0.632)

     Math Number of Credits            2.582          2.688           -0.109            2.583           2.773          -0.203             2.582           2.599          -0.011
                                      (1.696)        (1.697)         (0.094)           (1.767)         (1.756)        (0.123)            (1.620)         (1.631)        (0.118)

     English Number of Credits         3.865          3.867           -0.019            3.782           3.810          -0.023             3.953           3.927          -0.010
                                      (1.409)        (1.435)         (0.090)           (1.459)         (1.511)        (0.129)            (1.350)         (1.350)        (0.112)

     Observation                        741            785              -                381             400              -                360            385              -
     Notes: This table presents means, means-difference and standard deviations (in parentheses) of outcomes of individuals who are aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002. Treatment
     group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. Control group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 2004, 2005. The dependent variable in row I is whether the
     student received a matriculation certificate; in row II it is the number of credit unites of the matriculation certificate; in row III and IV it is the number of matriculation
     units in English and mathematics subjects respectively. The range of units in these subjects is 0-5. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
     respectively.
                  Table 8: Placebo Experiments, Using Older Unaffected Cohort in Difference-In-Differences Estimation
                                                        (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1989, 1990 and in 1995, 1996)

                                                                                             BA Degree by Field of Study

                                                          Humanities           Social Sciences                                        Sciences

                                            Any Field     Humanities         Social   Economics,       Sciences Any    Biology,     Math, Eng,     Computer     Engineering
                                                          Any Field      Sciences Any Business,            Field      Chemistry,     Physics,       Science
                                                                             Field       Law                          Pre-Health    Comp Sci,
                                                                                                                          Sci         Stat
                                               (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)           (9)
41




     Simple Difference-in-Differences         0.008         -0.013**        0.015*         0.009           0.006         0.006         -0.000         0.003         -0.004
                                             (0.014)         (0.007)        (0.009)       (0.006)         (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.003)       (0.005)

     Controlled Difference-in-Differences     0.004         -0.012*          0.011         0.008           0.005         0.005         -0.000         0.003         -0.005
                                             (0.014)        (0.007)         (0.009)       (0.006)         (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.003)       (0.005)

     Observations                             3863            3863           3863          3863            3863          3863          3863           3863          3863
     Notes: This table presents difference-in-differences and controlled difference-in-differences coefficients of placebo experiment that compare cohorts of individuals aged
     22-27 in two pre-reform periods. The treatment group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. The control group includes kibbutzim that reformed in 2004,
     2005. The dependent variable is an indicator of whether the student completed a BA in the areas of study indicated by the outcome. The simple difference-in-differences
     regressions include only cohort dummies. The controlled difference-in-differences regressions include cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed effects and the following student
     demographic controls: gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from FSU, Ethiopia, Israel, and other
     countries). Standard errors clustered by kibbutz are presented in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                        Table 9: Treatment-Control Differences, by Eligibility for High School Matriculation Certificate
                                                                  (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002)

                                                      Individuals With a Matriculation Certificate                       Individuals Without a Matriculation Certificate

                                                 Treatment        Control      Treatment-     Controlled              Treatment       Control      Treatment-      Controlled
                                                   Mean            Mean         Control       Difference                Mean           Mean         Control        Difference
                                                                               Difference                                                          Difference
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)                     (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)

     A. BA Degree by Field of Study
     Any Field                                      0.216          0.163         0.053*         0.057*                   0.057          0.037          0.02          0.019
                                                   (0.412)        (0.370)        (0.029)        (0.030)                 (0.232)        (0.189)        (0.015)       (0.014)

       Humanities Any Field                         0.028          0.039          -0.011         -0.011                  0.009          0.006          0.003         0.004
                                                   (0.166)        (0.194)        (0.013)        (0.013)                 (0.092)        (0.075)        (0.006)       (0.005)

       Social Sciences Any Field                    0.069          0.08           -0.011         -0.009                  0.031          0.02           0.011         0.009
                                                   (0.254)        (0.272)        (0.017)        (0.017)                 (0.174)        (0.140)        (0.011)       (0.012)

          Economics, Business, Law                  0.021          0.03           -0.009         -0.009                  0.009          0.006          0.003         0.004
                                                   (0.142)        (0.170)        (0.010)        (0.010)                 (0.092)        (0.075)        (0.006)       (0.006)

       Sciences Any Field                           0.118          0.044        0.075***       0.077***                  0.017          0.011          0.006         0.006
                                                   (0.323)        (0.205)        (0.022)        (0.022)                 (0.130)        (0.106)        (0.008)       (0.008)

          Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci        0.036          0.009         0.027**       0.028***                  0.011          0.006          0.006         0.006
                                                   (0.187)        (0.096)        (0.010)        (0.011)                 (0.106)        (0.075)        (0.006)       (0.007)
42




          Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat        0.082          0.034         0.048**        0.048**                  0.006          0.006          -0.000        -0.000
                                                   (0.275)        (0.183)        (0.019)        (0.020)                 (0.075)        (0.075)        (0.005)       (0.006)

          Computer Science                          0.044          0.011        0.032***       0.033***                  0.003          0.000          0.003         0.003
                                                   (0.205)        (0.107)        (0.011)        (0.011)                 (0.053)        (0.000)        (0.003)       (0.003)

          Engineering                               0.041          0.021           0.02          0.022                   0.003          0.003          0.000         0.000
                                                   (0.199)        (0.143)        (0.015)        (0.015)                 (0.053)        (0.053)        (0.004)       (0.004)

     B. BA Degree by Expected Wages
     Expected wage                                  8878           7834        1044.175**     1078.1***                  6910           6767          142.5          142.6
                                                 (5600.638)     (3829.801)      (395.873)     (397.072)               (1965.729)     (1529.918)     (116.385)      (110.218)

     Above 75'th Percentile                         0.075          0.030         0.045**        0.045**                  0.006          0.003          0.003         0.003
                                                   (0.263)        (0.170)        (0.018)        (0.019)                 (0.075)        (0.053)        (0.005)       (0.005)

     Above 50'th Percentile                         0.108          0.064         0.044*         0.044*                   0.014          0.011          0.003         0.003
                                                   (0.311)        (0.246)        (0.022)        (0.022)                 (0.119)        (0.106)        (0.007)       (0.007)

     Observations                                    389            435             -              -                     352            350              -              -

     Notes: This table presents means, means-difference and standard deviations (in parentheses) of outcomes of individuals who are aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002. The treatment
     group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. The control group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 2004, 2005. In Panel A the dependent variable is
     an indicator of whether the student completed a BA in the areas of study indicated by the outcome. In Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator of whether the
     student completed a BA in a field of studies with expected wages between the different quartile. The outcome "Expected Wages" is continuous, and the measurement
     unit is New Israeli Shekels per month. 1US dollar is currently equal to approximately 3.7 shekels. The simple difference regressions include only cohort dummies. The
     controlled difference regressions include cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed effects and the following student demographic controls: gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic
     dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from FSU, Ethiopia, Israel and other countries). Difference in means significant at ***1% **5% *10%.
                  Table 10: Treatment-Control Differences, by Level of High School Math Matriculation Study Program
                                                                  (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002)

                                                                          Advanced                                                    Basic and Intermediate

                                                 Treatment        Control      Treatment-     Controlled              Treatment       Control      Treatment-      Controlled
                                                   Mean            Mean         Control       Difference                Mean           Mean         Control        Difference
                                                                               Difference                                                          Difference
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)                     (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)


     A. BA Degree by Field of Study
     Any Field                                      0.364          0.180        0.184***       0.182***                  0.110          0.096          0.014         0.016
                                                   (0.484)        (0.386)        (0.060)        (0.060)                 (0.314)        (0.295)        (0.020)       (0.019)

        Humanities Any Field                        0.023          0.004          -0.017         -0.018                  0.018          0.022          -0.004        -0.003
                                                   (0.150)        (0.197)        (0.026)        (0.025)                 (0.135)        (0.147)        (0.009)       (0.009)

        Social Sciences Any Field                   0.080          0.080                         0.005                   0.048          0.005          -0.002        -0.002
                                                   (0.272)        (0.273)        (0.033)        (0.032)                 (0.213)        (0.217)        (0.011)       (0.012)

          Economics, Business, Law                  0.045          0.007          -0.025         -0.018                  0.011          0.012          -0.001        -0.001
                                                   (0.209)        (0.256)        (0.029)        (0.028)                 (0.103)        (0.108)        (0.006)       (0.006)

        Sciences Any Field                          0.261          0.006        0.201***       0.194***                  0.044          0.025          0.020        0.021*
                                                   (0.442)        (0.239)        (0.047)        (0.048)                 (0.206)        (0.156)        (0.012)       (0.012)

          Biology, Chemistry, Pre-Health Sci        0.034                        0.034*         0.032**                  0.023          0.009        0.014**        0.015**
43




                                                   (0.183)        (0.000)        (0.018)        (0.016)                 (0.150)        (0.093)       (0.006)        (0.006)

          Math, Eng, Physics, Comp Sci, Stat        0.227          0.060        0.167***       0.162***                  0.021          0.016          0.005         0.006
                                                   (0.421)        (0.239)        (0.047)        (0.047)                 (0.145)        (0.126)        (0.009)       (0.009)

          Computer Science                          0.114          0.030         0.084**        0.081**                  0.012          0.003         0.009*        0.010*
                                                   (0.319)        (0.171)        (0.036)        (0.036)                 (0.110)        (0.054)        (0.005)       (0.005)

          Engineering                               0.102          0.030         0.072*         0.079*                   0.012          0.010          0.002         0.002
                                                   (0.305)        (0.171)        (0.039)        (0.042)                 (0.110)        (0.101)        (0.006)       (0.007)

     B. BA Degree by Expected Wages
     Expected wage                                 11826           8563        3263.432***   3238.032***                 7421           7184          237.6          257.3
                                                 (8099.873)     (5227.583)      (974.442)     (973.728)               (3285.824)     (2575.711)     (204.451)      (202.592)

     Above 75'th Percentile                         0.205          0.060        0.145***       0.137***                  0.020          0.012          0.008         0.009
                                                   (0.406)        (0.239)        (0.047)        (0.047)                 (0.140)        (0.108)        (0.008)       (0.008)

     Above 50'th Percentile                         0.273          0.130         0.143**        0.144**                  0.035          0.028          0.007         0.008
                                                   (0.448)        (0.338)        (0.059)        (0.058)                 (0.185)        (0.164)        (0.012)       (0.012)

     Observations                                    88             100              -             -                     652            684              -              -
     Notes: This table presents means, means-difference and standard deviations (in parentheses) of outcomes of individuals who are aged 22-27 in 2001, 2002. The treatment
     group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. The control group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 2004, 2005. In Panel A the dependent variable is
     an indicator of whether the student completed a BA in the areas of study indicated by the outcome. In Panel B the dependent variable is an indicator of whether the
     student completed a BA in a field of studies with expected wages between the different quartile. The outcome "Expected Wages" is continuous, and the measurement
     unit is New Israeli Shekels per month. 1US dollar is currently equal to approximately 3.7 shekels. The simple difference regressions include only cohort dummies. The
     controlled difference regressions include cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed effects and the following student demographic controls: gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic
     dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from FSU, Ethiopia, Israel and other countries). Difference in means significant at ***1% **5% *10%.
              Table 11: Tel-Aviv as a Control Group, Effect of Pay Reform on BA Degree Attainment, by Field of Study
                                                              (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1995 and in 2001)

                                                                                     BA Degree by Field of Study

                                       Humanities               Social Sciences                                                 Sciences

                      Any Field        Humanities       Social Sciences    Economics,         Sciences Any      Biology,     Math, Eng,         Computer        Engineering
                                       Any Field          Any Field       Business, Law           Field       Chemistry,    Physics, Comp        Science
                                                                                                             Pre-Health Sci   Sci, Stat
                          (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)             (6)            (7)                (8)              (9)

     A. Cross Section Regressions
     Pre-Reform       -0.066***          -0.010**          -0.039***        -0.031***          -0.017***       -0.006**         -0.012**           -0.002           -0.005
                       (0.011)            (0.005)           (0.008)          (0.006)            (0.006)         (0.003)          (0.005)          (0.003)          (0.004)

     Post-Reform      -0.029***            -0.007          -0.034***        -0.033***           0.012**        0.011***           0.002            0.003            0.005
44




                       (0.010)            (0.005)           (0.008)          (0.006)            (0.006)         (0.003)          (0.005)          (0.003)          (0.003)

     B. Difference-in-Differences
     Simple            0.037**             0.004             0.004            -0.002            0.029***       0.016***          0.013*            0.005           0.009*
                       (0.015)            (0.007)           (0.011)          (0.009)             (0.008)        (0.004)          (0.007)          (0.005)          (0.005)

     Controlled        0.036**             0.002             0.003            -0.003            0.030***       0.017***          0.013*            0.005           0.009*
                       (0.015)            (0.007)           (0.011)          (0.009)             (0.008)        (0.004)          (0.007)          (0.005)          (0.005)

     Observations       91563             91563             91563            91563               91563             91563         91563            91563            91563

     Notes: This table presents the estimated coefficients of interest of difference-in-differences regressions, comparing cohorts of individuals aged 22-27 in pre/post reform
     period (See Figure 1). Treatment group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. Control group consists of Individuals who lived in Tel-Aviv. The dependent
     variable is an indicator of whether the student completed a BA in the areas of study indicated by the outcome. The simple difference-in-differences regressions includes
     only cohort dummies. The controlled difference-in-differences regressions includes cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed effects and the following student demographic controls:
     gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from FSU, Ethiopia, Israel and other countries). Standard
     errors clustered by kibbutz are presented in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     Table 12: Tel-Aviv as a Control Group, Effect of Pay Reform on BA Degree Attainment by Expected Wages and Gender
                                                              (Sample: Individuals Aged 22-27 in 1995 and in 2001)

                                                                                 BA Degree by Expected Wages

                                    Expected Wages                                  Field of Studies With                                Field of Studies With
                                                                              Expected Wages Above 3rd Quartile                      Expected Wages Above Median

                          All             Male            Female              All             Male            Female              All             Male            Female
                          (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)             (5)               (6)               (7)             (8)               (9)

     A. Cross Section Regressions
     Pre-Reform       -336.1***        -399.6***        -268.7***          -0.026***        -0.021***        -0.031***         -0.037***        -0.036***        -0.038***
                       (75.55)          (119.5)           (84.8)            (0.006)          (0.008)          (0.010)           (0.008)          (0.011)          (0.013)

     Post-Reform         72.74            76.74           61.98              0.000            0.007            -0.008            0.003            -0.003           0.011
                        (75.14)          (118.6)          (84.5)            (0.006)          (0.008)          (0.010)           (0.008)          (0.010)          (0.013)
45




     B. Difference-in-Differences
     Simple            408.8***         476.3***         330.7***          0.026***          0.028**          0.023*            0.040***         0.034**          0.049***
                        (106.6)          (168.4)          (119.7)           (0.009)          (0.012)          (0.014)            (0.011)         (0.015)           (0.018)

     Controlled        402.0***         471.2***         345.9***          0.025***          0.027**          0.025*            0.040***         0.033**          0.049***
                        (107.2)          (171.3)          (120.9)           (0.009)          (0.012)          (0.014)            (0.011)         (0.015)           (0.018)

     Observations       91,563           48,579           42,984            91,563           48,579           42,984             91,563           48,579           42,984
     Notes: This table presents the estimated coefficients of interest of difference-in-differences regressions, comparing cohorts of Individuals aged 22-27 in pre/post reform
     period (See Figure 1). The treatment group consists of kibbutzim that reformed in 1998, 1999. The control group consists of individuals who lived in Tel-Aviv. In
     columns 1-3 the dependent variable is continuous and the measurement unit is New Israeli Shekels per month. 1US dollar is currently equal to approximately 3.7 shekels.
     the dependent variable in columns 4-9 is an indicator of whether the student completed BA. in a field of studies with expected wages between the different quartile.
     The simple difference-in-differences regressions includes only cohort dummies. The controlled difference-in-differences regressions includes cohort dummies, kibbutz fixed
     effects and the following student demographic controls: gender, number of siblings, a set of ethnic dummies (origin from Africa/Asia, Europe/America, immigrants from
     FSU, Ethiopia, Israel and other countries). Standard errors clustered by kibbutz are presented in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
     levels respectively.
