                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HOW WOULD 401(K) `ROTHIFICATION' ALTER SAVING, RETIREMENT SECURITY,
                           AND INEQUALITY?

                                          Vanya Horneff
                                         Raimond Maurer
                                         Olivia S. Mitchell

                                       Working Paper 26437
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26437


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2019, Revised March 2020




The authors acknowledge research support for this work from the Michigan Retirement and
Disability Research Center (MRDRC), the German Investment and Asset Management
Association (BVI), and the Pension Research Council/Boettner Center at The Wharton School of
the University of Pennsylvania. We also thank the initiative High Performance Computing in
Hessen for grating us computing time at the LOEWE-CSC and Lichtenberg Cluster. The authors
also thank Anna Maria Maurer for helpful comments. All findings and conclusions expressed are
those of the authors and not the official views of the MRDRC, the Social Security
Administration, or any of the other institutions with which the authors are affiliated. This research
is part of the NBER Aging program and the Household Portfolio workshop. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26437.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Vanya Horneff, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Would 401(k) `Rothification' Alter Saving, Retirement Security, and Inequality?
Vanya Horneff, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 26437
November 2019, Revised March 2020
JEL No. D14,D91,G11,G22,G23,G28,G5,G51

                                           ABSTRACT

The US has long incentivized retirement saving in 401(k) and similar retirement accounts by
permitting workers to defer taxes on contributions, levying them instead when retirees withdraw
funds in retirement. This paper develops a dynamic life cycle model to show how and whether
`Rothification' ­ that is, taxing 401(k) contributions rather than payouts ­ would alter household
saving, investment, and Social Security claiming patterns. We show that these changes differ
importantly for low- versus higher-paid workers. We conclude that moving to a system that taxes
pension contributions instead of withdrawals will lead to later retirement ages, particularly for the
better-educated. It would also reduce work hours and lifetime tax payments and increase
consumption inequality in retirement. In addition, we show how these behaviors would differ in a
persistently low interest rate environment versus a more "normal" historical return world.


Vanya Horneff                                     Olivia S. Mitchell
Goethe University Frankfurt                       University of Pennsylvania
Finance Department                                The Wharton School
Theodor-W. Adorno Platz 3                         3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
House of Finance                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
60323 Frankfurt                                   and NBER
Germany                                           mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
vhorneff@finance.uni-frankfurt.de

Raimond Maurer
Goethe University Frankfurt
Finance Department
Theodor-W. Adorno Platz 3
60323 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
maurer@finance.uni-frankfurt.de
                                                                                                                1


                           How Would 401(k) `Rothification' Alter
                         Saving, Retirement Security, and Inequality?

        The US has long incentivized retirement saving by deferring taxes on workers' pension

contributions until the assets are withdrawn in old age, at which point the withdrawn funds

become subject to income tax. In this way, most 401(k) retirement accounts are taxed according

to an "EET" regime: workers contribute out of pre-tax earnings, recognize pre-tax investment

earnings in their accounts, and pay income tax on withdrawals during retirement. This policy

has a large current budgetary cost: the US Treasury foregoes over $100 billion per year due to

tax-deferred contributions to 401(k) and similar plans (Thornton 2017). 1 Partly because of

projected federal budget shortfalls, some policymakers have recently proposed eliminating or

capping tax-qualified retirement plan contributions, a practice termed `Rothification,' named

after Senator William Roth who successfully passed legislation allowing this in 1997.

Specifically, the idea would be to treat all future retirement contributions to a "TEE" regime,

in which workers would contribute to their pensions out of after-tax income, and then no

additional tax would be levied thereafter (Schoeff 2017).

        The Rothification idea has been a topic of considerable recent discussion, with former

President Obama recommending a pre-tax pension contribution cap in 2015, and related

proposals were offered by the Trump Administration during the 2017 tax reform debate.

Though those proposals were not enacted, the topic is certain to be revisited given the amount

of revenue involved. In an economy with a single tax rate and a flat benefit system, taxing

benefits now versus later is unlikely to change behavior. Yet in the US economy, there are

numerous nonlinearities in the tax and Social Security systems which render less obvious the

ways in which such a reform might alter household behavior. Accordingly, if such a reform




1
  The Federal Government does receive some of the deferred tax revenue later when benefits are paid out, but
retirees are often in a lower tax bracket than when working. Moreover the deferral of taxes tends to mean that the
revenue is not `captured' in the traditional 10-year accounting window used for revenue neutrality calculations.
Hence moving the tax capture forward is politically appealing to some; see Sibaie (2017).
                                                                                                              2


were to be passed in the future, it could have important implications for household behavior.

Moreover, effects are likely to vary across different population subgroups.

        To date, however, there has been no coherent microeconomic analysis of how

Rothification could alter household consumption, saving, retirement patterns, and tax-

payments. Our paper fills this gap by developing a richly detailed and state-of-the-art life cycle

stochastic dynamic model with endogenous work effort, portfolio choice, consumption, saving,

and Social Security claiming patterns, to evaluate such a policy's potential effects for the

population overall and for different population subgroups. Of key importance is heterogeneity:

that is, how outcomes will differ for workers with different lifetime earnings profiles. For

instance, some have argued that "Roths may not, in fact, work out to be a better deal" for low

income people (Tergesen 2017), while others argue the opposite. 2 We therefore assess how key

outcomes change for a variety of worker-types differentiated by sex and education.

        Additionally, it is important to recognize that converting retirement plans to Roth plans

would take place against the backdrop of the new income tax structure implemented in 2018

which reduced the tax burden for most earners. 3 The tax reform therefore also changed the

relative attractiveness of saving for retirement in an EET environment, since lower marginal

tax rates on workers' earnings decreased the attractiveness of saving in 401(k) accounts. Our

research therefore also compares how work, saving, benefit claiming behavior, and tax

payments would respond in an EET versus TEE setting, for a heterogeneous set of workers.

        Finally, we analyze how our results would differ if the economy were to move out of

the very low interest rate environment of the last decade, and return to a more "normal" regime.

We know that persistent low returns spur workers to save and invest differently and can also

drive different decisions about how long to work and when to claim Social Security benefits



2
  Hallez (2017) reports that some predict that low-wage workers would save less in a TEE regime, whereas Statman
(2017) concluded the opposite.
3
  This tax reform doubled the standard deduction to calculate taxable income, cut marginal tax rates, and raised
tax brackets, especially for high earners. (IRS 2018)
                                                                                                3


(Horneff, Maurer, and Mitchell 2018). The quantitative easing policies of the US Federal

Reserve Bank after the financial crisis have resulted in extraordinarily low real US Treasury

yields over the past decade, compared to the normal historical real return of 3% (1989-2008). 4

We seek to study how appealing Rothification might be in this new low interest rate

environment, compared to the traditional EET framework for the $5 trillion invested in 40(k)

assets.

           In what follows, we first build and calibrate a structural life cycle model assuming an

EET framework calibrated to US federal/state income tax and Social Security/Medicare

premium structures and realistic Social Security benefit formulas including adjustments for

early and delayed claiming. Importantly, the baseline model also incorporates real-world rules

characterizing EET tax-qualified 401(k) accounts including the current caps on 401(k) pre-tax

contributions, employer matches, penalties and taxes on early withdrawals, and Required

Minimum Distribution withdrawals. We show that our results agree closely with observed

consumption, saving, and Social Security claiming age behavior of U.S. households, while

matching the current distribution of 401(k) wealth rather nicely.

           Next, we develop results under an alternative environment where 401(k) contributions

are taxed according to a TEE structure. This permits us to identify changes in behavior for the

heterogeneous workers described above, under the two tax regimes (EET versus TEE). Next,

we compare results with those obtained in a higher real return environment. In particular, we

assess whether the lower-paid behave differently from the higher-paid in terms of savings inside

and outside the tax-qualified accounts, as well as in non-pension savings accounts, and whether

they would change their claiming behavior for Social Security benefits. In addition, we are

interested in how Rothification would alter the distribution of retirement incomes relative to the

current EET-system. For example, the gap between high and low-wage workers' take home pay




4
    Based on our analysis using DataStream of US Treasury rates deflated by the CPI.
                                                                                              4


is not diminished by income taxes under an EET system, whereas it is under a TEE program.

Moreover, the Social Security replacement rate formula is progressive, as it provides relatively

higher benefits for low-wage workers than for the higher paid. Given this, an EET scheme

enhances the progressivity of overall old age income (pension account withdrawals plus Social

Security benefits), whereas a TEE structure treats retirement benefits more neutrally.

Accordingly, it is theoretically unclear how Rothification will alter household behavior without

modeling the rich institutional details confronting real-world consumers, along with the

economic environment, capital and labor market risk, and uncertain lifetimes. The paper also

compares expected household tax payments over the life cycle under both the EET and TEE

regimes. We conclude that taxing pension contributions instead of withdrawals leads to delayed

retirement, lower lifetime tax payments, reductions in consumption, and higher consumption

inequality. Retirement asset accumulation is also lower under the Rothification regime.



Related Literature

       This research builds on prior work (Horneff, Maurer, and Mitchell 2018, 2019) by

exploring the impact of a Rothification reform for 401(k) plans. Here we add to the literature

by delving into the distributional impacts of such a reform in both a "normal" and a low return

environment, while accounting for the income tax regime recently adopted. Our work is

informed by a number of studies using a life cycle framework to model and evaluate how

individuals respond to a range of environmental shocks. For example, the workhorse model of

Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) and Gomes and Michaelides (2005) was subsequently

extended by Love (2010) and Hubener, Maurer, and Mitchell (2016), who showed how family

shocks due to changes in marital status and children alter optimal consumption, insurance, asset

allocation, and retirement patterns.Horneff, Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla (2015) demonstrated

how capital market surprises can influence saving and portfolio allocation patterns. Gomes,

Kotlikoff, and Viceira. (2008) and Chai, Horneff, Maurer, and Mitchell (2011) showed how
                                                                                                                5


flexible work patterns can help people hedge both earnings and capital market risk. Gomes,

Michaelides, and Polkovnichenko (2009) demonstrated the impact of taxable and tax-deferred

accounts on optimal saving over the lifecycle.

    In the present paper, we evaluate how people might optimally respond to a TEE versus the

current EET tax regime for retirement accounts by adjusting their consumption, saving,

investment, and retirement patterns. In addition we analyze these possible changes in optimal

behavior if the capital market were to move away from a persistently low return environment

to what used to be perceived as the "normal" return environment. In contrast to our life cycle

model in Horneff, Maurer, and Mitchell (forthcoming), we do not include annuity purchases

but we do allow flexible work effort and endogenous claiming of Social Security benefits. 5



The Consumer's Lifecycle Problem: Model and Calibration

        In what follows, we build and calibrate a structural dynamic consumption and portfolio

choice model for an individual maximizing his utility over his life cycle using a richly specified,

sophisticated formulation of lifetime behavior calibrated to US federal/state income tax and

Social Security/Medicare premium structures, along with realistic Social Security benefit

formulas. 6 Just as importantly, the baseline model also incorporates real-world rules

characterizing EET tax-qualified 401(k) accounts including the current U.S. caps on 401(k) pre-

tax contributions, employer matches, penalties and taxes on early withdrawals, and Required

Minimum Distribution withdrawal amounts. Results using calibrated baseline parameters agree

closely with observed consumption, saving, and Social Security claiming age patterns of U.S.

households. Specifically, our model generates a large peak at the earliest claiming age at 62




5
   We also provide a theoretical backing for the empirical claiming age patterns identified by Shoven and Slavov
(2012, 2014).
6
  In particular, we take account of Social Security PIA and AIME formulas, as well as early and delayed retirement
adjustments, and full retirement ages.
                                                                                               6


along with a second peak at the (system-defined) Full Retirement Age, and the model also

matches the current distribution of 401(k) wealth rather nicely (Horneff et al. 2018).

Preferences. We work in discrete time and assume that the worker's decision period starts at

 = 1 (age 25) and ends at  = 76 (age 100); accordingly, each period corresponds to one

year. The household has an uncertain lifetime, such that the probability to survive from  until

the next year  + 1 is denoted by  . Survival rates entering into the utility function are taken

from the US Population Life Table (Arias 2010). Preferences are represented by a Cobb

                                (  )1-
Douglas function  ( ,  ) =                based on current consumption  and leisure time 
                                    1-


(normalized as a fraction of total available time). The parameter  measures leisure preferences;

 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion; and  is the time preference factor. The recursive

definition of the value function is given by:

                                  (   )1-                                                (1)
                                =         +  ( +1 ) ,
                                   1 - 

                                  1-
                              
with terminal utility  =               and  = 1 after retirement. We calibrate the preference
                               1-


parameters so our results match empirical claiming rates reported by the US Social Security

Administration and average assets in tax-qualified retirement plans. This matching procedure

produces preference parameters of  = 1.2,  = 5 and  = 0.96 (for details, see below).

Time budget, labor income, and Social Security retirement benefits. As in Horneff et al.

(2019), our model allows for flexible work effort and retirement ages. The worker has the

opportunity to allocate up to (1 -  ) = 0.6 of his available time budget to paid work (assuming

100 waking hours per week and 52 weeks per year). Depending on his work effort, the uncertain

yearly before-tax labor income is given by:

                              +1 = (1 -  ) ·  · +1 · +1 .                                (2)

Here  is a deterministic wage rate component which depends on age, education, sex, and an

indicator for whether the individual works full time, part time, or overtime. The variable +1 =
                                                                                                                 7


 · +1 is the permanent component of wage rates with independent lognormal distributed

shocks  ~(-0.52   2                                          2
              P ,  ), having a mean of one and volatility of  . In addition,


 ~(-0.52   2                                        2
       U ,  ) is a transitory shock with volatility  and assumed uncorrelated with

 .

                                                                                
        The calibration of the deterministic component of the wage rate process  and the

variances of the permanent and transitory wage shocks  and 
                                                            is based on 1975­2015 waves

of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). We estimate these separately by sex and

educational level, where the latter groupings are less than High School, High School graduate,

and at least some college (<HS, HS, Coll+); see Appendix A, Table A1.

        Between ages 62 and 70, a worker may retire from work and claim Social Security

benefits. The benefit formula is an overall concave piece-wise linear function of the worker's

average indexed lifetime earnings. Accordingly, this provides an annual unreduced Social

Security benefit ­ also named Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) ­ equal (in 2015) to 90 percent

of (12 times) the first $826 of average indexed monthly earnings, plus 32 percent of average

indexed monthly earnings over $826 and through $4,980, plus 15 percent of average indexed

monthly earnings over $4,980 and through the cap $9,875. 7 Should an individual claim benefits

before (after) his system-defined Normal Retirement Age of 66, his lifelong Social Security

benefits will be permanently reduced (increased) according to pre-specified factors. If the

individual were to work beyond age 62, the model stipulates that he devote at least one hour

per week; also, our model rules out overtime work in retirement (i.e. 0.01  (1 -  )  0.4).

Wealth dynamics during the work life. During the work life, an individual has the opportunity

to use current cash on hand for consumption  and investments. Some portion  of the

worker's pre-tax salary  (up to a limit of $18,000 per year) can be invested into a tax-qualified




7
  See US SSA (nd_a) and US SSA (nd-b). Following Chai et al. 2011 in the optimization the PIA is approximated
using the permanent income; in the simulation of optimal life cycle we use the 35 best years of earnings to specify
the PIA and adjust the corresponding permanent income state.
                                                                                                 8


401(k)-retirement plan of the EET or TEE type. Also, from age 50 onwards, he is permitted an

additional $6,000 of `catch-up' contributions. In addition, a worker can invest outside his

retirement plan in risky stocks  and riskless bonds  . Hence, cash on hand  in each year

can is given by:

            =  +  +  +  .                                                                  (3)

In addition to the usual constraints,  ,  ,  ,   0, the worker may not contribute more than

  $18,000 in the 401(k) plan (as per US law). One year later, his cash on hand is given by

the value of stocks (bonds) having earned an uncertain (riskless) gross return of +1 ( ), plus

income from work (after housing costs  ), plus withdrawals ( ) from the 401(k) plan, minus

any federal/state/city taxes and Social Security contributions, +1 , and health insurance 

costs:

           +1 =  +1 +   + +1 (1 -  ) +  - +1 -  .                                          (4)

We model housing costs  as in Love (2010). Our "baseline" financial market

parameterizations assume a risk-free interest rate of 1%, and an equity risk premium of 4% with

a return volatility of 18%. In subsequent simulations, we work with a higher interest rate of 3%,

reflective of the more historically normal capital market returns. The annual cost of health

insurance  is set at $1200. As in Lusardi, Michaud and Mitchell (2017), if a worker's cash

on hand were to fall below +1  $5,879 p.a., the model posits that he receives a minimum

welfare benefit of $5,879 the next year.

Taxation and evolution of retirement plans: During the work life and retirement, households

must pay various taxes (+1 ) which reduce cash on hand available for consumption and

investment. The amount and timing of these tax payments over the life cycle differ significantly

in the case of an EET versus TEE system.
                                               
         First, workers must pay payroll taxes +1 amounting to 11.65%, which is the sum of

1.45% Medicare, 4% city and state tax and 6.2% Social Security tax (up to a cap of 118,500 per
                                                                                                                9


year). Payroll taxes are not directly affected by retirement accounts. Second, the individual must
                                                                         
also pay a progressive federal income tax +1 based on his taxable income +1 , seven income

tax brackets, and the corresponding marginal tax rates for each tax bracket (for details, see IRS

2015a and Appendix B). Taxable income is a complex function of labor earnings, income from

investments, and contributions into as well as withdrawals from 401(k) plans. Under both

regimes for tax-qualified retirement accounts that we consider, investment earnings on assets

are not counted as part of taxable earnings, yet the treatment of contributions (including

employer matching contributions) and withdrawals differs between the two tax regimes. In the

EET setup, contributions to the retirement account are tax-exempt (E) up to a limit, while

withdrawals are part of taxable income (T). Technically, this means that employer matching

contributions are not part of taxable income, while own contributions can be subtracted from

taxable income. In the TEE case, contributions (including matching employer contributions)

are taxed, but withdrawal are tax exempt. Technically, this means that own contributions cannot

be deducted from taxable income, and employer matching contributions are added to taxable

income. To sidestep liquidity problems due to back tax payments, we assume that employer

contributions are taxed directly at the source, based on the worker's personal income tax rate.
                               
This generates a tax burden of  , which reduces the contribution into the TEE account as

well as the income tax amount. 8

        Finally, in line with US regulation, the individual must also pay penalty tax of 10% on

early withdrawals from 401(k) accounts prior to age 59 ½ ( = 36). This rules applies for both

the TEE and EET regime:

 EET                            =  +  +                                                                 (5)




8
  Actual Roth-401(k) regulation requires that employer contributions are taxed according to the EET regime, which
requires a separate account for own versus employer contributions. This would require an additional state variable
in our models, greatly increasing the computational burden required to solve the models, so we do not follow that
approach here.
                                                                                                            10


    TEE                  =  + ( - 
                                   ) + 



          Next, we describe the development of the tax-qualified retirement account in the life-

cycle model. Prior to the endogenous retirement age  =  , the worker's assets in his tax-

qualified retirement plan are invested in bonds earning a risk-free gross (pre-tax) return of ,

                                                                                               401()
as well as risky stocks paying an uncertain gross return of  . The total value (+1                     ) of the

401(k) assets at time  + 1 is therefore determined by the previous period's value minus any

                         401()
withdrawals (                    ), plus additional own contributions ( ), plus any employer match

( ), and returns on stocks and bonds. To avoid substantial tax penalties from age 70.5

onwards, retirees must take Required Minimum Distributions from 401(k) plans which are

based on life expectancy data from the IRS Uniform Lifetime Table (IRS 2015b). In the TEE
                                                                             
regime, the employer match is reduced by the tax pre-payment  . The variable  denotes

the relative exposure of overall assets allocated to stocks. Overall, the wealth dynamics of the

EET or TEE retirement account evolves as follows:

    EET      401()            401()                           )  401()                                    (6)
            +1         =                - Wt +  +  +1 + (1 -           -

            Wt +  +                 and

    TEE      401 ( )  401         ( )   
            +1    =        - Wt +  +  -  +1 + (1 -
             )     401()                
                           - Wt +  +  -   .

          To be considered as a safe harbor 401(k) plan and therefore avoid complex non-

discrimination testing, we assume that the employers match 100% of employee contributions

up to 5% of yearly labor income. 9 Due to regulation, the matching rate can only applied to a

maximum compensation of $265,000, so the maximum employer contribution is $13,250. The

matching contribution is then given by:




9
 See Willson (2019) for 401(k) safe harbor plans. Love (2007) reports a modal value of 6% for matching rates of
US defined contribution plans.
                                                                                                               11


                                      = min( , 0.05 , $13,250).                                            (7)

Wealth dynamics during retirement. The worker can retire and claim Social Security benefits

between age 62 and 70. After selecting his endogenous retirement age,  , the individual may

still elect to save outside the tax-qualified retirement plan in stocks and bonds, as follows:

                                               =  +  +  .                                                  (8)

His cash on hand for the next period evolves as follows:

                   +1 =  +1 +   + +1 (1 -  ) +  - +1 .                                                   (9)


Old age retirement benefits provided by Social Security are determined by the worker's Primary

Insurance Amount (PIA), which in turn depend on his average lifetime earnings as described

above. Social Security payments (+1 ) in retirement (   ) are given by:

                                      +1 =     +1 .                                                     (10)


Here,  is the mandated adjustment factor for claiming before or after the system-defined Full

Retirement Age, which in our model is assumed to be age 66. 10 The variable  is a transitory
               2 2
shock  ~LN(-0.5 ,  ), which reflects out-of-pocket medical and other expenditure shocks

in retirement (as in Love 2010). During retirement, benefits payments from Social Security are

partially taxed by the individual federal income tax rate as well as the 4% city and state and

1.45% Medicare taxes. 11 We model the 401(k) plan payouts as follows:

                     401()            401()
                   +1        =                - Wt R t+1
                                                                                                       (10)
                                               )  401()
                                     + (1   -                 - Wt  ,           <  .



10
   The factors we use are 0.75 (claiming age 62), 0.8 (claiming age 63), 0.867 (claiming age 64), 0.933 (claiming
age 65), 1.00 (claiming age 66), 1.08 (claiming age 67), 1.16 (claiming age 68), 1.24 (claiming age 69), and 1.32
(claiming age 70); see US SSA (nd_c).
11
   For Social Security tax rules see US SSA (nd_d). Up to 85% of Social Security benefits may be subject to
income tax for higher-income households, yet due to generous exemptions, many households receive their Social
Security benefits tax-free. From age 65 onward, benefits are not taxed by Social Security or Medicare Part A
(hospital insurance). Nevertheless, most elderly enroll in Medicare Part B (medical insurance), Part C (advantage
plans), and Part D (drug prescription), and pay premiums. To simplify calculations, we assume that these premiums
equal 1.45% of benefits.
                                                                                              12


Under US law, plan participants must take retirement account payouts from age 70 onwards,

according to the Required Minimum Distribution rules (m) specified by the Internal Revenue

Service (IRS 2015b). Accordingly, withdrawals from the retirement account must take into

                                     401()               401()
account the following constraints:              <                .

Calibration of preference parameters and model solution. We posit that households

maximize the value function (1) subject to the constraints and calibrations set out above, by

optimally selecting their consumption, work effort, claiming age for Social Security benefits,

investments and withdrawals from tax-qualified 401(k)-plans, and investments in as well as

redemptions of stocks and bonds. As this optimization problem cannot be solved analytically,

it requires a numerical procedure using dynamic stochastic programming. Accordingly, to

generate optimal policy functions, in each period  we discretize the space in four dimensions

30(X)×20( 401() )×8(P)×9(K), with  being cash on hand,  401() assets held in the 401(k)

retirement plan, P permanent income, and K the claiming age. Next, we simulate 100,000

independent life cycles based on optimal feedback controls for each of the six population

subgroups of interest (male/female with <HS, HS, and Coll+). We then aggregate the subgroups

to obtain national mean values using weights from the National Center on Education Statistics

(2016). Specifically, the weights are 50.7% female (61% with Coll+, 28% with HS, and 11%

with <HS), and 49.3% male (57% with Coll+, 30% HS, and 13% <HS).

       We calibrate preference parameters (assumed to unique for the six subgroup) in such a

way that our model results match empirical claiming rates reported by the US Social Security

Administration (US SSA 2015) and average assets in 401(k) plans. Our baseline calibration

assumes a risk-free interest rate of 1%, and also that people have access to tax qualified 401(k)

retirement accounts under the EET regime. Specifically, we calibrate our model to data from

the Employee Benefit Research Institute (2017) which reports 401(k) account balances for 7.3

million plan participants in five age groups (20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, and 60-69) in 2015.

To generate 401(k) simulated balances and claiming rates, we first solve the life cycle model
                                                                                                                 13


where the individual has access to traditional EET 401(k) plans under the tax-regime in 2015

(i.e. before the reform in 2018); we then generate 100,000 lifecycles using optimal feedback

controls for each of the six subgroups (male/female with <HS, HS, and Coll+). These six

subgroups are aggregated to obtain national median values, using National Center on Education

Statistics (2016) weights. Finally, to compare our results to the EBRI (2017) data, we construct

average account levels for each of five age subgroups. Repeating this procedure for alternative

preference parameter sets, we find that a coefficient of relative risk aversion  of 5, a time

discount rate  of 0.96, and a leisure parameter  of 1.2 are the parameters that most closely

match simulated model outcomes and empirical evidence on both 401(k) balances and claiming

rates of Social Security Benefits. 12

         Figure 1 (top) presents claiming rates generated by our life cycle model (dark bars)

versus empirical claiming rates (light bars) reported by the US Social Security Administration

(2015) for the year 2015 for nondisabled males and females. Here we see that our model closely

tracks the empirically-observed early claiming age peak at age 62, as well as the second peak

at the Full Retirement Age (66). The lower Panel of Figure 1 displays simulated versus

empirical evidence on 401(k) assets by age groups. Again, our simulated outcomes are

remarkably close to the empirically-observed 401(k) account values, implying that our model

accords well with real-world data.

Figure 1 here



What Would Rothification Do?

         We next illustrate how switching from traditional EET to a TEE tax regime for

retirement savings would affect claiming ages, assets held inside and outside tax-qualified

retirement plans, consumption, hours of work, asset and consumption inequality, and tax



12
  Interestingly, these parameters are also in line with those used in prior work on life-cycle portfolio choice; see
for instance Brown (2001).
                                                                                                 14


payments over the life cycle. In addition, we study how the results would differ, if the very low

interest rate environment of the last decade ( = 1%) were to be replaced by a more historically

"normal" return regime ( = 3%).

Asset accumulation patterns. Table 1 offers an accounting of how the tax regime change alters

asset allocation patterns in the 401(k) accounts versus non tax-qualified assets. Here we focus on

lifecycle asset accumulation patterns under the EET/TEE regimes, as well as the low/high expected

return scenarios. Most strikingly, we see that assets in 401(k) plans (Panel A) are lower under the

Rothification regime, particularly in later life, compared to the higher levels under the EET regime.

This shortfall is greater in the higher return regime, such that tax qualified assets are always larger

in the EET environment. By contrast, non-qualified assets are markedly lower in the EET world

from age 60 onward, by about half as of the Full Retirement Age (i.e., the mid-60s). Yet in terms

of consumption opportunities, the value of retirement plan assets in the EET regime is not directly

comparable with that in the TEE regime. This is because withdrawals of EET assets must be taxed

before they can used for consumption, while withdrawals from TEE assets are tax free.

Table 1 here

Impacts on consumption and work hours. Table 2 evaluates the effects of moving from an EET

to a TEE regime on consumption patterns and work hours, for low and high interest rates ( =

1% and 3%). In the low interest rate regime, EET lifetime consumption is below that in the TEE

world from age 40 onward. Panel B also reveals that people work about three more hours per week

in the TEE scenario during the Social Security claiming window (age 62-69). If the real return

were instead  = 3%, average consumption under TEE would be lower for all age groups,

compared to the EET case. In addition, during the work life, work effort would be about two hours

per week lower under TEE. Nevertheless, in the Social Security benefit claiming window, people

work about three hours more per week under the TEE regime. Overall, Rothification reduces work

over the lifetime but pushes out retirement claiming, compared to the EET tax environment.

Table 2 here
                                                                                                                   15


Impact on claiming ages. Table 3 shows how Social Security benefit claiming ages would

change by sex across tax regimes and under the low versus high interest rate scenarios. In both

tax regimes men and women's average retirement ages are later when interest rates are low

( = 1%). This is because delaying Social Security is similar to buying a deferred annuity.13

Hence it is more attractive to draw down one's 401(k) account to delay Social Security

claiming, compared to keeping the money in the retirement account and earning (uncertain)

investment returns.

         Overall, the TEE regime's lower marginal tax rate on 401(k) payouts induces workers

to defer Social Security claiming more than under the EET regime. This may be explained as

follows: some workers with sufficient retirement plan assets want to retire, but they find it

attractive to wait to claim Social Security so as to boost these via the delayed claiming factors

(6-8% increase per year of delayed claiming). Meanwhile, financing consumption during this

no-work phase requires them to withdraw from their 401(k) assets. Under an EET regime,

workers must pay income taxes on their pension withdrawals; thus the attraction of earning

higher Social Security benefits by delaying claiming must be weighed against the disadvantage

of paying high income taxes on withdrawals. If the tax burden on withdrawals is heavier than

the advantage of receiving higher Social Security benefits, it is rational to claim earlier. This

tradeoff must also take into account the fact that only a portion of Social Security benefits are

included in taxable income (up to 50% could be tax-free). Accordingly, the net-of-tax gain from

delaying Social Security claiming is relatively small in the EET scenario. The effect is stronger

when interest rates are high, because workers build more assets in their 401(k) accounts.

         Such complex tax considerations are irrelevant under the TEE regime, because pension

withdrawals are not counted as part of taxable income. Therefore, given their financial

resources to finance consumption until claiming, in the TEE scenario workers base their


13
   Naturally, the price of the annuity varies with the market return. For instance, the implied interest rate to price
an annuity comparable to Social Security in the private market would range between 2 and 5%, depending on the
retiree's age and sex. See Hubener et al. (2016), Shoven and Slavov (2014), and Maurer et al 2017.
                                                                                              16


decisions to delay claiming only on delayed retirement credit earned by deferring Social

Security. Moreover, this effect is stronger under a high versus a low interest rate regime.

Table 3 here

       The average claiming age changes do obscure some interesting differences across

population subgroups, as can be seen in Figure 2. Specifically, claiming behavior of the least-

educated high school dropouts is relatively similar in the EET and TEE regimes, primarily

because this group saves and accumulates fewer assets than the better-educated. Moreover, the

changes in claiming ages for this group are small under both interest rate environments. For

example, women (men) without a high school degree work only 0.5 (3) month more under the

TEE regime in a low interest rate environment, while Coll+ men and women defer claiming

benefits by more than a year under both interest rate environments. The impact is strongest for

college-educated females who work 16 months longer given a high real rate, in the TEE versus

EET setup. Accordingly, more educated and wealthier workers are predicted to work

substantially longer under Rothification, with a much smaller impact on the less-educated.

Figure 2 here

Impacts on tax payments over the life cycle. Next, in Figure 3 we plot the average tax

payments per individual over the life cycle under the EET and TEE regimes. The figure includes

payroll taxes, income taxes, and penalty taxes for early withdrawals for the overall population

comprised by our six subgroups. Both scenarios assume a low and persistent interest rate of

1%. As anticipated, tax payments under EET are lower during the first 25 years of the worklife,

since 401(k) contributions are not part of taxable income; by contrast, under the TEE regime,

workers must pay taxes on both own and employer matching contributions. Yet the situation

changes around age 50 when tax payments rise in the EET regime, and the difference is

particularly marked between ages 62 and 70. Thereafter, tax payments in both the EET and TEE

scenarios are relatively low.
                                                                                               17


       The explanation is that, in both tax regimes, workers begin curtailing their work hours

after age 50 and finance their consumption by 401(k) withdrawals. From age 60 onward, 401(k)

withdrawals are not subject to the 10% penalty tax in both tax regimes, but withdrawals from

EET accounts are part of taxable income which results in higher tax payments ­ in contrast to

the TEE world. The difference in tax payment is particularly large between ages 62 and 70. For

example, at age 65, the annual EET tax payment averages $8,000, or about twice as large as in

the Roth regime. This result is driven by individuals who have relatively large accumulations

in their 401(k) plans and use these assets to (partially) retire from work, delay claiming Social

Security benefits, and spend retirement assets to cover consumption until claiming. From age

70 onwards, most of the 401(k) assets are spent so people withdraw only small amounts from

their retirement plans. Hence, retirees in the EET world pay only slightly more taxes than those

in the TEE world.

Figure 3 here

       Table 4 shows numerical values of average lifetime tax payments per individual for the

two tax regimes and interest rate scenarios under consideration. In all scenarios, we find that

average tax payments are higher under the EET system until workers attain age 49. For example,

assuming  = 1%, workers pay about $11,000 more in taxes under the TEE system up to that

age. Yet between ages 50-69, workers in the EET regime pay $26,000 more than in the TEE

world. Over the complete life cycle, tax payments average 6% ($24,000) more in the EET world

when the interest rate is low; the difference increases to about 10% ($42,000) if the real rate is

3%. Overall, we conclude that tax payments are higher in the short run in the TEE regime, but

lower in the long run.

Table 4 here

Impact on Inequality

       Last, we evaluate how a TEE versus an EET tax regime for retirement savings affects

asset and consumption inequality. For the three population subgroups and the ETT versus TEE
                                                                                                18


tax regimes, Table 5 reports average wealth inside and outside tax-qualified accounts as of age

62, as well as average income and average consumption between ages 25-62. Panel A depicts

results for the low and Panel B for the high interest rate scenario.

Table 5 here

       Following Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell (2017), we measure relative wealth, income,

and consumption inequality in terms of the ratio of college graduates to high school dropouts

as of age 62. The higher is this ratio, the greater the inequality along this dimension. Regardless

of the interest rate environment, we see that inequality measured this way is greater under the

TEE regime, for three out of four metrics. For example, under the EET regime, a Coll+

individual receives 3.73 times the income of the <HS group in the low interest regime; this

differential rises to 3.81 under the TEE tax setup. Additionally, consumption inequality is

slightly larger under the TEE regime, and inequality of assets outside tax-qualified accounts

rises substantially, for both interest rate scenarios. In contrast, 401(k) assets are less unequal

under the TEE regime, though it must be recalled that asset levels in 401(k) accounts cannot be

directly compared across the two tax regimes, since 401(k) assets are subject to tax on

withdrawal and under the TEE regime, such assets are not taxed. Furthermore, the marginal tax

rate for <HS who have only about $14,000 in their 401(k) accounts is far lower than for their

Coll+ counterparts who have over $210,000 in their 401(k) accounts.



Conclusions

       This paper evaluates whether adopting a different tax treatment of retirement plan

contributions would materially change Social Security benefit claiming ages and work hours,

consumption, and asset allocation of workers looking ahead to retirement. We also assess

whether the lower-paid would behave differently from the higher-paid, in terms of change in

claiming, saving inside and outside the Roth accounts, and non-pension saving. Rothification

also alters the distribution of retirement incomes relative to the current EET-system. For
                                                                                                19


example, the gap between high and low-wage workers' take home pay is not diminished by

income taxes under an EET system, whereas it is under a TEE program. Moreover, the Social

Security replacement rate formula is progressive, as it provides relatively higher benefits for

low-wage workers than for the higher paid. Given these realities, an EET scheme enhances the

progressivity of overall old age income (pension account withdrawals plus Social Security

benefits), whereas a TEE structure treats pension benefits more neutrally. Accordingly, it is

theoretically impossible to predict how Rothification will alter household behavior without

taking into account the rich institutional details confronting real-world consumers, along with

the economic environment, capital and labor market risk, and uncertain lifetimes.

       Our structural model is a richly specified, sophisticated formulation of lifetime behavior

calibrated to US federal/state income tax and Social Security/Medicare premium structures,

along with realistic Social Security benefit formulas. We account for PIA and AIME formulas,

early and delayed retirement adjustments under Social Security, and real-world rules

characterizing tax-qualified DC accounts including the current caps on pre-tax contributions,

employer matches, penalties and taxes on early withdrawals, and Required Minimum

Distribution withdrawals. This lifecycle model of work, saving, consumption, and retirement

behavior provides several lessons for those interested in an alternative tax regime for pension

plans. Overall, we show that that taxing pension contributions instead of withdrawals leads to

later retirement ages, especially for the better-educated. It also reduces lifetime work hours, and

increases consumption inequality. While there is some sensitivity to market returns, our overall

conclusions remain robust to the alternative assumptions explored here. Finally, lifetime tax

payments are lower by 6-10% under the Rothification tax regime.
                                                                                               20


References

Arias, E. (2010). United States Life Tables, 2005. National Vital Statistics Reports 58(10).
       US National Center for Health Statistics: Hyattsville, Maryland.

Brown, J. R. (2001). Private Pensions, Mortality Risk, and the Decision to Annuitize. Journal
      of Public Economics 82(1): 29-62.

Chai, J., W. Horneff, R. Maurer, and O. S. Mitchell. (2011). Optimal Portfolio Choice over
        the Life Cycle with Flexible Work, Endogenous Retirement, and Lifetime Payouts.
        Review of Finance. 15(4): 875-907.

Cocco, J., F. Gomes, and P. Maenhout. (2005). Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the
       Life Cycle. Review of Financial Studies. 18(2): 491-533.

Employee Benefit Research Institute. (EBRI 2017). What Does Consistent Participation in
      401(k) Plans Generate? Changes in 401(k) Plan Account Balances, 2010­2015. EBRI
      Issue BRIEF No.439.

Gomes, F. J., L. J. Kotlikoff, and L. M. Viceira. (2008). Optimal Life-Cycle Investing with
      Flexible Labor Supply: A Welfare Analysis of Life-Cycle Funds. American Economic
      Review: Papers & Proceedings. 98(2): 297-303.

Gomes, F. J., and A. Michaelides. (2005). Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation: Understanding
      the Empirical Evidence. The Journal of Finance. 60(2):869-904.

Gomes, F., A. Michaelides, and V. Polkovnichenko (2009). Optimal Savings with Taxable and
      Tax-Deferred Accounts. Review of Economic Dynamics. 12(4): 718-735.

Hallez, E. (2017). How a GOP Roth Plan Could Impact Retirement Savings. Ignites.com.
       https://www.ignites.com/c/1781243/209413?referrer_module=SearchSubFromIG&highlight=
       How%20a%20GOP%20Roth%20Plan%20Could%20Impact%20Retirement%20Savings

Horneff, V., R. Maurer, and O.S. Mitchell. (2018). How Low Returns Alter Optimal Life Cycle
       Saving, Investment, and Retirement Behavior. In R. Clark, R. Maurer, and O. S.
       Mitchell, eds. How Persistent Low Returns Will Shape Saving and Retirement. Oxford:
       Oxford University Press: 119-131.

Horneff, V., R. Maurer, and O.S. Mitchell. (2019). How Will Persistent Low Expected Returns
       Shape Household Economic Behavior? Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 18,
       612-622.

Horneff, V., R. Maurer, and O.S. Mitchell. (forthcoming). Putting the Pension Back in 401(k)
       Plans: Optimal versus Default Longevity Income Annuities. Journal of Banking and
       Finance.

Horneff, V., R. Maurer, O.S. Mitchell, and R. Rogalla. (2015). Optimal Life Cycle Portfolio
       Choice with Variable Annuities Offering Liquidity and Investment Downside
       Protection. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics. 63(1): 91-107.
                                                                                                    21


Hubener, A., R. Maurer, and O. S. Mitchell. (2016). How Family Status and Social Security
      Claiming Options Shape Optimal Life Cycle Portfolios. Review of Financial Studies.
      29(4): 937-978.

Internal Revenue Service (IRS 2015a). Form 1040 (Tax Tables): Federal Tax Rates, Personal
        Exemptions,      and      Standard     Deductions.       Downloaded      09/13/2018.
        https://www.irs.com/articles/2015-federal-tax-rates-personal-exemptions-and-
        standard-deductions

Internal Revenue Service (IRS 2015b). Retirement Plan and IRA Required Minimum
        Distributions FAQs. https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/p590b--2015.pdf

Internal Revenue Service (IRS 2018). Form 1040 (Tax Tables): Federal Tax Rates, Personal
        Exemptions,    and     Standard     Deductions.     Downloaded      08/26/2019.
        https://www.irs.com/articles/2018-federal-tax-rates-personal-exemptions-and-standard-
        deductions

Love, D. A. (2007). What Can Life-Cycle Models Tell Us about 401(k) Contributions and
      Participation? Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. 6(2): 147-185.

Love, D. A. (2010). The Effects of Marital Status and Children on Savings and Portfolio
      Choice. Review of Financial Studies. 23(1): 385-432.

Lusardi, A.M., O.S. Mitchell, and P.C. Michaud (2017). "Optimal Financial Literacy and
       Wealth Inequality." Journal of Political Economy. 125(2): 431-477.

National Center on Education Statistics. (2016). Digest of Education Statistics 52nd Edition,
       Table 104.30. https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2017/2017094.pdf.

Schoeff, M. (2017). Promises by Congress to Protect Retirement-savings Incentives Don't
       Ease Advocates. Jul 12. InvestmentNews.com.
        https://www.investmentnews.com/article/20170712/FREE/170719976/promises-by-congress-to-
        protect-retirement-savings-incentives-dont

Shoven, J.B., and S. N. Slavov. (2012). The Decision to Delay Social Security Benefits: Theory
      and Evidence. NBER Working Paper 17866.

Shoven, J.B., and S. N. Slavov. (2014). Does it Pay to Delay Social Security? Journal of
      Pension Economics and Finance. 13 (2): 121-144.

Sibaie, A. (2017). What Rothification Means for Tax Reform. The Tax Foundation.
       Washington, D.C. https://taxfoundation.org/what-rothification-means-for-tax-reform/

Statman, M. (2017). Critically, 'Rothification' of 401(k)'s not Harmful to Lower Incomes.
    TheHill.com.

Tergesen, Ann. (2017). How a $2,400 Cap on 401(k) Deductions Would Affect Your Savings.
   Oct. 29. https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-a-2-400-cap-on-401-k-deductions-would-affect-your-savings-
    1509313100?mg=prod/accounts-wsj
                                                                                              22


Thornton, Nick. (2017). Asset Managers' Profits Threatened by Rothification. benefitspro.com,
   September.http://www.benefitspro.com/2017/09/07/asset-managers-profits-threatened-by-
   rothification?t=retirement&slreturn=1508873159&page=3&page_all=1

US Social Security Administration (US SSA). (nd_a). Primary Insurance Amount. Washington,
      DC. https://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/piaformula.html

US Social Security Administration (US SSA). (nd_b). Fact Sheet: Benefit Formula Bend
     Points. Washington, DC. https://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/bendpoints.html

US Social Security Administration (US SSA). (nd_c). Incentivizing Delayed Claiming of Social
      Security Retirement Benefits Before Reaching the Full Retirement Age. Washington,
      DC. https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/ssb/v74n4/v74n4p21.html

US Social Security Administration (US SSA). (nd_d). Benefits Planner: Income Taxes and
       Your Social Security Benefit. Washington, DC. ttps://www.ssa.gov/planners/taxes.html

US Social Security Administration. (US SSA 2015). Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social
      Security Bulletin, 2015 (Table 6.B5). Washington, DC.

Willson, Nicolle (2019). Safe Harbor 401(k): The 2019 Guide for Business Owners.
       https://www.guideline.com/blog/safe-harbor-401k-plan/
                                                                                                                           23


Figure 1: Social Security Claiming Patterns for Males and Females, and 401(k) Asset
Values (model vs data)

 A: Female                                                         B: Male


           50                                                         50
           40                                   model     data        40                              model         data

           30                                                         30
  (%)




                                                                   (%)
           20                                                         20
           10                                                         10

            0                                                             0
                    62   63     64   65    66     67-69   70                  62   63    64   65     66     67-69    70
                                     Age                                                      Age


                                 Simulated versus empircal 401(k) average values
           300
           250                                                                                      model           data

           200
  ($000)




           150
           100
            50
                0
                          20s               30s                     40s                 50s                 60s
                                                                 Age group




 Notes: The top two panels compare claiming rates generated by our life cycle models and empirical claiming rates
 reported by the US Social Security Administration (see US SSA 2015) for the year 2015 (without disability).
 Expected values are calculated from 100,000 simulated lifecycles based on optimal feedback controls. Results for
 the entire female (male) population are computed using income profile for three education levels: 61% +Coll;
 28% HS; 11% <HS (57% +Coll; 30% HS; 13%<HS). Parameters used for the baseline calibration are as follows:
 risk aversion  = 5; time preference  = 0.96; leisure preference  = 1.2; endogenous retirement age 62-70.
 Social Security benefits are based on average permanent income and the bend points in place in 2015; minimum
 required withdrawals from 401(k) plans are based on life expectancy using the IRS-Uniform Lifetime Table in
 2015; tax rules for 401(k) plans are as of 2015 and described in Appendix B. The risk premium for stocks returns
 is 5% and return volatility 18%; the risk free rate in the baseline case is 1%. The lower panel compares empirical
 401(k) account balances across the US population. Empirical account balance data are taken from the Employee
 Benefit Research Institute (2017); age groups referred to as 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s, and 60s denote average values for
 persons age 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, and 60-69. Source: Authors' calculations
                                                                                                               24


Figure 2: Average Claiming Age Differences by Education: TEE (Roth) vs EET Tax
Regimes, and Low vs High Return Scenarios

A: Female                                                     B: Male




                                                                                                                     Coll+
                                                      Coll+
                                                      HS




                                                                                                                     HS
                              3% Interest rate                                              3% Interest rate



                                                      <HS
                              1% Interest rate                                              1% Interest rate




                                                                                                                     <HS
  0          5          10          15           20
                                                                0         5         10           15             20
                     Months                                                        Months




 Notes: We report the average claiming age difference for EET vs TEE for r=1% and 3% by sex and education groups
 <HS, HS, +Coll, derived from 100,000 simulated lifecycles based on optimal feedback controls from the life cycle
 model. Preference parameters are as follows: risk aversion  = 5; time preference  = 0.96; leisure preference  =
  1.2. The endogenous retirement age is between age 62-70.The assumed risk premium for stock returns is 5% and
 return volatility 18%. Tax bracket are based on 2018 regulations (as described in Appendix B). Source: Authors'
                                                                                                                 25


Figure 3: Average Annual Tax Payments per Individual: EET vs TEE (Roth) Tax
Regimes




                12
                                                                                      EET
                10
                                                                                      TEE
                 8
        $000l




                 6
                 4
                 2
                 0
                     25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60    65   70    75    80    85     90   95 100
                                                             Age




 Notes: The table reports average annual tax payments (sum of income taxes, payroll taxes, and penalty tax
 for early withdrawals) over the life cycle per individual for EET versus TEE taxation based on low interest
 rates (1%). Values are based on 100,000 simulated lifecycles for each of the six subgroups (male / female
 and three education groups) using optimal feedback controls from the life cycle model. Results for the entire
 population are computed using the following weights for the three education levels: females (61% +Coll;
 28% HS; 11% <HS) and males (57% +Coll; 30% HS; 13%<HS); the weights for females is 51% and for
 males 49%. Further notes on parameters see Figure 2.
                                                                                                             26




Table 1: Lifecycle Asset Accumulation Patterns under EET versus TEE Tax Regimes, and
Low versus High Expected Return Scenarios

                                             r=1 %                         r=3 %
                                          EET     TEE                   EET     TEE
                  Panel A: 401(k) Assets ($000)
                  Age 30-39                 54.8    46.6                  61.5        51.5
                  Age 40-49                130.6   110.2                 149.5         114
                  Age 50-59                174.7   147.3                 201.7       148.8
                  Age 60-69                127.1    91.1                 162.9       105.3
                  Age 70-79                 87.6    67.1                 128.6        94.9
                  Age 80-89                 43.6    34.3                  75.5          58
                  Age 90-99                  8.8     6.6                  18.9        14.7

                  Panel B: Non-Qualified Assets ($000)
                  Age 30-39                6.3       5.6                    7.2         5.7
                  Age 40-49                8.9       8.2                    7.9         6.9
                  Age 50-59                8.1       8.6                    6.4         7.9
                  Age 60-69               16.7      31.5                   16.6        30.5
                  Age 70-79               10.9      16.2                   11.9        11.7
                  Age 80-89                7.7       8.7                    8.5         6.8
                  Age 90-99                5.4         6                    5.7         5.4



 Notes: The two panels show expected assets by age in tax-qualified 401(k) plans and non-qualified assets for low
 and high interest rate (1% and 3%), and different tax regimes. Expected values are based on 100,000 simulated
 lifecycles using optimal feedback controls from the life cycle model. The assumed risk premium for stock returns
 is 5% and return volatility 18%. For other parameters, see Figure 1. Source: Authors' calculations.
                                                                                                          27


Table 2: Life Cycle Consumption and Working Hours under EET versus TEE Tax
Regimes, and Low versus High Expected Return Scenarios



                                         r=1 %                         r=3 %
                                     EET       TEE                  EET     TEE
                   Panel A: Consumption ($000)
                   Age 30-39         24.0      23.7                 24.3        21.3
                   Age 40-49         27.8      28.0                 28.5        24.9
                   Age 50-59         29.5      30.2                 30.2        27.0
                   Age 60-69         27.9      29.1                 29.5        26.6
                   Age 70-79         24.8      25.2                 27.3        24.0
                   Age 80-89         23.4      23.9                 26.4        23.9
                   Age 90-99         20.8      21.8                 22.9        22.1

                   Panel B: Av. Work Hours per Week
                   Age 25-61         33.8     33.9                  33.2        31.6
                   Age 62- 69         8.8     11.6                   6.7         9.4
                   Age 25-69         29.4     29.9                  28.5        27.6


 Notes: The two panels report average consumption and weekly work hours for low and high r (1% and 3%), and
 different tax regimes. Expected values are based on 100,000 simulated lifecycles using optimal feedback controls
 from the life cycle model. The assumed risk premium for stock returns is 5% and return volatility 18%. For other
 parameters, see Figure 1. Source: Authors' calculations.
                                                                                                               28



  Table 3: Social Security Claiming Patterns (in %) for Females and Males under EET versus
  TEE Tax Regimes, and Low versus High Expected Return Scenarios



                                      Female                                           Male
                         r=1 %                   r=3 %                   r=1 %                   r=3 %
      Age             EET     TEE             EET     TEE             EET     TEE             EET     TEE
       62              42.5    37.8            49.1    37.3            34.6    29.4            36.9    28.6
       63               3.1     3.1             4.9     4.4             4.3       4             6.2     4.1
       64               3.9     2.8             5.6     4.3             4.6       3             7.8     3.1
       65               6.7       4             7.7     6.0             7.9     3.8            10.4     7.1
       66                16     7.3            13.6     8.0            19.8    14.1            17.3    15.5
       67                 8     7.5             5.5    11.4             9.3      10             6.9    12.2
       68               7.5    11.4               7     9.1             8.4      11             7.6    12.7
       69               7.2      11             4.2    10.2             5.8    12.3             3.7     8.3
       70               4.9    15.1             2.3     9.3             5.3    12.3             3.2     8.3
   Av. Claim
   Age (years)           64.7        65.5        64.1        65.2        65.0        65.8        64.5        65.6

Notes: We report the average claiming age for low and high r (1% and 3%) by sex, for the two different tax regimes
(EET vs TEE) derived from 100,000 simulated lifecycles based on optimal feedback controls from the life cycle
model. The assumed risk premium for stock returns is 5% and return volatility 18%. For other parameters, see Figure
1. Source: Authors' calculations.
                                                                                                            29


Table 4: Sum of Average Life-Time Tax Payments per Individual: EET vs TEE (Roth)
Tax Regimes, and Low versus High Expected Return Scenarios


                                            r=1%                           r=3%
                                     EET             TEE            EET            TEE
               Age 25-49             214.6           225.4          213.9          222.7
               Age 50-69             167.4           141.2          165.8          133.4
               Age 70-100             43.4            35.2           54.5           36.3
               Age 25-100            425.4           401.8          434.2          392.4

    Notes: The table reports average life-time tax payments (sum of income taxes, payroll taxes, and penalty
    tax for early withdrawals) per individual for EET versus TEE taxation and for low and high interest rates
    (1% and 3%). Values are based on 100,000 simulated lifecycles for each of the six subgroups (male /
    female and three education groups) using optimal feedback controls from the life cycle model. Results for
    the entire population are computed using the following weights for the three education levels: females
    (61% +Coll; 28% HS; 11% <HS) and males (57% +Coll; 30% HS; 13%<HS); the weights for females is
    51% and for males 49%. Further notes on parameters see Figure 2.
                                                                                                                                                                             30


Table 5: Asset and Consumption Inequality by Education under EET versus TEE Tax Regimes, and Low versus High Expected Return
Scenarios
                                                                   EET                                                               TEE
                                                        Ave. Pre-
                                       Ave. Cash                       Ave. Pre-    Ave.     Ave. Cash Ave. 401(k) Ave. Pre-     Ave.
                                                       tax 401(k)
                                        on Hand                       tax Income Consumption on Hand     Assets    tax Income Consumption
                                                         Assets
                                          @62                         Age 25-62 Age 25-62      @62        @62      Age 25-62 Age 25-62
                                                          @62
Panel A: r= 1%
<HS                                     $19,291         $16,677         $13,940          $11,983         $21,021         $13,039       $13,856             $11,874
HS                                      $35,027         $67,193         $28,913          $19,540         $41,311         $50,139       $28,781             $19,395
Coll+                                   $58,061        $210,349         $52,016          $32,416         $84,833        $158,400       $52,815             $32,911
Ratio (Coll+/<HS)                         3.01            12.6            3.73             2.71            4.04           12.15        3.81                  2.77

Panel B: r=3%
<HS                                     $21,075         $28,443         $15,177          $12,878         $23,536         $21,969       $15,118             $12,808
HS                                      $35,849         $90,032         $28,364          $20,080         $45,039         $67,241       $28,696             $20,143
Coll+                                   $57,616        $250,887         $49,173          $32,830         $89,490        $183,962       $50,693             $33,631
Ratio (Coll+/<HS)                         2.73            8.82            3.24             2.55            3.80            8.37        3.35                  2.63


 Notes: The table reports average cash on hand, 401(k) plan assets, and average annual pre-tax earnings by educational group, for low and high r (1% and 3%) and different
 tax regimes. Expected values are based on 100,000 simulated lifecycles using optimal feedback controls from the life cycle model. The assumed risk premium for stock
 returns is 5% and return volatility 18%. For other parameters, see Figure 1. Source: Authors' calculations.
                                                                                            31


    Online Appendix for How Would 401(k) `Rothification' Alter Saving, Retirement
                             Security, and Inequality?
                Vanya Horneff, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell

Online Appendix A: Wage rate estimation
       We calibrated the wage rate process using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
1975-2015 from age 25 to 69. During the work life, each individual's labor income profile has
deterministic, permanent, and transitory components with uncorrelated and normally
                                          2   2)               2   2)
distributed shocks according to ( ) ~(-0.5  ,    and ( ) ~(-0.5  ,   . The
wage rate values are expressed in $2015. These are estimated separately by sex and by
educational level. The educational groupings are: less than High School (<HS), High School
graduate (HS), and those with at least some college (Coll+). Extreme observations below $5
per hour and above the 99th percentile are dropped.
       We use a second order polynomial in age and dummies for employment status. The
regression function is:

    ln(, ) = 1  , + 2  2
                       , + 5  , +    ,                                               (A1)

where log(, ) is the natural log of wage at time y for individual i, age is the age of the
individual divided by 100, ES is the individual's employment status, and wave dummies control
for year-specific shocks. For employment status, we include three groups depending on work
hours per week as follows: part-time worker ( 20 hours), full-time worker (< 20 &  40 hours)
and overtime worker (< 40 hours). OLS regression results for the wage rate process equations
are provided in Table A1.
       To estimate the variances of the permanent and transitory components, we follow
Carroll and Samwick (1997) and Hubener at al. (2016). We calculate the difference of the
observed log wage and the regression result, and we take the difference of these differences
across different lengths of time d. For individual i, the residual is:
                               , = -1
                                   =0 (+ ) + ,+ -  , .                               (A2)

We then regress the  =  2
                       , on the lengths of time d between waves and a constant:

                                         = 1   + 2  2 +  ,                           (A3)
                                           2             2
where the variance of the permanent factor   = 1 and the   = 2 represents the variance of
the transitory shocks.
                                                                                                            32




Table A1: Regression results for wage rates


Coefficient       Male <HS        Male HS       Male +Coll     Female <HS      Female HS     Female +Coll



Age/100           3.161***        5.972***      9.092***       1.256***        2.767***      4.731***
                  (0.108)         (0.049)       (0.070)        (0.110)         (0.046)       (0.072)

Age²/10000        -3.329***       -6.416***     -9.351***      -1.339***       -2.915***     -4.960***
                  (0.130)         (0.062)       (0.089)        (0.131)         (0.059)       (0.094)

Part-time work -0.109***          -0.153***     -0.0826***     -0.0858***      -0.129***     -0.0847***
               (0.020)            (0.009)       (0.011)        (0.006)         (0.003)       (0.004)
Over-time work 0.00412            0.0506***     0.0949***      0.0158***       0.0748***     0.106***
               (0.004)            (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.002)       (0.003)

Constant          1.807***        1.435***      1.151***       2.051***        2.015***      1.938***
                  (0.042)         (0.012)       (0.015)        (0.037)         (0.011)       (0.017)

Observations      48,762          327,305       293,386        31,788          290,597       225,211
R-squared         0.069           0.102         0.147          0.032           0.044         0.092

Permanent         0.009***        0.013***      0.019***       0.008***        0.013***      0.019***
                  (0.001)         (0.0002)      (0.0003)       (0.0001)        (0.0002)      (0.001)

Transitory        0.028***        0.031**       0.041***       0.023***        0.028***      0.038***
                  (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.001)       (0.001)

Observations      28,359          175,247       140,984        20,863          176,304       123,145
R-squared         0.214           0.283         0.307          0.146           0.255         0.264

Notes: Regression results for the natural logarithm of wage rates (in $2015) are based in on information in the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for persons age 25-69 in waves 1975-2015. Independent variables
include age and age-squared, and dummies for part time work (20 hours per week) and overtime work ( 40
hours per week). Robust standard errors in parentheses. Source: Authors' calculations.
                                                                                                                 33


Online Appendix B: Modeling retirement accounts
         We embed a US-type progressive tax system in our model to explore the impact of
having access to a qualified (tax-sheltered) pension account of the EET versus the TEE (Roth)
type. 14 (All values are in $2015 and relevant amounts are inflation adjusted yearly). Here the
worker must pay taxes on labor income and on capital gains from investments in bonds and
stocks. During the working life, he invests  in a tax-qualified pension account which reduces
his taxable income; contributions can be made to an annual maximum amount  =$18,000 (and
from age 50 an additional $6,000 catch up is feasible). Correspondingly, withdrawals  from
the tax-qualified account increase taxable income. Finally, the worker's taxable income is
reduced by a general standardized deduction . For a single person, this deduction was in
2015 $6,300 (in 2018 $12,000) per year. Consequently, taxable income during the working age
is given by:
            
 EET        +1 = maxmax  (+1 - 1) +    - 1; 0 +
            +1 (1 -  ) +  - min( ;  +  ) - ; 0, and
            
 TEE        +1 = maxmax  (+1 - 1) +    - 1; 0 +  +
                                                                                                        (B1)
            +1 (1 -  ) - ; 0.
For Social Security (+1 ) taxation, we use the following rules: when the retiree's combined
income 15 is between $25,000 and $34,000 (over $34,000), 50% (85%) of benefits are taxed.
After retirement, we set  = 0, i.e. no further contributions in 401(k) retirement plans are
possible.
         In line with US rules for federal income taxes, our progressive tax system has seven
income tax brackets (IRS 2015a). These brackets  = 1, ... ,7 are defined by a lower and an
                              
upper bound of taxable income +1  [ ,  ] and determine a marginal tax rate  . In
2018, the marginal taxes rates for a single household were 10% from $0 to $9,225, 12% from
$9,225 to $38,700, 22% from $38,701 to $82,500, 24% from $82,501 to $157,500, 32% from
$157,500 to $200,000 35% from $200,001 to $500,000 and 37% above $500,000 (see IRS
2018). Based on these tax brackets, the dollar amount of taxes payable is given by: 16




14
   That is, contributions and investment earnings in the account are tax exempt (E), while payouts are taxed (T).
15
   Combined income is sum of adjusted gross income, nontaxable interest, and half of his Social Security benefits
(US SSA nd).
16
   Here we assume that capital gains are taxed at the same rate as labor income, so we abstract from the possibility
that long-term investments may be taxed at a lower rate.
                                                                                           34


    
    +1 = (+1 - 7 )  1
          
                     
                     +1 7 
                            7
                             



                   + (
                      +1 - 6 )  17 > 7  + (6 - 6 )  1
                                                     +1 7 
                                                             6
                                                              
                                          +1



                   + (
                      +1 - 5 )  16 > 5  + (5 - 5 )  1
                                                     +1 6 
                                                             5
                                                              
                                          +1



                   + (
                      +1 - 4 )  15 > 4  + (4 - 4 )  1
                                                     +1 5 
                                                             4
                                                              
                                          +1
                                                                                      (B2)
                   +   (
                        +1   - 3 )  14 > 3  + (3 - 3 )  1+1 4 
                                                                             3
                                                                              
                                          +1



                   + (
                      +1 - 2 )  13 > 2  + (2 - 2 )  1
                                                     +1 3 
                                                             2
                                                              
                                          +1



                   + (
                      +1 - 1 )  12 > 1  + (1 - 1 )  1
                                                     +1 2 
                                                             1
                                                              
                                          +1




where, for    , the indicator function 1  {0, 1} is defined as:
              1 |   
       1 () =                                                                         (B3)
              0 |    .


Online Appendix References
Carroll, C. D. and A. A. Samwick. (1997). The Nature of Precautionary Wealth. Journal of
        Monetary Economics. 40(1): 41-71.

Hubener, A., R. Maurer, and O. S. Mitchell. (2016). How Family Status and Social Security
      Claiming Options Shape Optimal Life Cycle Portfolios. Review of Financial Studies.
      29(4): 937-978.

Internal Revenue Service (IRS 2015a). Form 1040 (Tax Tables): Federal Tax Rates, Personal
        Exemptions,      and      Standard     Deductions.       Downloaded      09/13/2018.
        https://www.irs.com/articles/2015-federal-tax-rates-personal-exemptions-and-
        standard-deductions

US Social Security Administration (US SSA). (nd). Benefits Planner: Income Taxes and Your
      Social Security Benefit. Washington, DC. https://www.ssa.gov/planners/taxes.html
