                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    EFFECTS OF MANDATORY ENERGY EFFICIENCY DISCLOSURE IN HOUSING
                             MARKETS

                                          Erica Myers
                                        Steven L. Puller
                                        Jeremy D. West

                                      Working Paper 26436
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26436


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We thank Austin Energy and the Austin/Central Texas Realty Information Services for sharing
data. We also thank Filia Arga for providing excellent research assistance. This work benefited
from helpful comments from Hunt Allcott, Matthew Backus, Joshua Blonz, Judd Boomhower,
Richard Carson, Lucas Davis, Tatyana Deryugina, Meredith Fowlie, Joshua Graff Zivin, Matthew
Harding, Koichiro Ito, Mark Jacobsen, Ryan Kellogg, David Rapson, Jan Rouwendal, James
Sallee, and seminar participants at the Midwest Energy Fest, Resources for the Future, UC-
Berkeley, UC-Davis, UC-San Diego, UC-Santa Cruz, University of Chicago, University of
Maryland, and the Urban Economics Association. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Erica Myers, Steven L. Puller, and Jeremy D. West. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Mandatory Energy Efficiency Disclosure in Housing Markets
Erica Myers, Steven L. Puller, and Jeremy D. West
NBER Working Paper No. 26436
November 2019
JEL No. D83,K32,L15,Q48,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

Mandatory disclosure policies are increasingly prevalent despite sparse evidence that they
improve market outcomes. We study the effects of requiring home sellers to provide buyers with
certified audits of residential energy efficiency. Using similar nearby homes as a comparison
group, we find this requirement increases price capitalization of energy efficiency and encourages
energy-saving residential investments. We present additional evidence characterizing the market
failure as symmetrically incomplete information, which is ameliorated by government
intervention. More generally, we formalize and provide empirical support for seller ignorance as
a motivation for disclosure policies in markets with bilaterally incomplete information about
quality.

Erica Myers                                         Jeremy D. West
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign          Department of Economics
and E2e                                             University of California at Santa Cruz
ecmyers@illinois.edu                                1156 High Street
                                                    Santa Cruz, CA 95064
Steven L. Puller                                    westj@ucsc.edu
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3046 Allen
College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER
puller@econmail.tamu.edu
                                 Disclaimer

    This report was prepared as an account of work with the City of Austin
and Austin Energy. Austin Energy provided the authors access to the data
used in the study in consideration for research that may improve efficiency,
reduce cost, support adoption of new technologies, launch new products and
services and institute best practices to better serve Austin Energy customers.
The study was conducted independently of Austin Energy. Austin Energy
had no involvement in the design, analysis, and interpretation of the data;
in writing of the report; or in the decision to submit for publication. Neither
the City of Austin nor Austin Energy, nor any of their employees, make any
warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility
for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus,
product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe
privately owned rights. Reference in this report to any specific commercial
product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or
otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recom-
mendation, or favoring by the City of Austin or Austin Energy. The views
and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect
those of the City of Austin, the Austin/Central Texas Realty Information
Services (ACTRIS), or Austin Energy. The authors have no material finan-
cial interests related to this study.
1       Introduction
Government-mandated information disclosure is increasingly used as a policy intended to
improve the ability of consumers to make optimal decisions in the face of imperfect informa-
tion about product quality. Policymakers view disclosure requirements as a lower-cost and
less-intrusive means of improving market efficiency compared to alternative forms of regu-
lation. As a result, such requirements are a significant policy component in many economic
sectors including health care, education, and finance, among others (Hastings and Weinstein,
2008; Bollinger et al., 2011; Seira et al., 2017).1 In theory, mandatory disclosure should im-
prove the quality of goods and services by correcting for information-related market failures.
In practice, the literature finds minimal evidence supporting the efficacy of disclosure pro-
grams at improving market outcomes (see Winston, 2008; Loewenstein et al., 2014; Ho et al.,
2019). Reconciling the theoretical guidance with the empirical evidence necessitates an im-
proved characterization of which information frictions are effectively corrected by disclosure
mandates, so that policies can be better-targeted to address market failures.
    This paper focuses on one setting where mandated disclosure may play a crucial role:
investment in energy efficiency in housing markets. Prominent analyses such as McKinsey
& Company (2009) point to substantial unexploited investment opportunities that would
pay for themselves through energy savings within a short period, encouraging global cli-
mate mitigation plans to depend on energy efficiency to deliver more than forty percent
of targeted emissions reductions (International Energy Agency, 2015). Towards this end,
numerous jurisdictions have enacted mandatory residential energy efficiency audit and dis-
closure requirements in recent years, including many European countries, at least ten states
in the U.S., and dozens of municipalities.2
    The success of these programs in combating climate change ultimately depends on their
ability to exploit cost-effective opportunities to improve energy efficiency, which in turn
depends on the underlying market failure. If the "Energy Efficiency Gap" in residential in-
vestments is primarily attributable to behavioral or information-driven market frictions, then
    1
      Several United States policies with mandatory disclosure requirements include the (1) Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act, (2) No Children Left Behind initiative, (3) Credit Card Accountability Responsi-
bility and Disclosure Act, (4) Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform, and (5) Consumer Protection Act.
    2
      For example, the Oregonian (January, 5, 2018) states that Portland's policy "...is intended to give buyers
a better idea of maintenance costs in the long run." Programs in Massachusetts and Austin, Texas are
also motivated by a desire to increase residential energy efficiency investments. The Boston Globe (April 23,
2018) wrote that Massachusetts' program "could spur consumers to replace their windows or seal their doors,
for example, reducing energy consumption." And, Austin Energy's website states that, "ECAD promotes
energy efficiency by identifying potential energy savings in homes, businesses and multifamily properties."



                                                       1
mandatory audit and disclosure policies are poised to yield substantial benefits (Gillingham
et al., 2009; Allcott and Greenstone, 2012; Gerarden et al., 2017). In contrast, if the per-
ceived under-investment is simply because realized savings from energy efficiency programs
often fall short of engineering projections, then disclosure policies will be largely ineffective
at improving quality (c.f. Davis et al., 2014; Levinson, 2016; Allcott and Greenstone, 2017;
Fowlie et al., 2018; Davis et al., 2019).
    Our study examines the Energy Conservation Audit and Disclosure (ECAD) ordinance
in Austin, Texas. As with similar disclosure policies, this law stipulates that home sellers
must provide a standardized report of a certified technical audit of their properties' energy
efficiency to prospective buyers. Our empirical setting and administrative data enable us to
make two unique contributions. First, we identify a market failure that contributes to under-
provision of information and under-investment in energy efficiency, such that an audit and
disclosure program may be welfare-enhancing. We show that it appears to be a symmetric
lack of information, i.e. ignorance about product quality on the part of both buyers and
sellers, that is a barrier to voluntary disclosure of residential energy efficiency in housing
transactions. Second, our study is one of the first to our knowledge to find credibly-identified
evidence of product quality improvements resulting from any disclosure policy.
    We identify the effects of this disclosure program by comparing homes sold in Austin
to similar homes located just outside of the city limits but sold on the same real estate
market and serviced by the same energy utility. We provide supporting evidence for this
counterfactual; these homes are similar in their relevant attributes and we demonstrate that
the jurisdictions exhibit parallel pre-policy trends for our outcomes of interest. For years
spanning the policy's implementation and for areas both inside of and adjacent to Austin city
limits, we use property-level data on housing transaction prices and characteristics, monthly
electricity billing data, energy efficiency program participation, and technical information
contained in the ECAD audit reports.
    First, we estimate the effects of the ECAD disclosure program on the capitalization of
energy efficiency into home prices and on homeowners' decisions to invest in energy efficiency.
We use a panel fixed effects model including property fixed effects and a rich set of controls
for local housing market shocks that might be correlated both with homes' energy efficiency
and with the regression outcomes. We show that the policy significantly increases the cap-
italization of energy efficiency into housing transaction prices. This suggests that home
purchasers are not obtaining full information about homes' respective energy efficiency from
other sources in the absence of a disclosure policy. Next, we show that the policy successfully


                                               2
encourages investments in energy efficiency technologies by homeowners. Of note, we find
that the policy increases investments made by both sellers and by home buyers.
    We then explore the economic mechanism(s) underlying the effects we estimate for the
disclosure policy. One interesting feature of our setting is that while the ECAD program
is officially mandatory for all encompassed property sales, in practice few resources are
dedicated to enforcement and compliance is incomplete (about 60 percent of targeted homes
comply).3 Therefore, we can leverage property owners' decisions of whether to comply with
the program to explore pre-existing market failures that ECAD helps to correct. Voluntary
disclosure theory would predict an "unraveling" effect from the highest quality sellers to the
lowest (Grossman, 1981; Milgrom, 1981).4 However, contrary to the theoretical prediction
that the highest-quality sellers should be those most likely to disclose, we show that ECAD
disclosure propensity varies little across the energy efficiency distribution of homes sold inside
of Austin post-policy. That is, we find little evidence of an unraveling effect in this market,
despite significant financial stakes associated with quality disclosure via policy compliance.
    We examine several plausible explanations for the weak relationship between home sell-
ers' relative energy efficiency and their likelihood of disclosure. First, we note that this
pattern is not driven simply by seller ignorance about ECAD requirements. All sales in our
sample are brokered through realtors, who are well-informed of the policy and whose finan-
cial incentives complement those of their home-selling clients. Moreover, the relationship
is also not attributable to some realtors consistently complying while others consistently
do not; instead, we find that the disclosure propensity across realtors follows a bell-shaped
distribution. We additionally show that compliance is not attributable to buyers asking
for the audit information, which could drive the flat relationship if the requests come from
prospective home buyers uniformly-distributed across energy efficiency space. The timing
of disclosure is generally within a few days of the real estate listing agreement ­ before a
property is marketed ­ and is uncorrelated with the sale closing date.
    This leaves two plausible explanations for the weak relationship between homes' relative
quality and sellers' propensities to disclose: sellers might be ignorant about their own prop-
   3
     In this sense, the ECAD program can be thought of as a disclosure encouragement policy: the government
standardization of audits lowers the cost of disclosure and the threat of a fine for non-compliance increases
the net benefits to sellers of disclosing.
   4
     Because buyers may infer that undisclosed product quality implies poor quality, strategic sellers with
the highest-quality products will always volunteer their private information so long as their disclosure costs
are sufficiently low. This in turn creates an incentive for sellers with the next best quality products to
disclose, and so on, until the benefits of disclosure for the next seller are equal to the costs, and all but the
lowest-quality product sellers will voluntarily disclose quality information to the market.



                                                       3
erties' relative energy efficiency, and/or there might be substantial variation across sellers in
effective compliance costs (including psychic and other nonmonetary disclosure costs). To
distinguish between these candidate mechanisms, we construct a behavioral model of the
seller's policy compliance decision. We then connect the model to our empirical findings
using a computational simulation, in which we evaluate the decision to perform an ECAD
audit given our capitalization estimates and a range of simulated distributions of effective
disclosure costs. This exercise reveals that the flat empirical relationship between benefit
from disclosure and likelihood of disclosure can be rationalized with the model only if there
is either extremely large heterogeneity in disclosure costs or, much more plausibly, if a sig-
nificant share of homeowners are uninformed about the (relative) energy efficiency of their
homes. Thus, homeowners' ignorance about their own homes' respective quality appears to
be a significant factor for why market-improving information disclosure does not occur in
the absence of public policy.
    Our study has several important policy implications and contributes to multiple strands
of the literature. First, we provide some of the only empirical evidence of quality-improving
effects of a mandatory disclosure policy. Second, we demonstrate evidence consistent with
a specific market failure of symmetrically incomplete information ­ i.e. uninformed buyers
and uninformed sellers ­ which likely explains why government intervention improves market
outcomes in our context. In doing so, our study is also the first to our knowledge to test two
of the "often strong assumptions" for the disclosure unraveling prediction: that sellers have
complete information about their own product quality and that the distribution of available
quality is public information (Dranove and Jin, 2010). In addition to real estate, as we study,
there are likely other peer-to-peer markets where these strong assumptions do not hold and
a disclosure mandate would improve market quality.
    Our findings additionally speak to the Energy Efficiency Gap. Most prior work on the
topic focuses on explanations of uninformed consumers or on optimistic engineering estimates
of energy savings (Brounen and Kok, 2011; Busse et al., 2013; Allcott and Wozny, 2014;
Myers, 2015; Sallee et al., 2016; Allcott and Greenstone, 2017; Fowlie et al., 2018; Grigolon
et al., 2018; Allcott and Knittel, 2019; Myers, 2019). A smaller branch of this literature
considers the role of nonmonetary costs, such as the hassle burden associated with investing
in energy-saving technologies and building materials, and the implications for self-selection
into program participation (Fowlie et al., 2015; Allcott and Greenstone, 2017). Prior research
on the supply side explores whether the energy savings from more efficient technologies are
fully capitalized into property values (Aydin et al., 2017; Frondel et al., 2017; Walls et al.,


                                               4
2017; Cassidy, 2018; Myers, 2019). To our knowledge, ours is the first study to consider
that sellers' ignorance of their own properties' quality might also be a significant barrier
to improving the energy efficiency of durable goods such as homes. Furthermore, because
homeowners elsewhere may be as uninformed about residential energy efficiency as those
in Austin, our study supports that mandatory disclosure programs are likely to lead to
improvements in other markets as well.


2       Empirical setting
In order to estimate the effect of energy efficiency information disclosure on home prices
and cost-saving investments, we leverage a natural policy experiment in the housing market
provided by the City of Austin, Texas through the city's Energy Conservation Audit and
Disclosure (ECAD) ordinance. Austin's ECAD ordinance came into effect on June 1, 2009.
The policy mandates that qualifying residential properties obtain an official energy efficiency
audit and that home sellers disclose this information to prospective buyers as part of the
regular seller's disclosure notice. A home is subject to the disclosure requirement if all of the
following conditions apply: (1) the home is within Austin city limits, (2) the home is aged
ten years or older, (3) the home's electricity is serviced by Austin Energy (which services
essentially all Austin homes), and (4) the home is sold. While audit reports must be disclosed
for all qualifying home sales, an audit report itself remains valid for ten years following the
date of the audit.5 Originally, the energy audit must be provided to potential buyers before
the point of sale. An amendment effective as of May 2011 pushed the disclosure timing
more specifically to at least 3 days before the close of the option period, during which the
prospective buyer may legally cancel their contract to purchase the home penalty-free.
    These energy efficiency audits must be conducted by certified professional technicians
who have received special training from Austin Energy and are approved contractors for the
program.6 A typical audit takes about an hour and costs the home seller around $100-$300 in
direct cost. After completing the audit, the engineering professional provides a standardized
report to both the seller and to Austin Energy, who publicly publishes each report.
    An example ECAD audit report is included in Appendix A. The first page of the form
    5
     Sellers are also exempted from obtaining a new audit report if the property has undergone major en-
ergy efficiency improvements through Austin Energy's Home Performance with ENERGY STAR (HPWES)
program within the last 10 years, a mechanism that appears to be used minimally for compliance.
   6
     These engineering professionals are certified either by the Residential Energy Services Network
(RESNET) or the Building Performance Institute (BPI). For summary details of the ECAD process, c.f.
https://austinenergy.com/ae/energy-efficiency/ecad-ordinance/energy-professionals/energy-professionals.


                                                   5
summarizes any cost-saving actions recommended in each of four categories: (1) windows
and shading, (2) attic insulation, (3) air infiltration and duct sealing, and (4) heating and
cooling system efficiency (HVAC). The remaining four pages of the form provide detailed
information on specific measurements performed, such as the condition and estimated R-
value of the attic insulation, the percentage of air leakage from the duct system, and the
age, efficiency, and overall condition of the heating and cooling system, etc. Importantly,
the ECAD Energy Professional is required to send the audit results to Austin Energy within
30 days following the inspection. Therefore, it is not possible for a home seller to obtain an
audit and subsequently withhold that information from realtors and potential buyers.
    As per the ECAD ordinance, Austin Energy maintains a record of the audits that are
performed. However, it is not in its mission nor budget to track or enforce compliance. In a
strictly statutory sense, noncompliance with the mandate can result in pecuniary penalties
ranging from $500-$2000. However, because housing transactions are not directly monitored
for compliance, penalties for noncompliance have almost never been incurred: to date, there
has been only a single instance of an ECAD noncompliance penalty action being filed with
Austin Municipal Courts.7 As shown below, around 40 percent of homes in our sample are
sold without complying with the program.
    Austin Energy's service territory extends beyond the boundaries of Austin city limits.
Therefore, while only homes inside of Austin are required to comply with ECAD, all of the
homes within the territory receive the same utility promotional materials for its rebate and
pricing programs. For the purposes of our analysis, we treat the establishment of the ECAD
ordinance as an exogenous disclosure encouragement. The cost of disclosure is reduced for
all households in the service territory by standardizing the audit format and even more so
for Austin City homeowners by introducing the threat of a fine for non-compliance. We
leverage the resulting change in the relative propensity to disclose between homes inside
and homes just outside of Austin city limits to estimate the effects of the information on
capitalization of and investment in energy efficiency. Further, imperfect compliance with the
program provides us an opportunity to examine sellers' disclosure decisions in order to shed
light on the economic mechanisms preventing voluntary disclosure unraveling in the absence
of government intervention.
  7
      Personal communication with Tim Kisner, ECAD project manager, Austin Energy.




                                                  6
3       Data
We combine data from several administrative sources for our analysis. First, to determine
the physical location and characteristics of all single-family residences within the territory
serviced by Austin Energy, we purchased the tax appraisal records and GIS shapefiles for all
parcels in Travis and Williamson counties. From these appraisal records, we extracted the
geographic location, construction year, square footage, and other details about each home.
We use the shapefiles to assign each premise to either inside or outside of Austin city limits.
    Next, we obtained residential property sales transaction details through the Austin Board
of Realtors' (ABOR) Multiple Listing Service database (MLS). In most states, housing trans-
actions are collected by county clerk offices and are public record; however, Texas is among a
handful of non-disclosure states that do not provide the financing and sales price details for
property transactions when a deed is transferred from one party to another. The data avail-
able through the MLS roughly correspond to all transactions conducted through a licensed
realtor, which represents around 89 percent of sales.8 We pulled the universe of transaction
information for single-family homes sold in Travis and Williamson counties during 1997-2014.
For our analysis, we use MLS data on the timing and closing price of each property sale.
    Austin Energy provided us with property-level data on the universe of ECAD energy ef-
ficiency audit reports, participation in any utility-sponsored energy efficiency program, and
monthly electricity billing records for all single-family residences during 2006-2014.9 The
ECAD audit reports include the date of the audit and the property address, along with the
audit findings. For energy efficiency program participation, we focus on the utility's four
largest residential programs: the Appliance Efficiency Program, Home Performance with
ENERGY STAR Program (HPWES), Power Partner Thermostat Program, and Weather-
ization Assistance Program. We use information on the timing of participation and the total
dollar amounts of rebates paid to property owners through these four programs. With few
    c.f. https://www.zillow.com/sellers-guide/for-sale-by-owner-vs-real-estate-agent/.
    8

    The Appliance Efficiency Program provides customers with rebates for installing energy efficient equip-
    9

ment; about 95 percent of program participation is for air conditioning and heat pumps, with a small
fraction of rebates awarded for pool pumps and water heaters. Home Performance with Energy Star focuses
on improving the overall efficiency of a home, offering rebates for the following upgrades done through a
participating contractor: new air conditioner or heat pump, HVAC tune up and efficiency improvement, attic
insulation overhaul, duct and envelope sealing, covers for attic pull down stairs, solar shading for windows,
and smart thermostats. The Power Partner Thermostat Program provides subsidies for purchasing smart
thermostats from an approved list. The Weatherization Assistance Program helps low-to-moderate income
customers to improve their homes' weatherization via new attic insulation, sealing duct work, weather strip-
ping on doors, and similar upgrades. Combined, the AEP and HPWES programs account for more than 97
percent of energy efficiency program rebates.



                                                     7
exceptions, eligible utility customers may participate in each program at most only once per
account. And, finally, the monthly billing data include the kWh of electricity consumed at
the address between the start and end date for each bill.


3.1     Defining the energy efficiency proxy measure
Our empirical study focuses on the energy efficiency of homes sold. Ideally, we would directly
observe an engineering measurement quantifying the efficiency for each home, but such data
do not exist for the homes in our sample. For properties that obtained an ECAD audit, we do
observe some engineering measures of energy efficiency, but many of the audit components
are qualitative (non-quantitative), and the report does not provide any summary metric
of the overall efficiency for the property (see Appendix A for a sample report). Moreover,
ECAD audit measurements are only available for properties that obtained an audit ­ i.e.
homes that were sold post-2009, particularly so within the city limits of Austin ­ whereas
our identification strategies require a comprehensive measure of every in-sample property's
energy efficiency.
    Leveraging pre-policy energy consumption data and characteristics of the homes, we form
an ordinal proxy measure of energy efficiency as follows. First, we use linear interpolation to
recenter the monthly energy billing data for each property to correspond to calendar months
rather than billing cycles.10 Using these recentered values and dividing by each property's
square footage, we determine the average monthly electricity consumption per square foot
for each property during the full available pre-policy period spanning from January 2006
through May 2009. Finally, we rank these kWh/SqFt values within-vintage (but pooling
jurisdictions) and scale the ordinal set to range from zero to one.
    This proxy measure of energy efficiency has several advantages. In addition to being
available for all in-sample homes, it serves as a single value that concisely summarizes the
relative expected energy use at each property. Furthermore, because we define the measure
within-vintage and accounting for home size, our proxy should primarily capture the less
obvious components of energy efficiency that would comprise the information shock provided
by an ECAD audit. That is, a home buyer can readily anticipate that a "newer" home is likely
more energy efficient than an "older" home, but predicting differences in energy efficiency
between two homes of the same vintage will be much more subtle. Finally, as our proxy
  10
    For example, for a household that consumed 900 kWh during the billing cycle of May 16 through June
15 and 1000 kWh during the billing cycle of June 16 through July 15, we assign a consumption value of 950
kWh during June.



                                                   8
is ordinal rather than cardinal, it should be less sensitive to statistical outliers in energy
consumption.
    In Appendix A, we provide empirical support for our energy efficiency proxy. Using the
sample of ECAD audited properties, Appendix Table A1 shows that various qualitative and
quantitative measurements from the engineering inspections are significantly correlated with
our proxy term. For instance, a ten percent improvement in our proxy is associated with: a
one percentage point (two percent of the mean) increase in the probability that the home has
double-pane or low-emissivity windows; a 0.22 degrees Fahrenheit square feet hours per Btu
(one percent of the mean) increase in the R-value thermal resistance of the attic insulation;
and a 0.16 percentage point (0.84 percent of the mean) reduction in air duct leakage. Thus,
especially when considering that these correlations are not independent, while our ordinal
proxy does not perfectly characterize residential energy efficiency, it seems very well-suited
to serve as a tractable measure.


3.2     Sample compilation and summary statistics
We combine the data from our various sources using the unique tax appraisal id (parcel num-
ber) for each property.11 In compiling our sample for analysis, we make several restrictions.
Most substantially, we restrict our sample to properties that were constructed no later than
1998, as the ECAD policy enacted in 2009 applies only to homes aged ten years or older.
In addition, we drop less than half of one percent of properties for which we are unable to
determine the jurisdictional geography and/or energy efficiency. Our final sample consists
of 131,028 single-family homes served by Austin Energy that were at least 10 years old at
the start of the ECAD program, i.e. constructed in 1998 or earlier. Of these properties, 83.5
percent are within the Austin city limits, as depicted in a map in Appendix Figure A1. We
observe 65,454 (50 percent) of these homes sold on the MLS at some point during 1997-2014,
generating a total of 105,978 sales transactions.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics for selected attributes of the homes in our empirical
sample. The "full sample" in Column (1) includes all homes in the sample, regardless of
whether or not the home was ever sold during our sample period. Columns (2) and (3)
include, respectively, only the subset of these homes that are inside or outside the Austin
city limits and were sold at least once during 1997-2014. Overall, homes in the sample are
  11
    Technically, we rely on two identifier fields: the tax appraisal real "property id" and the "geographic id"
or parcel number. For single-family homes, both values are unique to each particular parcel of land. The
Austin Energy data are tracked by property id whereas the MLS data are tracked via the geographic id. We
use the Travis and Williamson county tax appraisal roll files, which contain both identifiers, as a cross-walk.


                                                      9
sold on average 0.8 times each, and 0.22 times post-policy. The average vintage is 1973 and
average size is 1839 square feet. By construction, the average energy efficiency quantile is
0.5, with corresponding average monthly electricity use of 1178 kWh (0.67 kWh per square
foot). For homes that were sold at least once between 1997-2014, average sale prices are $228
thousand inside Austin and $315 thousand outside the city limits. "Pre-sale EE rebates ($),"
which include the total dollar value of rebates paid to the property's owners by Austin Energy
within two years prior to the property sale for participation in energy efficiency programs,
average $29.6 and $27.6, respectively inside and outside of Austin; note, however, that 96
percent of these values are zero dollars.
    Comparing Columns (2) to (3), the most stark differences are that homes sold just out-
side of the city limits are systematically newer and larger; correspondingly, they also tend
to use more energy and command higher sales prices. Of interest, there is not much differ-
ence across jurisdictions in the energy use per square foot, which could arguably be more
closely-related to a difference in the composition of occupants. And, there is not substantial
difference in the homes' energy efficiency by jurisdiction. In most of the regression esti-
mations to follow, we control for vintage-by-year or jurisdiction-by-year fixed effects ­ and
often also for property fixed effects ­ in order to account for systematic differences across
jurisdictions in the composition of properties. Overall, the descriptive statistics in Table 1,
combined with the empirical identification exercises to follow, provide compelling support
for the identification strategy outlined above in Section 2.


4     Empirical strategy and results
4.1    Capitalization effects of disclosure
Our first empirical question is whether ECAD increases the capitalization of homes' energy
efficiency into sale prices. Because we use a proxy for homes' relative energy efficiency
(discussed in Section 3.1), we do not view our estimates as fully capturing the capitalization
of energy efficiency; rather, we examine whether our proxy ­ and by extension homes' true
energy efficiency ­ becomes more capitalized into sale prices as a result of ECAD. To estimate
the effects of the ECAD policy, we use a difference-in-differences identification strategy
comparing outcomes of homes sold inside Austin versus outside of the city limits, before
versus after the ECAD ordinance took effect only for homes within the Austin city limits. If
our hypothesis is correct, then we should see the price spread between less- and more-efficient


                                              10
homes increase by more inside Austin than for the counterfactual.12
    Appendix Figure A1 shows a map of the greater Austin area of our empirical sample,
with our treatment and control group homes indicated by color in Panel (b). Not only are
the counterfactual homes nearby to the treated homes, the properties are all sold on the
same regional Realtor Multiple Listing Service and they are serviced by the same electric
utility (Austin Energy). Further, the probability of selling a home in either jurisdiction is
remarkably similar during the sample period. In Appendix Figure A2 we display the fraction
of homes in each jurisdiction (i.e. inside or outside of Austin city limits) sold in each year in
our sample. Importantly, there is no visible discontinuous change in the probability a home
is sold inside of Austin relative to nearby outside of Austin areas, either just before or just
after the change in policy regimes. This pattern, which is further supported by regression
analyses in Appendix Table A2, indicates that homeowners do not appear to adjust the
timing of sale or decision to sell in anticipation of or as a result of the introduction of the
energy efficiency disclosure requirement.
    To illustrate our "first stage" for compliance with the the policy, Figure 1 displays the
fraction of sales in each jurisdiction with an ECAD audit for each year in our sample. Once
the program begins in 2009 (depicted by the vertical line), roughly 60 percent of sales inside
of Austin and 15 percent of sales outside of Austin obtain ECAD audits. The presence of
audits for homes sold in the Outside Austin area could be due to treatment spillovers or
curiosity on the part of homeowners.13 However, the figure displays a substantial spread in
energy efficiency disclosure across jurisdictions post-2009, a pattern that is further supported
by regression analyses in Appendix Table A3.
    Given this support for our identification strategy, our capitalization estimation asks
whether the correlation between the energy efficiency proxy and the housing price is stronger
when energy efficiency information is disclosed than when it is not. Figure 2 provides a graph-
ical representation of the energy efficiency capitalization for each jurisdiction over time. We
plot the year-specific correlation by jurisdiction between the homes' sale prices and the
homes' energy efficiency proxy, controlling for property fixed effects as well as jurisdiction-
by-year fixed effects. The omitted base year is 1997. Importantly, the residual correlation
  12
       Conceivably, one might use a regression discontinuity design at the ten-year-old home age treatment
cutoff. The first draw-back to using such an approach is relevance: homes constructed close to ten years
prior to the policy, i.e. in the late 1990s and early 2000s, do not have nearly as much heterogeneity in energy
efficiency as is present in older homes. More importantly, there is inadequate statistical power to conduct
meaningful RDD tests around the 10-year-old cutoff.
    13
       As these homes were all sold by professional realtors, who were well-informed of the specifics of the
ECAD mandate, it is quite unlikely that seller confusion is responsible for audits outside of Austin.



                                                      11
between home price and energy efficiency appears to be on parallel trends in the two jurisdic-
tions prior to the introduction of the ECAD program. However, following the policy change
in 2009, the two lines discontinuously separate and show a relatively much more positive cor-
relation between energy efficiency and sale price for homes inside of Austin compared to those
outside of Austin. This visual evidence suggests that homes that are more energy efficient
receive larger price premiums post policy inside of Austin compared to counterfactual.
    In order to more formally estimate the energy efficiency capitalization effects of disclosure,
our preferred specification is as follows:

       ln(Pivjt ) = 1 EEP roxyi × P ostt +
                                                                                              (1)
                    2 EEP roxyi × Austinj × P ostt + µi + vt + jt + ivjt

    Our outcome variable is the log of the sales price for house i of vintage (year-built) v in
jurisdiction j in month t. The energy efficiency proxy is denoted by EEP roxyi and takes
on a continuous value between zero and one, where one indicates the highest efficiency. The
jurisdiction is indicated by Austinj and takes on a value of one for homes within Austin city
limits (and zero otherwise), and P ostt is an indicator for the months after the introduction of
ECAD (post June 2009). House fixed effects are denoted by µi , vt indicate vintage-by-month
fixed effects, jt indicate jurisdiction-by-month fixed effects, and ivjt is an idiosyncratic error
term.
    The house fixed effects control for the time-invariant qualities of a house that affect its
price. Since the composition of the ages of the homes are different inside versus outside of
Austin, we include vintage-by-month fixed effects to control for any differences in sales prices
between the jurisdictions that are driven by differential trends in preferences for particular
vintages of homes. Likewise, we include jurisdiction-by-month fixed effects to account for
differential trends in preferences for homes inside or outside of the city that are not related to
energy efficiency. Given these fixed effects, the identification of the coefficients in our model
comes from comparing the slope of the energy efficiency proxy with respect to house price for
same-age homes sold in the same month, controlling for any differential price trends in one
jurisdiction relative to the other and for each homes' time invariant qualities. Our coefficient
of interest is 2 , which is an estimate of the difference-in-differences of that price-efficiency
slope for homes sold inside Austin versus outside of the city limits, before versus after the
ECAD ordinance took effect.
    Table 2 more formally evaluates this capitalization of energy efficiency, displaying re-
gression estimates for how the natural log of properties' sale prices relates to interactions


                                               12
between energy efficiency, jurisdiction, and time period. The specification for Column (1)
includes the full sample of sales, with jurisdiction and vintage-by-monthly fixed effects. For
Column (2), we estimate a model that includes property fixed effects rather than jurisdiction
fixed effects, which limits the sample to include only homes sold more than once between
1997 and 2014. The advantage of this sub-sampling is that property fixed effects account
for substantially more potential heterogeneity across homes, controlling for any property-
specific factors which might be correlated with both their energy efficiency and sale prices.
In Column (3), we include property fixed effects and jurisdiction-by-monthly fixed effects
rather than vintage-by-monthly fixed effects. Finally, Column (4) displays the results from
our preferred and most saturated specification including property fixed effects and both
vintage-by-monthly and jurisdiction-by-monthly fixed effects.
    The first row in the table displays the estimates for the coefficient on the interaction
between the energy efficiency proxy and the post-policy period (post-June 2009). This
quantifies any change post- versus pre-policy for the residual correlation between energy
efficiency and sale prices for homes overall. For the full sample of sales, the point estimate is
positive and significant at the 10 percent level. However, once we include property fixed
effects to control for any changes in the composition of homes' time invariant qualities
(Columns (2-4)), the effect is no longer statistically nor economically distinguishable from
zero.
    The second row in the table displays estimates for our coefficient of interest: the triple
interaction between the energy efficiency proxy, an indicator for being inside Austin city lim-
its, and an indicator for post policy. Across specifications, the point estimates are positive
and significant. This indicates that comparatively more efficient homes receive a deferen-
tially higher price premium as a result of the ECAD policy applicable inside of Austin but
not outside of Austin. The point estimate in Column (2) of .096 log-points is only half the
magnitude of that in Column (1) of .186, suggesting that asymmetric changes in the com-
position of homes sold over time may be driving some of the relative differences in housing
prices between the two jurisdictions over time. However, once we control for house fixed
effects, as done in Figure 2, the pre-trends for the two jurisdictions are parallel and the
point estimates then remain qualitatively and quantitatively consistent across specifications
in Columns (2-4). These findings here are consistent with Cassidy (2018) who also studies
the ECAD program using a different identification strategy. That work also finds evidence of
capitalization; moreover the capitalization is larger for difficult-to-observe features of homes,
suggesting that information is the mechanism at play.


                                               13
    To provide some perspective for the quantitative magnitudes of the results shown in
Table 2, consider the point estimate of 0.08 log-points in our preferred specification in Column
(4). At the average inside Austin home sale price of $228,000 (Table 1), this treatment effect
corresponds to about a $19,000 price difference in reduced-form between the lowest and
highest quality home, or $190 for each percentage point improvement in our ordinal energy
efficiency proxy. If we are willing to fully attribute the price difference only to the audits
themselves and rescale by the 45 percentage point relative difference in audit disclosure,
then the average treatment effect of disclosure is about $422 per percentage point increase
in energy efficiency. We view this as a strong exclusion restriction, however, considering that
the policy might also have more generally influenced the attention that home buyers pay
to energy efficiency. More generally, we remain agnostic on the specific causal mechanisms
by which ECAD influences the price capitalization of energy efficiency, which are likely
a combination of increased salience and reduced computational costs of evaluating these
features of homes, in addition to the added information provided to the market.
    In the underlying data for the summary statistics in Table 1, each percentage point
improvement in homes' energy efficiency is associated with about an 11.26 kWh reduction in
average monthly electricity use. Using the reduced-form capitalization estimate, at Austin
Energy's average post-2009 electricity tariff of $0.10/kWh, a back-of-the-envelope calculation
indicates an expected pay-back period of about 14 years.14 For a homeowner operating
with a 30-year outlook, this corresponds to about a six percent annual discount rate. For
reference, 30-year mortgages had fixed rates of around four to five percent during this time
period. Thus, our back-of-the-envelope calculation supports that the capitalization estimates
in Table 2 are quite reasonable in quantitative magnitude.


4.2     Effects on investment in energy efficiency
We next explore how the ECAD disclosure program impacts home sellers' and buyers' in-
vestments in energy efficiency technologies and building materials. More specifically, we
estimate how the ordinance affects the total dollar value of program rebates paid to prop-
erty owners by Austin Energy for participation in any of the four energy efficiency rebate
programs offered by the utility. Note that each dollar of rebates corresponds to substantially
more out-of-pocket total dollars of energy efficiency capital investment on the part of the
  14
    That is, home buyers on average are willing to spend $190 more in purchase price in order to save
an expected $1.126 each month, which balances after 14.06 years. We assume no change in tariffs for this
back-of-the-envelope calculation. The findings of Ito (2014) support using the average tariff rate.



                                                  14
homeowner.15
    We start by using our difference-in-differences framework to assess how the disclosure
policy affects total program rebate dollars paid to (soon to be) home sellers. This evaluation
tests whether the availability of credible energy efficiency disclosure provided through the
ECAD ordinance induces sellers to invest in higher product quality prior to listing their
home for sale. As our outcome variable, we use the total dollar value of rebates paid per
property for any program participation within the two years prior to sale. Post-2009 overall,
ninety-four percent of these values are zero within our sample.16
    Figure 3 plots the annual inside Austin coefficients from regressing these rebate dollars
on vintage-by-year fixed effects and annual jurisdiction indicators. The series starts with
2006 as these are the first home sales for which we observe program participation. The
2009 policy change year serves as the omitted base-year. Of importance to the identification
strategy, the overall trends appear very similar across jurisdictions prior to the ECAD policy.
Following 2009, there is a visible jump up in the investment dollars inside Austin compared
to counterfactual, which persists throughout the rest of the time series in Figure 3.17 As
indicated by the confidence intervals for each plotted coefficient, each of these year-specific
estimates is noisy. Table 3 shows a more formal evaluation.
    In Column (1) of Table 3, we estimate the post-pre difference between the coefficients
shown in Figure 3. The econometric specification regresses the total two-years pre-sale dollar
value of rebates paid to each seller (inclusive of zeros) on an interaction for the sale occurring
inside Austin and post-June 2009, controlling for jurisdiction and vintage-by-monthly fixed
effects. The difference-in-differences coefficient of interest is an economically and statistically
significant $13.15 average effect of the policy on total energy efficiency investment rebate
dollars. As the post-policy mean for this outcome variable is $42.39, this reduced-form
treatment effect is a 31 percent increase in average energy investment rebates paid to home
sellers. In the second column, we focus more specifically on rebate dollars paid to the seller
for participation in HPWES, the efficiency program that is explicitly highlighted on the first
page of the ECAD report (see Appendix A) and therefore the types of investments that
  15
      The four programs are discussed in Section 3. Austin Energy's rebate payment schedule is here:
https://savings.austinenergy.com/rebates/residential/offerings/home-improvements/hpwes-rebate.
   16
      Primarily for this reason, we focus on the average value of rebates, inclusive of zeros, rather than the
share of sellers that participate. From a more practical standpoint, our approach is also able to leverage
both extensive and intensive margins of program participation, which improves statistical precision.
   17
      Although the policy change occurred in mid-2009, it is reasonable to expect a short lag before seeing
effects on this outcome, as homeowners are unlikely to undergo additional major renovations in their current
homes immediately following the policy change.



                                                     15
are most closely tied to ECAD report values. Here, we find an effect on HPWES-specific
investment by home sellers that is larger in both point estimate ($16.47) and relative to
subgroup mean (61 percent). This evidence of investment by home sellers indicates that at
least some sellers are aware both of their homes' respective energy efficiency and that this
quality is more likely to be capitalized into home prices when it may be credibly disclosed.
    In the final two columns of Table 3, we evaluate the effects of the ECAD ordinance on
energy efficiency program rebates paid for participation in the two-years post-sale, i.e. paid
to home buyers. Column (3) shows the estimates for all program rebates. Although the point
estimate is positive, it is statistically insignificant; moreover, it is smaller in both magnitude
and proportionately compared to that for total pre-sale rebate dollars. In Column (4), how-
ever, which focuses only on rebates paid to home buyers for HPWES participation, we find
a large and statistically significant effect of $21.25 (31 percent of the mean). Together, these
latter two findings indicate that: (1) the ECAD ordinance induced investment in energy
efficiency improvements highlighted on the ECAD audit report, and (2) these investments
might in part be substitutions away from other program participation (e.g. appliance re-
placement).18


5      Market failures and value of mandatory disclosure
5.1     Relationship between energy efficiency and disclosure
Our finding that audits increase the internalization of energy efficiency into house prices
creates a broader puzzle about the role of a government disclosure policy. Under some
circumstances, policymakers need not mandate disclosure in order for quality information to
be incorporated into market outcomes. For example, if sellers know quality but buyers do
not, and if disclosure is sufficiently low cost, then sellers with the highest quality products
have an incentive to voluntarily disclose quality to induce buyers to purchase from them.
Given this incentive, the sellers with the next highest quality product also have incentives
to disclose for similar reasons. This dynamic leads to an "unraveling" where all but the
lowest quality seller discloses, which eliminates incomplete information in the market. Even
given some disclosure costs, such incentives to voluntarily disclosure still predict a sharp
  18
    Given this evidence of increased investments, it is tempting to explore how the ordinance affects energy
consumption. Two data limitations preclude such an exercise. First, the margin of investment is relatively
small, so the analysis is under-powered statistically. Second, we cannot observe which households are buying
which homes, and the policy might have facilitated increased sorting of households across homes.



                                                    16
relationship between quality and the decision to disclose (Grossman, 1981; Milgrom, 1981).
     However, these dynamics of voluntary disclosure are inconsistent with two robust empir-
ical features that we observe in our setting. First, the voluntary disclosure dynamics imply
that making audits mandatory should not increase price internalization. More precisely,
given that an audit infrastructure was in place both inside and outside of Austin, there
should not exist a greater annual relative energy efficiency capitalization in Austin versus
outside of Austin after 2009. However our results in Section 4 indicate otherwise.
    Second, the voluntary disclosure dynamics would imply a sharp relationship between the
energy efficiency of homes and the disclosure decision. However, we find only a very weak
relationship. Figure 4 plots the share of in-sample homes sold inside Austin post-June 2009
that complied with the ECAD policy by obtaining and disclosing an energy efficiency audit,
across the homes' energy efficiency quantiles. Each point depicts a local average compliance
rate for the respective energy efficiency decile. The line shows the linear fit to the underlying
microdata. Strikingly, the slope between energy efficiency and disclosure propensity is fairly
flat. The first decile does have the lowest average disclosure rate at 55.4 percent; however,
the most efficient decile's average disclosure rate is only 3.5 percentage points higher at 58.9
percent. More broadly, sellers of properties with below-median energy efficiency obtain an
audit in 59 percent of sales, while above-median efficiency homes are audited in 62.4 percent
of sales.
    In this section, we construct an alternative model of disclosure that predicts these two
empirical regularities. We offer evidence supporting that the mechanism by which mandatory
disclosure increases capitalization is that both buyers and sellers have incomplete informa-
tion about quality. Specifically, some sellers do not know the energy efficiency of their own
homes, and a mandatory disclosure policy encourages that information to be revealed and
incorporated into market prices. This bilateral incomplete information stands in stark con-
trast to much of the literature on the role of disclosure, which assumes that sellers know
product quality (Dranove and Jin, 2010). This mechanism suggests a rethinking about the
normative implications of mandating disclosure in some market settings, as we discuss below.
    Our model below shows that when some sellers are uninformed about the relative energy
efficiency of their homes, the relationship between energy efficiency and disclosure can by
weak. We note that there are several other a priori possible explanations for a flat relation-
ship, but none appear to be plausible in this setting. The first is that our proxy for homes'
energy efficiency is a poor or relatively meaningless one. It is difficult to argue that this is
the case. For one, as shown and discussed in Section 3 and Appendix A, we validate that our


                                               17
proxy is highly correlated with actual audit measures of residential energy efficiency. In ad-
dition, our empirical results above demonstrate that this measure is significantly capitalized
among treated homes post-policy relative to counterfactual.
    A second possibility is that buyers are driving the compliance decision by asking sellers to
provide the information as part of the closing process. If the requests come from home buyers
who are uniformly distributed across efficiency space, it could drive the weak relationship
we observe between compliance and energy efficiency. However, the timing of the audit is
generally within a few days of the real estate listing agreement ­ before the property is
marketed ­ and is uncorrelated with the closing date (see Appendix Figures A3 and A4). A
related potential explanation is that the decision to disclose is driven by realtors. If some
realtors consistently ask their clients to perform ECAD audits, while others consistently do
not, this could result in the weak relationship between compliance and energy efficiency that
we observe. In contrast, we find that the propensity to disclose across realtors instead follows
a bell-shaped distribution as shown in Appendix Figure A5.
    Another hypothetical explanation, in principle, is that many seller's are simply unin-
formed about the requirements of the ECAD program. However, this explanation has min-
imal support given that these are all properties sold via realtors, who are well informed
about ECAD.19 If sellers were well-informed about the efficiency quality of their properties,
realtors would have a strong financial incentive to encourage their client sellers of more effi-
cient homes to disclose. Therefore, if we take seriously that the compliance decision is most
likely driven by the seller in consultation with a realtor who knows about the program, there
are two plausible explanations for the empirical pattern of disclosure, which we model and
evaluate just below: (1) sellers are not aware of the energy efficiency of their homes and
(2) there is substantial heterogeneity in costs (including time, effort and psychological) of
disclosure.


5.2     Model of ECAD compliance decision
We present a simple model of the seller's decision to comply with a mandatory disclosure
policy. This model shows that when both the buyers and some sellers are uninformed
about (relative) product quality, that compliance with a mandatory disclosure policy will be
incomplete and only weakly related to quality.
    Consider a single house that is being sold from a seller to a buyer. Beliefs about the
  19
     The Austin Board of Realtors regularly puts on events in coordination with Austin Energy to disseminate
information about ECAD to local realtors, and our own discussions corroborate that they are well-informed.


                                                    18
energy efficiency of the house do not affect whether the house is sold, but do affect the
negotiated transaction price. The house's true energy efficiency ­ which we refer to as
quality ­ is characterized by q  [0, 1], with a larger q corresponding to a higher level of
energy efficiency.
     In this incomplete information setting, denote seller beliefs about quality as q s and buyer
beliefs as q b . First, consider the seller's beliefs. Let the seller be informed about the true
quality with probability , and we take this probability to be exogenous to the model. For
example, the seller may be unaware of the number of inches of insulation in the attic or
unaware of the relative energy efficiency of the home relative to other homes. An informed
seller knows the true product quality (q s = q ) whereas an uninformed seller has beliefs about
quality given by q s = q  ^s , which we specify below.20
     Next, consider buyer beliefs. The buyer is uninformed about the true quality q unless
the seller chooses to conduct an audit. If an audit is conducted, the results of the audit
are automatically reported to the buyer (i.e. the seller cannot observe the audit results and
keep that information private). We assume that the audit is unbiased and reports the true
quality q .21 Therefore, if no audit is conducted then the buyer's beliefs are given by q b = q  ^b ,
but if an audit occurs then buyer knows the true quality and q b = q .
     Beliefs about quality determine the buyer's and seller's respective beliefs about the dollar
value of the home as given by b(q b ) and b(q s ). Nash Bargaining determines how beliefs
about the pecuniary benefits of quality map to the price premium for the energy efficiency
characteristics of the house. Therefore, the home's energy efficiency affects the negotiated
transaction price of the house by the amount: 1      2
                                                       [b(q s ) + b(q b )].
     The audit/disclosure decision is made by the seller. Let the net pecuniary costs of getting
an audit versus not getting an audit be given by c. In other words, c is the dollar costs of
paying for the audit process net of the expected penalty for not obtaining an audit prior to
sale. (Voluntary disclosure corresponds to an expected penalty of zero). In our setting, the
expected penalty appears to be very small given the degree of enforcement.
     The benefits to the seller of undertaking an audit are driven by how much the disclosure
changes the beliefs of the buyer. An informed seller will choose to disclose quality if b(q ) - c 
1
2
  [b(q ) + b(^
             q b )]. That is, the seller chooses to disclose if and only if the expected benefit
from disclosure is greater than the net of the direct disclosure cost and the expected Nash
  20
     For simplicity, we assume here that uninformed agents' beliefs are loaded at a single mass point, but one
could also allow for non-degenerate distributions.
  21
     See Dranove and Jin (2010) for a discussion of the literature investigating whether third-party certifiers
necessarily have an incentive to report unbiased results.



                                                      19
Bargaining opportunity cost. An uninformed seller faces a similar tradeoff but evaluates
expected benefits on (perhaps incorrect) beliefs of the quality of the house. An uninformed
seller discloses if b(^
                      qs) - c  12
                                     q s ) + b(^
                                  [b(^                       ^s may not necessarily be true quality q .
                                               q b )], where q
    Given this model, we illustrate how full unraveling can break down. Figure 5 presents
several scenarios. In the illustration, we set the domain of b(·)  [0, ¯    b]. For ease of exposition,
these scenarios all assume that the buyer's belief in the absence of disclosure q         ^b = 0. This
assumption is equivalent to the seller operating as if the buyer's belief about an undisclosed
product quality is that it is of the lowest possible quality, consistent with assumptions in
classic models of voluntarily disclosing of asymmetric information (Dranove and Jin, 2010).
Note that this assumption is not Bayesian in the sense that our model will predict something
different ­ some high quality and some low quality homes will fail to get an audit. However, in
this incomplete information environment, it is not clear that buyers follow a "fully strategic"
model of belief formation.
    Similarly, for exposition we assume in this illustration that an uninformed seller believes
her house to be of median quality, i.e. b(^     q) = ¯  b/2. Of course, uninformed sellers and buyers
might hold alternate beliefs, such as that unknown quality is positively correlated with true
quality. The key insight of the model is to illustrate that incomplete information by both
the buyer and seller yields a weak relationship between disclosure and quality.
    In the first scenario, we illustrate that full unraveling can breakdown when disclosure is
costly to the seller. In this benchmark scenario, all sellers are informed about the quality of
their homes ( = 1). Suppose that the seller faces a deterministic disclosure cost c = ¯            b/4.
Deterministically, the seller will disclose product quality if and only if b(q )  ¯          b/2. This
scenario is shown by the solid line in Figure 5. This signals to the market only that the
energy efficiency value of an unaudited house lies in the range b(q )  [0, ¯        b/2), but provides
no more detailed information about product quality. In this scenario, the sellers of all houses
of sufficiently high quality disclose quality to the buyer.
    In the second scenario, all sellers are informed but there is heterogeneity in the cost of
disclosure. Cost heterogeneity could reflect the fact that the time, effort, and psychological
costs of disclosing and the perception of expected penalties of non-compliance may vary
across sellers. In this illustration, the disclosure cost is drawn from a normal distribution
around ¯ b/4: c  N (¯   b/4, ¯
                             b/8). The relationship between quality and equilibrium disclosure
is shown by the long-dashed line. The probability of disclosure is visibly smoother with
respect to the seller's product quality q . Even the highest quality houses do not always
have quality disclosed to the buyer, but higher quality homes are much more likely to have


                                                  20
quality disclosed. In particular, a seller with benefit of less than ¯
                                                                     b/2 will still disclose quality
if the cost draw is sufficiently small, and vice versa. Note that the relationship between
disclosure probability and disclosure benefit is relatively steep when the seller is informed
with certainty, despite our imposition here of sizable variation in disclosure cost.
    Next we allow for the major innovation of this exercise ­ sellers can be uninformed about
the quality of their own homes. We continue to model disclosure costs as heterogeneous as
in the scenario above, but we reduce the probability  that the seller is informed. In the
short-dashed line, the probability the seller is informed  = 0.50 and independent of the true
quality q . And in the dotted line, the probability is  = 0.10. In general, when the seller is
uninformed, the relationship between true quality and disclosure is substantially flattened.
    Collectively, the theoretical scenarios illustrated in Figure 5 show two insights. The first
is that, given either a dispersion in disclosure costs and/or the possibility for seller ignorance
about product quality, the classic theoretical unraveling result breaks down. The second
insight is that for unraveling to be minimal requires either that there be a large dispersion
in disclosure costs or that there be a substantial likelihood that the seller is uninformed (or
both).


5.3     Computational simulation
Next we conduct a simulation exercise that connects our reduced-form empirical findings
to the theoretical model presented in Section 5.2. Our computational exercise simulates
draws of audit costs for each post-policy inside Austin home seller and uses these simulated
cost values ­ along with data on homes' true energy efficiency and sellers' actual disclosure
decisions ­ to determine the maximum plausible share of home sellers that could be informed
under various cost distributions without violating the specification of the model.
     Our starting point for the simulation is the solution to the seller's disclosure problem
in the model in Section 5.2. Recall, an informed seller will choose to disclose quality if
b(q ) - c  12
              [b(q ) + b(^
                         q b )] while an uninformed seller discloses if b(^        1
                                                                          qs) - c  2    q s ) + b(^
                                                                                     [b(^         q b )],
where q ^s may not necessarily be the true quality q . Let i  {0, 1} denote whether the seller
is informed, with i  Bernoulli() and  taken as exogenous to the model. Then, the seller's
decision to disclose d  {0, 1} can be summarized as a function of the seller's information
status:
        
                                      ^s )  2c + b(q
         1 if i · b(q ) + (1 - i) · b(q             ^b )
      d=                                            ^b )                                             (2)
                                      ^s ) < 2c + b(q
         0 if i · b(q ) + (1 - i) · b(q


                                                   21
That is, the seller chooses to disclose quality if and only if the seller's (expected) benefit
from disclosure is greater than the seller's combined disclosure cost and expected Nash
bargaining opportunity cost. When making the disclosure decision, the seller may or may
not be informed, i  {0, 1}, about the value of the home's quality. We observe disclosure
decisions d in the data, we can use the reduced-form results shown above to provide a sale
price benefit b(q ) for each property, and we can simulate values for 2c + b(q  ^b ), which we
hereafter refer to as effective disclosure cost. However, we do not observe whether or not
a seller is informed, nor do we observe sellers' beliefs about their homes' quality, q  ^s . By
rearranging the above solution, we can define:
         
          0 if     d=0         and    b(q )  2c + b(q^b )
         
          0 if
         
                   d=1         and                   ^b )
                                      b(q ) < 2c + b(q
       i                                             ^b )                                                  (3)
         
          1 if     d=1         and    b(q )  2c + b(q
              1 if d = 0       and                   ^b )
                                      b(q ) < 2c + b(q

The first two scenarios in Equation (3) are mechanically true per the model, whereas the
latter two only indicate that the seller is plausibly informed. Note that with this framing,
we do not need to assume nor simulate any values for uninformed sellers' beliefs b(q        ^s ). We
simulate values of the effective disclosure cost 2c + b(q     ^b ) and conduct the computational
simulation exercise as follows.
    First, we linearly re-scale the gross price benefits to range b(q )  [0, 1] by using the energy
efficiency proxy term directly as the gross benefit value. The advantage to this re-scaling
is that it preserves the quantitative implications of the model without being sensitive to
the specific values estimated for price capitalization above (i.e. it doesn't matter whether
we use the reduced-form intent-to-treat or the ATE to quantify price benefit). Next, we
assume that effective disclosure costs are normally distributed and determine the requisite
average cost that would generate the empirically-observed (61 percent) share of sellers who
disclose quality, using the model and assuming that all sellers are informed. This value is
0.44. That is, in the scenario that all sellers are informed about their homes' relative energy
efficiency and with price capitalization re-scaled to be in [0, 1], the only sellers to disclose
will be those who would realize re-scaled gross price benefit of greater than 0.44.22 We hold
average effective disclosure cost fixed across all simulations and vary the standard deviation
of simulated effective disclosure costs, such that 2c + b(q       ^b )  N (0.44,  ). Within each
  22
    Note that the reason for the average effective disclosure cost value of 0.44, rather than 0.39, is that the
distribution of energy efficiency for these sold homes slightly deviates from the overall sample distribution.


                                                      22
simulation loop, we specify a value of  and simulate a cost vector. Rather than randomly
assigning cost values to sales, we sort the cost vector such that the maximum plausible share
of sellers could be informed per Equation (3).23
    Thus, for specified values of  and observed vectors of values of d  {0, 1} and b(q )  [0, 1],
the steps of each simulation loop are:
                                                                          ^b )  N (0.44,  ).
   1. Draw a vector of gross effective disclosure cost values from 2c + b(q

   2. Sort the cost vector such that the maximum possible share of sellers could plausibly
      be informed without violating the rationality of the model per Equation (3).

   3. Store the aggregate value for this maximum possible fraction of informed sellers.

    Simulation results are shown in Figure 6 and Table 4 for values of  ranging from 0.0 to
0.3 in increments of 0.01. To reduce the influence of simulation variation, we repeat steps
1-3 for 1000 repetitions of each specified value for  . The figure plots the median values
from the repetitions for each  in the solid line in the graph; the first and ninety-ninth
percentile values for each simulated standard deviation value are shown in the dashed grey
lines. Table 4 shows the first, median, and ninety-ninth percentile values for the share of
plausibly-informed sellers from 1000 repetitions at selected  values.
    In the first row of Table 4, effective disclosure costs are set to be constant (at 0.44) across
sellers. With no heterogeneity in audit costs, Equation (3) can be rationalized only with at
most 54.18 percent of sellers being informed about their homes' relative energy efficiency.
As the simulated spread in effective disclosure costs increases (moving down the first column
of Table 4 or across the horizontal axis of Figure 6), the corresponding share of plausibly-
informed sellers also increases. This is consistent with the illustration in Figure 5 of the
theoretical model described in Section 5.2.
    More quantitatively, the simulation shows that for all sellers to be plausibly-informed
requires a standard deviation in simulated effective disclosure costs of at least 0.27, i.e.
2c + b(q ^b )  N (0.44, 0.27). At face value, this spread in costs might not seem very large
economically. As noted in Section 2, the direct out-of-pocket cost of an ECAD audit is around
$100-$300. However, because of the re-scaling in the simulation, the direct ECAD report cost
is not the average value of 2c + b(q ^b ). For exposition, let average b(q
                                                                         ^b ) = 0, average c = $200,
  23
    More precisely, we sort the vector of cost draws such that the largest cost value is assigned to the seller
with the largest gross benefit among the subset of sellers who did not disclose. We assign the second largest
cost value to the seller with the second largest gross benefit among sellers who did not disclose, and so on.
After all nondisclosing sellers have been assigned a cost value, we assign the next largest available cost value
to the seller with the largest gross benefit who did disclose, repeating the above process.

                                                      23
and use the ATE estimated in Section 4 to quantify b(q ) = 42200q for energy efficiency
q  [0, 1]. Recognizing that this benefit measure is a relative one, we can recenter (but do
not re-scale) the distribution such that average gross effective disclosure costs 2c = $400 and
b(q ) = $42200q - $18168. This implies that 2c + b(q  ^b )  N ($400, $11394).
     In principle, one could argue that a very large spread in disclosure costs is possible if
there are substantial nonmonetary costs involved with the disclosure process. For instance,
there might be privacy considerations or hassle costs that are not captured in a technician's
$200 fee. This explanation is challenging to support for ECAD audits. These homes are
all sold by a realtor and sales involve open houses, visits by buyers, other seller and buyer
inspections, and often contractor work (e.g. touch-up painting). The short visit by an
energy efficiency technician is unlikely to induce such sizable nonmonetary costs as would
be required to support such a large spread in disclosure costs as N ($400, $11394) ­ or even
N ($400, $2110), which corresponds to  = 0.05 in the simulation.
     Instead, it is much more plausible that the simulation exercise indicates that a significant
share of homeowners are uninformed about the energy efficiency of their homes, at least in
a relative sense. As highlighted in the theoretical scenarios in Figure 5, if few sellers are
informed, then a large spread in disclosure costs is not required to support a relatively flat
disclosure slope, as seen in our empirical Figure 4.


5.4    Discussion
These findings suggest a new dimension to the voluntary disclosure literature. In contrast
to the stark theoretical prediction of complete voluntary disclosure through unraveling, the
empirical literature finds that "there are many markets in which voluntary disclosure is
incomplete" such that "unraveling often does not occur in practice" (Dranove and Jin, 2010).
Explanations for this lack of unraveling have largely focused on the size of the disclosure costs
(e.g. Jovanovic, 1982; Lewis, 2011), the role of consumers (e.g. Milgrom and Roberts, 1986;
Fishman and Hagerty, 2003; Li and Shi, 2017), and the influence of competition (e.g. Board,
2009; Guo and Zhao, 2009). We provide suggestive evidence for another explanation for a
lack of unraveling in information disclosure markets: sellers might also not be fully informed
about their own products' relative quality.
    For quality disclosure models, Dranove and Jin's (2010) review article notes (p. 943)
that two of the "often strong assumptions" for the unraveling prediction are that sellers
have complete information about their own product quality and that the distribution of
available quality is public information. Ours is the first study to our knowledge, however,

                                               24
to provide empirical support for this plausible explanation for a lack of unraveling of quality
disclosure in markets with private information. Market failures driven by sellers' ignorance
about the relative quality of their own goods or services most closely applies to disclosure in
markets that are peer-to-peer, including sales of previously-owned assets such as residential
real estate (as we study) and used automobiles, but also digital marketplaces such as eBay
and airbnb (e.g. Lewis, 2011; Klein et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2017). However, a growing
literature shows that even firms and other organizations often appear to be ignorant of
many of their own qualities (e.g. Brehm and Hamilton, 1996; Anderson and Newell, 2004;
Bloom et al., 2013). Thus, the general insight from our findings that mandating standardized
testing and disclosure can increase economic welfare would apply to other circumstances with
symmetrically incomplete information about quality, even for goods and services provided
by large organizations such as manufacturing plants, hospitals, and schools, to note but a
few example settings from the literature on disclosure (Bui and Mayer, 2003; Dranove et al.,
2003; Andrabi et al., 2017).


6     Conclusions
In this paper, we analyze the Energy Conservation Audit and Disclosure program in Austin,
Texas. We show that encouraging home sellers to provide potential buyers with certified en-
ergy audits increases price capitalization of energy efficiency and leads to quality-improving
residential investments in energy-saving technologies. This is one of the few empirical set-
tings wherein a government disclosure program is shown to have socially beneficial effects,
particularly for product quality in the targeted market.
    To understand why government intervention is effective in this context, we examine
sellers' decisions to comply with ECAD. Despite substantially larger expected price premiums
from disclosure for more efficient homes, we find that properties' relative energy efficiency
only weakly predicts whether or not sellers choose to disclose this information. We rule
out that this weak relationship is attributable to buyers or realtors dictating compliance by
asking sellers to provide audits, rather than by home sellers making the decision.
    Then, we examine two other plausible explanations for the flat relationship between
homes' relative energy efficiency and sellers' propensities to disclose: either sellers are ig-
norant about their own homes' relative quality or there is substantial variation in effective
ECAD compliance costs. Using a computational simulation, we find that, given our estimated
capitalization effects, this flat relationship can be rationalized only by either extremely large


                                               25
heterogeneity in disclosure costs or, much more plausibly, by a significant share of homeown-
ers being ignorant about the relative energy efficiency of their own homes.
    Our findings have important policy implications. First, our work suggests that homeown-
ers' ignorance about their own energy efficiency is a market failure that disclosure policies
can help to ameliorate. Our capitalization findings indicate that home purchasers do un-
derstand and care about residential energy efficiency information when it is made available.
Thus, mandatory disclosure may improve residential sorting and, as we find, increase over-
all quality by creating stronger incentives to invest in energy efficiency. Our findings also
support that homeowners' ignorance about energy efficiency may be a contributor to the
Energy Efficiency Gap in residential housing. Therefore, encouraging homeowners to get
energy audits can increase participation in energy efficiency incentive programs.
    More broadly, our study indicates that in markets with symmetrically incomplete infor-
mation, mandating standardized testing and disclosure has potential to increase economic
welfare by harnessing the positive externalities associated with information provision. Our
framework is most directly analogous to peer-to-peer markets, such as residential real estate,
used automobiles or digital marketplaces such as eBay. However, in light of evidence that
even large firms are often ignorant of their own qualities, the general insights from our study
should apply even in markets supplied by incorporated organizations.


References
H. Allcott and M. Greenstone. Is there an energy efficiency gap?        Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 26(1):3­28, 2012.

H. Allcott and M. Greenstone. Measuring the welfare effects of residential energy efficiency
  programs. NBER Working Paper: w23386, 2017.

H. Allcott and C. Knittel. Are consumers poorly informed about fuel economy? Evidence
  from two experiments. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1):1­37, 2019.

H. Allcott and N. Wozny. Gasoline prices, fuel economy, and the energy paradox. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 96(5):779­795, 2014.

S. T. Anderson and R. G. Newell. Information programs for technology adoption: The case
   of energy-efficiency audits. Resource and Energy Economics, 26(1):27­50, 2004.

T. Andrabi, J. Das, and A. I. Khwaja. Report cards: The impact of providing school and
  child test scores on educational markets. The American Economic Review, 107(6):1535­
  1563, 2017.


                                              26
E. Aydin, D. Brounen, and N. Kok. Information asymmetry and energy efficiency: Evidence
  from the housing market. Maastricht University Working Paper, 2017.

N. Bloom, B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts. Does management matter?
  Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1):1­51, 2013.

O. Board. Competition and disclosure. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(1):197­213,
  2009.

B. Bollinger, P. Leslie, and A. Sorensen. Calorie posting in chain restaurants. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1):91­128, 2011.

J. Brehm and J. T. Hamilton. Noncompliance in environmental reporting: Are violators
  ignorant, or evasive, of the law? American Journal of Political Science, 40(2):444­477,
  1996.

D. Brounen and N. Kok. On the economics of energy labels in the housing market. Journal
  of Environmental Economics and Management, 62:166­179, 2011.

L. T. M. Bui and C. J. Mayer. Regulation and capitalization of environmental amenities:
  Evidence from the Toxic Release Inventory in Massachusetts. The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 85(3):693­708, 2003.

M. Busse, C. Knittel, and F. Zettelmeyer. Are consumers myopic? Evidence from new and
 used car purchases. The American Economic Review, 103(1):220­256, 2013.

A. Cassidy. How does mandatory energy efficiency disclosure affect housing prices? Available
  at SSRN 3047417, 2018.

L. W. Davis, A. Fuchs, and P. Gertler. Cash for coolers: Evaluating a large-scale appliance
  replacement program in Mexico. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4):
  207­38, 2014.

L. W. Davis, S. Martinez, and B. Taboada. How effective is energy-efficient housing? Ev-
  idence from a field trial in Mexico. Journal of Development Economics (Forthcoming),
  2019.

D. Dranove and G. Z. Jin. Quality disclosure and certification: Theory and practice. Journal
  of Economic Literature, 48(4):935­63, 2010.

D. Dranove, D. Kessler, M. McClellan, and M. Satterthwaite. Is more information better?
  The effects of "report cards" on health care providers. Journal of Political Economy, 111
  (3):555­588, 2003.

M. J. Fishman and K. M. Hagerty. Mandatory versus voluntary disclosure in markets with
 informed and uninformed customers. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 19
 (1):45­63, 2003.

                                            27
M. Fowlie, M. Greenstone, and C. Wolfram. Are the non-monetary costs of energy efficiency
 investments large? Understanding low take-up of a free energy efficiency program. The
 American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105(5):201­204, 2015.

M. Fowlie, M. Greenstone, and C. Wolfram. Do energy efficiency investments deliver? Evi-
 dence from the weatherization assistance program. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 133(3):1597­1644, 2018.

M. Frondel, A. Gerster, and C. Vance. The power of mandatory quality disclosure: Evidence
 from the German housing market. Available at SSRN 2796532, 2017.

T. D. Gerarden, R. G. Newell, and R. N. Stavins. Assessing the energy-efficiency gap. Journal
  of Economic Literature, 55(4):1486­1525, 2017.

K. Gillingham, R. G. Newell, and K. Palmer. Energy efficiency economics and policy. Annual
  Review of Resource Economics, 1(1):597­620, 2009.

L. Grigolon, M. Reynaert, and F. Verboven. Consumer valuation of fuel costs and the
  effectiveness of tax policy: Evidence from the European car market. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy (Forthcoming), 2018.

S. J. Grossman. The informational role of warranties and private disclosure about product
  quality. The Journal of Law and Economics, 24(3):461­483, 1981.

L. Guo and Y. Zhao. Voluntary quality disclosure and market interaction. Marketing Science,
  28(3):488­501, 2009.

J. S. Hastings and J. M. Weinstein. Information, school choice, and academic achievement:
   Evidence from two experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4):1373­1414,
   2008.

D. E. Ho, Z. C. Ashwood, and C. Handan-Nader. New evidence on information disclo-
  sure through restaurant hygiene grading: Reply. American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy (Forthcoming), 2019.

International Energy Agency. World energy outlook. Technical report, Organization for
  Economic Co-operation and Development, 2015.

K. Ito. Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
  electricity pricing. The American Economic Review, 104(2):537­563, 2014.

B. Jovanovic. Truthful disclosure of information. The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1):
  36­44, 1982.

T. J. Klein, C. Lambertz, and K. O. Stahl. Market transparency, adverse selection, and
  moral hazard. Journal of Political Economy, 124(6):1677­1713, 2016.


                                             28
A. Levinson. How much energy do building energy codes save? Evidence from California
  houses. The American Economic Review, 106(10):2867­2894, 2016.

G. Lewis. Asymmetric information, adverse selection and online disclosure: The case of eBay
  Motors. The American Economic Review, 101(4):1535­1546, 2011.

H. Li and X. Shi. Discriminatory information disclosure. The American Economic Review,
  107(11):3363­3385, 2017.

G. Loewenstein, C. R. Sunstein, and R. Golman. Disclosure: Psychology changes everything.
  Annual Review of Economics, 6(1):391­419, 2014.

X. Ma, J. T. Hancock, K. L. Mingjie, and M. Naaman. Self-disclosure and perceived trust-
  worthiness of airbnb host profiles. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer
  Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, pages 2397­2409, 2017.

McKinsey & Company. Unlocking energy efficiency in the US economy. Technical report,
 McKinsey Global Energy and Materials, 2009.

P. Milgrom and J. Roberts. Relying on the information of interested parties. The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 17(1):18­32, 1986.

P. R. Milgrom. Good news and bad news: Representation theorems and applications. The
  Bell Journal of Economics, 12(2):380­391, 1981.

E. Myers. Asymmetric information in residential rental markets: Implications for the energy
  efficiency gap. Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper, 2015.

E. Myers. Are home buyers inattentive? Evidence from capitalization of energy costs.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy (Forthcoming), 2019.

J. Sallee, S. West, and W. Fan. Do consumers recognize the value of fuel economy? Evidence
   from used car prices and gasoline price fluctuations. Journal of Public Economics, 135:
   61­73, 2016.

E. Seira, A. Elizondo, and E. Laguna-Müggenburg. Are information disclosures effective?
  Evidence from the credit card market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9
  (1):277­307, 2017.

M. Walls, T. Gerarden, K. Palmer, and X. F. Bak. Is energy efficiency capitalized into
 home prices? Evidence from three US cities. Journal of Environmental Economics and
 Management, 82:104­124, 2017.

C. Winston. The efficacy of information policy: A review of Archon Fung, Mary Graham,
  and David Weil's full disclosure: The perils and promise of transparency. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 46(3):704­17, 2008.


                                            29
Figures and tables

                        Figure 1: Fraction of in-sample home sales each year that had conducted ECAD audit


                                    100
                                             Jurisdiction             Sales
                                                 q   Inside Austin     q     1000
                                                     Outside Austin   q      5000



                                    75
Fraction sold with ECAD audit (%)




                                                                                                                q            q q
                                                                                                                       q q
                                    50


                                                                                                            q


                                    25




                                      0                q q q q q q q q qq q q
                                          1995                        2000                  2005                2010               2015
                                                                                    Year of property sale

          Notes: Figure 1 plots the annual fraction of in-sample home sales by jurisdiction ­ inside Austin versus
          outside of the Austin city limits ­ that had conducted an ECAD energy efficiency audit prior to the closing
          date of the sale. The dashed vertical line at 2009 indicates when the ECAD audit and disclosure policy
          went into effect for homes sold inside Austin only. The sample includes sales of single family residential
          properties constructed no later than 1998, for which all inside Austin sales were officially bound by the
          ECAD policy starting in June 2009.




                                                                                         30
                                                             Figure 2: Estimated annual relative energy efficiency capitalization by jurisdiction


                                                             0.2
                                                                      Coefficient
                                                                          q   Inside Austin
Relative price premium for energy efficiency (log-points)




                                                                              Outside Austin



                                                             0.1                                                                                          q


                                                                                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                    q                 q
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                             0.0                                    q
                                                                                       q                          q   q
                                                                                               q          q
                                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                                       q
                                                            -0.1                                                                   q




                                                            -0.2

                                                                   1995                            2000                     2005                   2010                   2015
                                                                                                                  Year of property sale

                 Notes: Figure 2 plots coefficients by jurisdiction ­ inside Austin versus outside of the Austin city limits ­
                 from regressing the natural log of homes' sale prices on the homes' energy efficiency, a term that ranges
                 continuously from zero to one and indicates each home's fixed energy efficiency quantile. The underlying
                 regression includes property fixed effects as well as jurisdiction-by-year fixed effects. The omitted base-
                 year is 1997. The ECAD audit disclosure program for all sales inside Austin took effect in June 2009.




                                                                                                                       31
                                  Figure 3: Inside Austin coefficients by year for pre-sale energy efficiency rebate dollars


                                                 50
                                                      Coefficient
                                                       q   Inside Austin
Average energy efficiency program rebates ($)




                                                 25

                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                       q               q
                                                                                               q                   q

                                                                           q
                                                             q                 q
                                                  0                                 q




                                                -25




                                                -50

                                                            2006                   2009                     2012           2015
                                                                                    Year of property sale

             Notes: Figure 3 plots the annual inside Austin coefficients from regressing pre-sale energy efficiency rebate
             dollars on vintage-by-year fixed effects and annual jurisdiction indicators. The 2009 policy change year
             is the omitted base-year. The outcome variable is the total dollar value of rebates paid to the property's
             owners by Austin Energy within two years prior to the property sale for participation in any of the four
             energy efficiency rebate programs offered by the utility; 96 percent of these values are zero dollars.




                                                                                          32
                                                Figure 4: ECAD audit disclosure propensity by energy efficiency of home sold


                                          100
                                                     Jurisdiction
                                                      q    Inside Austin
Sales fraction with ECAD disclosure (%)




                                          75



                                                                                                              q       q
                                                                                                   q              q
                                                                    q                    q
                                                                           q   q                                          q
                                                      q
                                          50




                                          25




                                            0

                                                       1            2      3   4         5         6          7   8   9   10
                                                                                   Energy efficiency decile

            Notes: Figure 4 plots the share of in-sample homes sold inside Austin post-June 2009 that complied
            with the ECAD policy by obtaining and disclosing an energy efficiency audit, across the homes' energy
            efficiency quantiles. Each point depicts a local average compliance rate for the respective energy efficiency
            decile. The line shows the linear fit to the underlying microdata.




                                                                                          33
                                         Figure 5: Illustration of various scenarios in theoretical model


                            1.00
                                       Scenario in theoretical model
                                             Seller certainly informed; disc. costs = b/4
                                           Certainly informed; disc. costs ~ N(b/4, b/8)
                                          50% prob. informed; disc. costs ~ N(b/4, b/8)
                                          10% prob. informed; disc. costs ~ N(b/4, b/8)
                            0.75
Probability of disclosure




                            0.50




                            0.25




                            0.00

                                   0                                                             b/2             b
                                                                                  Benefit from disclosure

       Notes: Figure 5 depicts four scenarios in illustration of the theoretical model described in Section 5.2.
       The solid line illustrates the classic unraveling scenario, in which an informed seller will certainly disclose
       the quality of the product if and only if the expected benefit from disclosure is greater than the constant
       disclosure cost (inclusive of opportunity cost). The long-dashed line extends this scenario so that the
       seller's audit cost may vary, which visibly flattens the relationship between the magnitude of disclosure
       benefit and propensity for disclosure. The short-dashed line allows that the seller might be uniformed,
       with 50 percent probability, of the expected magnitude of the benefit from disclosure. Finally, the dotted
       line shows the case in which the seller is informed with only 10 percent probability.




                                                                                            34
                          Figure 6: Simulation results for plausible share of informed sellers by audit cost spread


                                                 100
Maximum possible share of informed sellers (%)




                                                 75




                                                 50




                                                 25




                                                   0

                                                       0.0                               0.1                               0.2                                0.3
                                                             Standard deviation for simulated normal disclosure cost distribution with average cost of 0.44

              Notes: Figure 6 plots results from simulations of the model for the maximum share of plausibly-informed
              sellers at various given spreads in audit compliance costs. To generalize our simulation results, rather than
              pinning them to specific quantitative values for estimated capitalization, we linearly re-scale the gross
              disclosure benefits to range from zero to one by using the energy efficiency proxy directly to characterize
              disclosure benefit. We set the mean disclosure cost fixed at a value such that the empirically-observed
              aggregate 60.86 percent of sellers would obtain an audit in the scenario that all sellers are informed and
              audit costs are constant across sellers. This average cost value is 0.44. We simulate values in increments
              of 0.01 between 0.0 and 0.3 for the standard deviation around this average cost, running 1000 repetitions
              of each standard deviation value. The median values from these repetitions are shown in the solid line
              in the graph; the 1st and 99th percentile values for each simulated standard deviation value are shown
              in the dashed grey lines. Within each simulation loop, we sort benefits and costs such that maximum
              possible share of sellers could plausibly be informed.




                                                                                                       35
            Table 1: Summary statistics and covariate comparisons of homes


                                       Full sample                    Properties sold
                                                         Inside Austin         Outside Austin
Attribute                                   (1)               (2)                   (3)
Within Austin city limits                  0.835              1.000                  0.000

# Times sold: 1997-2014                    0.809             1.606                   1.681
                                          (1.001)           (0.827)                 (0.856)

# Times sold: post-June 2009               0.222             0.447                   0.433
                                          (0.469)           (0.586)                 (0.573)

Year built (vintage)                       1973              1972                     1987
                                          (17.52)           (17.33)                  (9.45)

Square feet                                1839              1780                    2421
                                          (931.1)           (759.7)                (1143.4)

Energy efficiency                          0.500             0.534                   0.448
                                          (0.289)           (0.275)                 (0.286)

Monthly electricity use (kWh)              1178              1085                    1650
(2006-2014 only)                          (710.0)           (580.1)                (1023.2)

Monthly kWh/SqFt                           0.673             0.636                   0.693
(2006-2014 only)                          (0.293)           (0.249)                 (0.270)

Sale price ($)                                              228,003                315,452
                                                           (185,280)              (311,946)

Pre-sale EE rebates ($)                                      29.64                   27.64
(2006-2014 only)                                            (187.8)                 (176.2)

Properties                               131,028             53,752                 11,702
 Notes: Table 1 presents means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for selected attributes of
 single family residential properties in the greater Austin area during 1997-2014. The "full sample"
 in Column (1) includes all homes constructed no later than 1998, regardless of whether or not the
 home was ever sold during our sample period. Columns (2) and (3) include, respectively, only the
 subset of these homes that are inside (outside) the city limits and were sold at least once during
 1997-2014. The "Energy efficiency" term is a value ranging continuously from zero to one that
 indicates each home's fixed energy efficiency quantile. "Pre-sale EE rebates ($)" include the total
 dollar value of rebates paid to the property's owners by Austin Energy within two years prior to
 the property sale for participation in the utility's four energy efficiency programs. 96 percent of
 these values are zero dollars.
      Table 2: Estimated price capitalization of energy efficiency due to ECAD policy


                                           Dependent variable: Natural log of sale price
                                     (1)                  (2)                (3)                  (4)
Energy efficiency                 0.046               -0.008                0.006               0.004
 X I{Post June-2009}              (0.025)             (0.014)              (0.019)             (0.020)

Energy efficiency
 X I{Inside Austin}               0.186               0.096               0.073                0.080
 X I{Post June-2009}              (0.023)             (0.012)             (0.022)              (0.024)

Sales sample                       All               Repeat              Repeat               Repeat
Spatial fixed effects          Jurisdiction         Property            Property             Property
Time fixed effects            Vint-monthly        Vint-monthly        Juris-monthly        V-M and J-M
Number of homes                   65,454             28,628               28,628              28,628
Observations                     105,978             69,152               69,152              69,152
 
  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01 Each column presents estimates for the capitalization of energy efficiency
 into home sale prices. The "Energy efficiency" term is a value ranging continuously from zero to one
 that indicates each home's fixed energy efficiency quantile. The ECAD audit disclosure program for
 all sales inside Austin took effect in June 2009. Figure 2 shows annual coefficients for energy efficiency
 capitalization for each jurisdiction. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by property.




                                                     37
      Table 3: Energy efficiency program rebates: Difference in differences estimates


                                 Dependent variable: Total energy efficiency rebate dollars
                                  Within 2-years pre-sale               Within 2-years post-sale
                              All programs          HPWES            All programs          HPWES
                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)
I{Inside Austin}                13.149              16.470              11.144             21.246
  X I{Post June-2009}            (4.395)             (3.881)            (7.601)             (6.894)

Post June-2009 mean               42.39              26.82              94.49               68.39
Spatial fixed effects         Jurisdiction        Jurisdiction       Jurisdiction        Jurisdiction
Time fixed effects           Vint-monthly        Vint-monthly       Vint-monthly        Vint-monthly
Number of homes                  65,454              65,454             65,454              65,454
Observations                    105,978             105,978            105,978             105,978
 
  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01        Each column presents a difference in differences estimate for the total
 energy efficiency program rebate dollars paid to the property owner for participation in the indicated
 energy efficiency program(s) during the indicated time period. Columns (1) and (2) evaluate rebates
 paid for improvements made within the two year prior to the sale. Columns (3) and (4) evaluate rebates
 paid for improvements made within the two year following the sale. Figure 3 shows the coefficients by
 year corresponding to Column (1). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by property.




                                                   38
Table 4: Maximum plausible share of informed sellers by simulated audit cost spread


       Simulated audit costs            Share of plausibly informed sellers (%)
        Standard deviation          1st percentile      median        99th percentile
                              0          54.18           54.18             54.18
                          0.050          58.28           58.34             58.42
                          0.100          63.37           63.53             63.66
                          0.150          69.84           70.16             70.49
                          0.200          85.36           85.65             85.85
                          0.250          90.58           91.39             92.08
                          0.270          94.81           96.60             99.95
                          0.300          100.00          100.00            100.00
       Table 4 presents results from simulations of the model for the maximum share of
       plausibly-informed sellers at various given spreads in audit compliance costs. To
       generalize our simulation results, rather than pinning them to specific quantita-
       tive values for estimated capitalization, we linearly re-scale the gross disclosure
       benefits to range from zero to one by using the energy efficiency proxy directly to
       characterize disclosure benefit. We set the mean disclosure cost fixed at a value
       such that the empirically-observed aggregate 60.86 percent of sellers would obtain
       an audit in the scenario that all sellers are informed and audit costs are constant
       across sellers. This average cost value is 0.44. We simulate values in increments
       of 0.01 between 0.0 and 0.3 for the standard deviation around this average cost,
       running 1000 repetitions of each standard deviation value. The table shows the
       median values from these repetitions, along with the 1st and 99th percentile values
       for each simulated standard deviation value. Within each simulation loop, we sort
       benefits and costs such that maximum possible share of sellers could plausibly be
       informed. The 1st, median, and 99th percentile values from these repetitions are
       shown more generally across a broader set of simulated values in Figure 6.




                                               39
A       Appendix tables and figures

Table A1: Correlations between our energy efficiency proxy and ECAD audit measurements


                            Dependent variable: Various components of ECAD audit reports
                       Double-pane       Programmable           Electric        Attic          Duct leak
                        windows           thermostat            heating        R-value         percentage
                           (1)                (2)                 (3)            (4)               (5)
    EE proxy             0.100                0.068            -0.144         2.197            -1.631
                         (0.016)              (0.016)           (0.009)       (0.289)           (0.413)

    Mean                   0.504              0.454              0.082         21.83              19.38
    Std. Dev.              0.500               0.498             0.274         9.028              11.64
    Observations          13,318              13,146             13,139        12,698            10,444
     
      p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01 Each column presents linear estimates from regressing a measure from
     the actual ECAD audit report (in column titles) on our proxy for homes' energy efficiency. The sample
     used here is all homes from our analysis sample that conducted an ECAD energy efficiency audit. The
     "EE proxy" term is a value that ranges continuously from zero to one that indicates each home's fixed
     energy efficiency quantile, defined based on the pre-policy within-vintage electricity use per square foot
     for the home. "Double-pane windows" is a binary indicator for whether the home has double-pane and/or
     low-emissivity windows. "Programmable thermostat" is a binary indicator for whether the home has a
     programmable thermostat. "Electric heating" is a binary indicator for whether the home has electric
     heating (versus gas). "Attic R-value" is the measured R-value of insulation in the home's attic. "Duct
     leak percentage" is the measured percent air flow leakage from the home's air ducts. The differing number
     of observations across columns is due to heterogeneity in the completeness of official ECAD audit reports.
     For properties that conducted more than one audit, we use the first audit report for each property.




                                                        40
              Table A2: Sales Probability: Difference in differences identification tests


                        Dependent variable: Indicator for whether the home is sold within the year
                                         Full sample                        Homes with energy efficiency
                                                                           Below-median        Above-median
                            (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)
I{Inside Austin}        -0.0090         -0.0040             0.0020             0.0002             0.0022
                         (0.0005)        (0.0009)           (0.0006)          (0.0007)            (0.0009)

I{Inside Austin}         0.0062           0.0013            -0.0007            0.0009             -0.0016
  X I{Post 2009}         (0.0007)        (0.0011)           (0.0008)          (0.0010)            (0.0012)

Years included          1997-2014       2006-2014        1997-2014           1997-2014           1997-2014
Time fixed effects         Year            Year         Vintage-year        Vintage-year        Vintage-year
Sample mean               0.044           0.041            0.044               0.042                0.047
Number of homes          131,028         131,028          131,028              65,579              65,449
Observations            2,355,413       1,179,252        2,355,413           1,178,864           1,176,549
 
  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01           All columns present difference in differences estimates testing whether the
 probability that a home is sold varies asymmetrically between Inside Austin and Outside Austin pre- versus
 post-2009, when the ECAD audit and disclosure policy went into effect. The annual fraction of in-sample homes
 sold by jurisdiction is shown in Figure A2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by property.




                                                       41
         Table A3: ECAD audit disclosure: Difference in differences estimates


                                     Dependent variable: Indicator for ECAD audit
                                   (1)                  (2)             (3)              (4)
I{Inside Austin}                 0.453                0.459          0.453            0.450
  X I{Post June-2009}            (0.006)              (0.008)        (0.011)          (0.015)

Sales sample                      All                All             Repeat           Repeat
Spatial fixed effects         Jurisdiction       Jurisdiction       Property         Property
Time fixed effects             Monthly          Vint-monthly        Monthly        Vint-monthly
Number of homes                 65,454             65,454            28,628           28,628
Observations                    105,978            105,978           69,152           69,152
 
  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01 Each column presents a difference in differences estimate for the
 probability that a home that is sold has conducted an ECAD audit. The ECAD audit disclosure
 program for all sales inside Austin took effect in June 2009. Columns (1) and (2) include all prop-
 erties that were sold at least once during 1997-2014. Columns (3) and (4) include only properties
 that were sold more than once during 1997-2014. Figure 1 shows annual average ECAD audit rates
 by jurisdiction for this full sample. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by property.




                                                 42
                        Figure A1: Map of the Austin, Texas study area




                    (a) Austin city limits (orange) and Travis county border (black)




                (b) Properties included in empirical sample by jurisdictional designation
Notes: Appendix Figure A1 provides a map of our empirical study area. Panel (a) presents the jurisdic-
tional coverage of Austin city limits, which excludes several "holes" as shown. Panel (b) plots points for
each of the homes in our analysis sample, indicating by color each property's respective jurisdiction.
Figure A2: Fraction of in-sample homes sold each year inside Austin and outside city limits


                                  10.0
                                            Jurisdiction             Properties
                                                q   Inside Austin     q     25,000
                                                    Outside Austin   q      100,000



                                   7.5
Fraction of properties sold (%)




                                                                                           q q
                                   5.0
                                                                    q q              q            q
                                                            q                    q q
                                                                            q                                   q q q
                                                      q                                               q q
                                                                                                          q q
                                   2.5




                                   0.0

                                         1995                        2000                  2005          2010           2015
                                                                                         Year

         Notes: Figure A2 plots the annual fraction of in-sample homes sold by jurisdiction, inside Austin versus
         outside of the Austin city limits. The dashed vertical line at 2009 indicates when the ECAD residential
         energy efficiency audit and disclosure policy went into effect for homes aged 10 years or older sold inside
         Austin only. The sample includes single family residential properties constructed no later than 1998.




                                                                                      44
Figure A3: Timing of ECAD audits with respect to listing and sale contracts

                            6000




                            4000
  Number of audited sales




                            2000




                               0

                                   <0                     60                           120              180+
                                                Days elapsing between listing contract and ECAD audit

                                          (a) Duration from listing contract to ECAD audit


                            6000




                            4000
  Number of audited sales




                            2000




                               0

                                   180+                   120                            60               0
                                                 Days elapsing between ECAD audit and sale closing

                                           (b) Duration from ECAD audit to sale closing
Notes: The date of the listing contract is when the seller formalizes an agreement with the
seller's realtor to market the property, which typically occurs before any marketing activities.
The date of the sale closing is the official closing date for the property sale transaction.
                               Figure A4: Timing of ECAD audits with respect to listing and sale contracts




                           3
Density of audited sales




                           2




                           1




                               0.00                  0.25                     0.50                      0.75                1.00
                                        Fraction of days spanning listing contract through sale closing before ECAD audit

                     Notes: Appendix Figure A4 shows the density of the fraction of days spanning between the listing
                     contract and the ECAD audit with respect to the total number of days the property was marketed
                     (spanning from the listing contract through the sale closing contract). For example, if a property was
                     audited seven days after the listing contract was signed and was sold 28 days after the listing contract
                     was signed, the value in the figure would be 0.25 for this sale. The date of the listing contract is when
                     the seller formalizes an agreement with the seller's realtor to market the property, which typically
                     occurs before any marketing activities. The date of the sale closing is the official closing date for the
                     property sale transaction.




                                                                            46
                                                Figure A5: Density of ECAD compliance rates across realtors



                                     3
Sales-weighted density of realtors




                                     2




                                     1




                                     0

                                         0.00              0.25                    0.50                     0.75                 1.00
                                                           Within-realtor fraction of sales with ECAD compliance

                             Notes: Appendix Figure A5 shows the sales-weighted density of ECAD compliance for a random subset
                             of realtors who handled home sales within-Austin after the ECAD policy was effective. To create this
                             graph, we first took a one percent sample of post-ECAD sales within Austin City limits and matched
                             each transaction to the seller's realtor using Zillow.com. Then, we determined the full set of properties
                             sold inside Austin post-ECAD by each of these realtors, which we use to compute the compliance
                             density depicted in the figure.




                                                                                 47
                                                                                                                            Austin City Code Chapter 6-7, June 2009
                               SINGLE FAMILY
                               ECAD Energy Audit Results
For Residence:                                                                                                            Audit Date:
Thank you for complying with the City of Austin's ECAD Ordinance, which requires homeowners to provide these
energy audit results to buyers.

                        SAVE THIS FORM! This ECAD audit is valid for 10 years after the audit date.

This audit helps you identify energy efficiency improvements that could lower your monthly energy costs and
make your home more comfortable. Austin Energy's Home Performance with ENERGY STAR® program offers
rebates and low-interest loans that make these improvements more affordable. Before you begin making any
home energy efficiency improvements, be sure to get the latest program details from austinenergy.com or by
calling 512-482-5346.

ENERGY AUDIT SUMMARY
                                                                             Action Recommended?                            Potential Annual Savings*:
A.   Windows and Shading
B.   Attic Insulation
C.   Air Infiltration and Duct Sealing
D.   Heating and Cooling System Efficiency (HVAC)                                                                                                   __________
                                                                                                              Total Annual Savings:
HOME IMPROVEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS:
Austin Energy recommends the following actions based on the energy audit performed by




DISCLOSURES: Figures are based on an estimate from the average single-family house in Austin (1800 - 2000 sq. ft.) that has made improvements through an efficiency
program by Austin Energy or Texas Gas Service. Weather, equipment installation and electric usage will all effect actual savings. There is no guarantee or warranty,
either expressed or implied, as to the actual effectiveness, cost or utility savings, if you choose to implement these recommendations.
The Energy Conservation Audit and Disclosure is not required to be included in the sales contract nor the Seller's Disclosure form (Texas Real Estate Commission), but
instead is a stand-alone requirement of the City of Austin.
                                                                                            In support of the City of Austin's
                                                                         Energy Conservation Audit and Disclosure Ordinance
                                                                                    Austin City Code Chapter 6-7, June 2009
                                                                                                                             .

                      SINGLE FAMILY
                      Energy Audit Data
DATA SUMMARY                                                                          Submission Date:
 PROPERTY
 Austin Energy Electric Meter Number:                              Tax Assessor's Property ID:
 Owner Name:                                                       Year Built:
 Street Address:                                                   Estimated Square Footage:
 City, State, Zip Code:
AUDITOR
 Auditor:                                                          Phone Number:
 Company Name:                                                     Property Audit Date:
WINDOWS & SHADING
 Type(s) of Window(s):
 Type(s) of Existing Solar Shading:
ATTIC INSULATION
 Attic Insulation Type :                                   Average R-Value:
 Open Chases(s):
HEATING & COOLING AIR DUCT SYSTEM
 HVAC SYSTEM:              Condenser:         Manufacturing Date:           Estimated EER:
                           Furnace/AH:        Manufacturing Date:           Estimated AFUE:
                           HVAC Duct Air Leakage:                           % Leakage:
                           Duct System Type(s)
                           Enrolled in the Austin Energy Power Partner Thermostat Program:
 ADDITIONAL SYSTEM: Condenser:         Manufacturing Date:           Estimated EER:
                    Furnace/AH:        Manufacturing Date:           Estimated AFUE:
                    HVAC Duct Air Leakage:                           % Leakage:
                    Duct System Type(s):
                    Enrolled in the Austin Energy Power Partner Thermostat Program:
AIR INFILTRATION/WEATHERIZATION
 Exterior doors: weather-stripped?                         Attic access: weather-stripped?
 Plumbing penetrations: sealed?
ADDITIONAL AUDIT INFORMATION
 Domestic Water Heater Type(s):
 Type(s) of Toilet(s):
PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION                                                                                         Outdoor Temperature F
County                       Property ID                               Property Type                            Building Count
Meter Number                                         Second Meter                                               Gas Type
Street #                     Direction               Street Name                                                Suffix                Unit
City                         State                   Zip               Occupied By                              Count of Occupants
Year Built                   Foundation                                Estimated Sq Footage                     Average Duct Leakage
Levels             Bedrms            Baths           Fireplaces        Average Wall Height                      Average Attic R-Value
WINDOWS & SHADING
Types of Windows             Single Pane               Double Pane         Low-e           Skylights            Other
Types of Shading             Solar Screens             Solar Film          Awnings         Skylights Cover      Other
       Windows                S              SW             W           NW             N           NE           E             SE         Skylight
 Needs Shade (sq ft)
 Choose House Shape                                                                   NW                        N                       NE
                                                                                       W             Bldg Front Orientation             E
                                                                                      SW                        S                       SE

APPLIANCES & WATER HEATER
APPLIANCES (Remaining in Home)                    '92 or older     '93 or newer
 Refrigerators                                                                       Pool Pumps                          Speed
 Freezers                                                                            Pool Pump Timers
 Clothes Washers
 Clothes Dryers                                                                      Water Heaters
 Dish Washers                                                                          WH1                               Fuel 1
 Range/Stove/Ovens                                                                     WH2                               Fuel 2
 Inefficient Toilets (> 1.6 gal)                                                     Water Heater Timers
 Efficient Toilets (<= 1.6 gal)
MISC Lighting                                        Solar PV                        Electric Vehicle Charger        Natural Gas Generator
         Sprinklers     Year Installed               Rainwater Collector             Water Saving Devices
ATTIC INSULATION & AIR INFILTRATION
Roof Type                              Roof Materials                                 Roof Color                         Total Attic R-Value
Attic Insulation                   Insulation Type                                    Secondary Insulation Type
                                        Square Feet                 Inches Deep            R-Value
Vaulted Ceiling Insulation         Insulation Type                                    Secondary Insulation Type
                                       Square Feet                  Inches Deep              R-Value
Cathedral Ceiling Insulation Insulation Type
                                       Square Feet                  Inches Deep              R-Value
Attic/Knee Wall Insulation Status
             Radiant Barrier                                                      Chases
             Plumbing Penetrations Sealed                           Furnace & WH Closet Appropriately Sealed
             # Exterior Doors                                       # Doors Weather-stripped            Whole House Fan
             # Conditioned Stair Boxes/Hatches                      # Insulated                         # Weather-stripped

                                      SINGLE FAMILY ECAD DATA COLLECTION FORM PAGE 1 OF 3
HEATING & COOLING (1)         Zone Description                                                         Est. Sq. Ft. (Zone)
COOLING Type                                                                                  Thermostat
 Condenser Mfg Date                    Est. EER                  Est. Condenser BTUs
  Tonnage                From Mfg Spec             OR            Est. from Sq. Ft.                         Sq. Ft. per Ton
HEATING     Type                       Fuel Type                     Location                              Air Handler
  Furnace Mfg Date                     Est. BTUs                          Est. BTUs (other)                AFUE
DUCT SYSTEM (Check all that apply)     NONE              Mylar Flex                   Grey Flex            Duct Board        Sheet Metal
  Duct Locations         Conditioned Space               Crawl Spaces                 Furrdowns            Attic
  Duct Condition                      R-Value
                         Return Air Sq. In.        Grille Type                        Return Plenum Seal
LEAKAGE                  Target CFM                                                   Current Est. CFM
                         Did Not Reach Pressure          Measured Pressure Test Leakage CFM                          % Leakage
                         Supply Air Reading F            Return Air Reading F                              Delta T
HEATING & COOLING (2)         Zone Description                                                         Est. Sq. Ft. (Zone)
COOLING Type                                                                                  Thermostat
 Condenser Mfg Date                    Est. EER                  Est. Condenser BTUs
  Tonnage                From Mfg Spec             OR            Est. from Sq. Ft.                         Sq. Ft. per Ton
HEATING     Type                       Fuel Type                     Location                              Air Handler
  Furnace Mfg Date                     Est. BTUs                          Est. BTUs (other)                AFUE
DUCT SYSTEM (Check all that apply)     NONE              Mylar Flex                   Grey Flex            Duct Board        Sheet Metal
  Duct Locations         Conditioned Space               Crawl Spaces                 Furrdowns            Attic
  Duct Condition                      R-Value
                         Return Air Sq. In.        Grille Type                        Return Plenum Seal
LEAKAGE                  Target CFM                                                   Current Est. CFM
                         Did Not Reach Pressure          Measured Pressure Test Leakage CFM                          % Leakage
                         Supply Air Reading F            Return Air Reading F                              Delta T
HEATING & COOLING (3)         Zone Description                                                         Est. Sq. Ft. (Zone)
COOLING     Type                                                                              Thermostat
  Condenser Mfg Date                   Est. EER                  Est. Condenser BTUs
  Tonnage                From Mfg Spec             OR            Est. from Sq. Ft.                         Sq. Ft. per Ton
HEATING     Type                       Fuel Type                     Location                              Air Handler
  Furnace Mfg Date                     Est. BTUs                          Est. BTUs (other)                AFUE
DUCT SYSTEM (Check all that apply)   NONE                Mylar Flex                   Grey Flex            Duct Board        Sheet Metal
 Duct Locations         Conditioned Space                Crawl Spaces                 Furrdowns            Attic
  Duct Condition                       R-Value
                         Return Air Sq. In.        Grille Type                        Return Plenum Seal
LEAKAGE                  Target CFM                                                   Current Est. CFM
                         Did Not Reach Pressure          Measured Pressure Test Leakage CFM                          % Leakage
                         Supply Air Reading F            Return Air Reading F                              Delta T


                               SINGLE FAMILY ECAD DATA COLLECTION FORM PAGE 2 OF 3
HEATING & COOLING (4)        Zone Description                                                         Est. Sq. Ft. (Zone)
COOLING Type                                                                                 Thermostat
 Condenser Mfg Date                   Est. EER                  Est. Condenser BTUs
  Tonnage                From Mfg Spec            OR            Est. from Sq. Ft.                         Sq. Ft. per Ton
HEATING     Type                      Fuel Type                     Location                              Air Handler
  Furnace Mfg Date                    Est. BTUs                          Est. BTUs (other)                AFUE
DUCT SYSTEM (Check all that apply)    NONE              Mylar Flex                   Grey Flex            Duct Board        Sheet Metal
  Duct Locations         Conditioned Space              Crawl Spaces                 Furrdowns            Attic
  Duct Condition                      R-Value
                         Return Air Sq. In.       Grille Type                        Return Plenum Seal
LEAKAGE                  Target CFM                                                  Current Est. CFM
                         Did Not Reach Pressure         Measured Pressure Test Leakage CFM                          % Leakage
                         Supply Air Reading F           Return Air Reading F                              Delta T
HEATING & COOLING (5)        Zone Description                                                         Est. Sq. Ft. (Zone)
COOLING Type                                                                                 Thermostat
 Condenser Mfg Date                   Est. EER                  Est. Condenser BTUs
  Tonnage                From Mfg Spec            OR            Est. from Sq. Ft.                         Sq. Ft. per Ton
HEATING     Type                      Fuel Type                     Location                              Air Handler
  Furnace Mfg Date                    Est. BTUs                          Est. BTUs (other)                AFUE
DUCT SYSTEM (Check all that apply)    NONE              Mylar Flex                   Grey Flex            Duct Board        Sheet Metal
  Duct Locations         Conditioned Space              Crawl Spaces                 Furrdowns            Attic
  Duct Condition                      R-Value
                         Return Air Sq. In.       Grille Type                        Return Plenum Seal
LEAKAGE                  Target CFM                                                  Current Est. CFM
                         Did Not Reach Pressure         Measured Pressure Test Leakage CFM                          % Leakage
                         Supply Air Reading F           Return Air Reading F                              Delta T
NOTES & INSTRUCTIONS




                               SINGLE FAMILY ECAD DATA COLLECTION FORM PAGE 3 OF 3
