                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INCOME GROWTH AND ITS DISTRIBUTION FROM EISENHOWER TO OBAMA:
        THE GROWING IMPORTANCE OF IN-KIND TRANSFERS (1959-2016)

                                        James Elwell
                                        Kevin Corinth
                                    Richard V. Burkhauser

                                     Working Paper 26439
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26439


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




The views in this paper reflect those of the authors and should not be attributed to the Joint
Committee on Taxation, the Council of Economic Advisers, their staffs, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Elwell's work on this research was funded by The Lynde and Harry
Bradley Foundation while he was a graduate student at Cornell University. Part of this work was
undertaken while Burkhauser was employed by the Council of Economic Advisers.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by James Elwell, Kevin Corinth, and Richard V. Burkhauser. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Income Growth and its Distribution from Eisenhower to Obama: The Growing Importance
of In-Kind Transfers (1959-2016)
James Elwell, Kevin Corinth, and Richard V. Burkhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 26439
November 2019
JEL No. D31,H24,J3

                                          ABSTRACT

Using Census Bureau estimates of the market value of in-kind transfers and Current Population
Survey (ASEC-CPS) data over the period 1979 to 2007, Burkhauser et al. (2012b) construct
measures of income and its distribution. We extend their work forward to 2016 and back to 1967
using ASEC-CPS data and decennial Census data for 1959. With this newly linked data set, we
provide a fresh look at the twenty-year period 1959 to 1979 that encompasses the inauguration of
New Frontier and Great Society programs as well as the first survey-based look at levels and
trends in income and its distribution from 1959 to 2016. We find that the dramatic decline in the
market income of the middle class (measured as the median American tax unit or the mean value
of the middle quintile of American tax units) began in 1969. However, we find that this decline
was more than offset by government tax and transfer programs--especially in-kind transfers.
Conventional measures of median income and income inequality that exclude the market value of
in-kind transfers will substantially understate the impact of government policies in offsetting the
stagnation of median market income growth and the rise in market income inequality since 1969.


James Elwell                                     Richard V. Burkhauser
Joint Committee on Taxation                      Cornell University
james.elwell@jct.gov                             Department of Policy Analysis & Management
                                                 Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
Kevin Corinth                                    and NBER
Council of Economic Advisers                     rvb1@cornell.edu
1650 Pennsylvania Ave NW
Washington, DC 20502
kevin.c.corinth@gmail.com
    1. Introduction
Using public use ASEC-CPS (Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current

Population Survey) data stretching over three business cycles (1979-1989, 1989-2000 and 2000-

2007), Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon (2012b) were the first to systematically show the

sensitivity of measures of income and its distribution to the types of income included in the data,

the sharing unit over which the data were collected, and the unit of analysis considered by the

researcher. 1 In this paper, we extend the analysis of Burkhauser et al. (2012b) back to 1959

(capturing the business cycles of the 1960s and 1970s) and forward over the current business

cycle to 2016. 2

         Because the Census Bureau did not begin to estimate the market value of in-kind

government transfers in general, and Medicare, Medicaid, and employer-sponsored health

insurance (ESI) in particular, until 1979, doing so is the first contribution of this paper. 3 We first

use public use ASEC-CPS data (income years 1967-2016) to create common yearly source of

income categories, including estimates of the market value of in-kind transfers, back to 1967. We

create analogous series using the decennial Census for the years 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990

(income years 1959, 1969, 1979, and 1989) and reassuringly show they yield similar values to

those found using ASEC-CPS data for 1969, 1979 and 1989. We then couple our decennial

Census-based 1959 values to our ASEC-CPS values from 1967-2016 to create common yearly


1
  We define a business cycle peak year as the peak in our median market income of tax unit series since it is
capturing market income. These years usually correspond to the last full year of macroeconomic growth as defined
by the NBER and identified in our figures but are the second to last full year of macroeconomic growth before the
recessions of early 1990s and 2000s. This measure is similar to that used by Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore
(2014) and Daly and Valletta (2006). In all cases, our findings are not sensitive to using the last full year before a
recession.
2
  We use the Consumer Price Index Research Series (CPI-U-RS) (Stewart and Reed 1999) for all estimates related to
ASEC-CPS data. We do so because this is the standard deflator used in the income inequality literature.
3
  We produce the market value of Medicare/Medicaid for 1967-1978. These values are consistent with those
produced by the Census Bureau thereafter. We created a similar market value of employer-provided health insurance
series for 1959 and from 1967-1978. See the Appendix for additional details on all these health insurance series.

                                                          2
source of income categories including estimates of the market value of in-kind transfers, back to

decennial Census income year 1959.

         Using this newly created data set, we then show that choice of income sources, sharing

unit and the unit of analysis substantially change our measures of how the American middle class

fared both absolutely and relative to the rest of the income distribution over a period stretching

from near the end of the Eisenhower Administration in 1959 to the end of the Obama

Administration in 2016. 4

         Using either of our most restrictive income definitions--labor earnings or market

income--and a tax unit as both our sharing unit and our unit of analysis (choices researchers

using tax record-based data are forced to make--e.g. Piketty and Saez 2003) the resources

available to the middle class (measured as the median American tax unit or the mean value of the

middle quintile of American tax units) peaked in 1969 and trended downward thereafter. While

these yearly values fell and rose within all subsequent business cycles, with the exception of the

business cycle of 1989-2000 these values were lower at the end than at the beginning of each

cycle.

         In contrast, as we broaden our income definition to the disposable size-adjusted

household income (including both cash and some in-kind transfers) of persons--the measure of

income most commonly used in the survey data-based literature--middle class Americans have

made peak-to-peak gains over all completed business cycles since 1959 including the 2000-2007

business cycle. In 2016, this disposable income measure finally returned to its peak year 2007

pre-Great Recession high at the start of the current, on-going business cycle. However, this is a



4
  "Middle class" is a term of art that potentially has many definitions. Here we focus only on two: the median of the
total United States population and the mean of its middle quintile. Other measures are possible. Our main results
based on our coupled ASEC-CPS and Census data are not sensitive to using the mean value of the middle quintile.

                                                          3
lower bound measure of the importance of government tax and transfer policies for the growth in

the median American's disposable income. When we include the market values of Medicare,

Medicaid, and ESI in our upper bound measure of the median American's disposable income, we

find even greater growth.

        Disaggregating the United States population into quintiles we show similar differences in

the pattern of income growth between 1959 and 2016 based on the choice of income sources,

sharing unit, and unit of analysis. Focusing only on the market income of tax units, the rich got

richer, the poor got poorer and the income of the middle class stagnated. 5

        However, these results change dramatically once we use more comprehensive measures

of income that are more consistent with Haig-Simon principals. 6 When we adjust for government

taxes, include cash and in-kind transfers, but exclude the value of Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI

benefits--thus creating a lower bound measure of disposable income--we find that all five

quintiles have experienced gains of more than 100 percent since 1959 with the highest gains

among the top and bottom quintiles. When we include the market values of Medicare, Medicaid

and ESI, the former two of which are programs that only began in 1966, in our upper bound

measures of disposable income, the bottom quintile of the income distribution registers the

greatest gains since 1959 and there are much smaller differences in gains across the other

quintiles.



5
  We use the top 5 percent throughout this paper rather than the top 1 percent used in the tax record based income
inequality literature due to under coverage of top incomes in the public use ASEC-CPS data, a problem it shares
with all other survey based data sets. See Burkhauser et al. (2012a) which uses the restricted access ASEC-CPS for
more details.
6
  The "gold standard" Haig-Simon income definition measures yearly income of an individual as equal to their
consumption plus their net change in wealth. This standard is used by both the Canberra Group (2011) and the
OECD (d'Ercole and Forster 2012) in their conceptualization of income. Poor data on consumption generally
constrains researchers from operationalizing this definition. A more comprehensive measure of income that includes
taxes and in-kind transfers comes closer to meeting this standard however than the market value of tax units measure
based on tax record data alone. See Larrimore, Burkhauser, Auten, and Armour (2019).

                                                         4
           We find similar results when we focus on the single most common scalar measure of

income inequality, the Gini Coefficient. For all business cycle peak years and for 2016, using

either of our most restrictive income definitions--labor earnings or market income--and a tax

unit as both our sharing unit and our unit of analysis, Gini values are highest (most unequal) but

fall as we increasingly take into account government taxes and transfers. We conclude that

measures of median income and income inequality that exclude the market value of in-kind

transfers will substantially understate the impact of government policies in offsetting the

stagnation in median market income and the rise in market income inequality since 1969.



       2. Alternative Measures of the Economic Well-Being of the Middle Class

Economic growth in gross domestic product, measured in either aggregate or per capita terms,

indicates a nation's progress in producing goods and services. How this progress translates into

resources for the middle class, however, depends on how these gains in output are distributed

across the population. Household survey data are the usual source for monitoring income and its

distribution--at the household, family, and individual levels. Each year the Census Bureau uses

household survey data to derive its official statistics on income and poverty. 7 Household survey

data are also the basis for cross-national comparative studies and are the source for most other

distributional analyses, such as those done by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and

Development (OECD 2008, 2011, 2015). The definitions that underlie the way that household

surveys ask income questions provide best-practice measures of personal living standards. The

"income-sharing" unit that researchers choose when using these data is virtually always the

household (all persons living in the dwelling), and the "income definition" is disposable (post-


7
    See Semega, Fontenot, and Kollar (2017) for income year 2016, the last year of data used in this paper.

                                                            5
tax, post-transfer) income, adjusted for differences in household size and composition using an

equivalence scale. 8

         The "unit of analysis" is the individual (regardless of age). Hence, median income is

based on the equivalized income assigned to each person in the population. Gottschalk and

Smeeding (1997), d'Ercole and Förster (2012), and the Canberra Group (2011) make the case for

this standard methodology. 9

         A long-standing challenge to survey-based estimates is that they do not provide a

complete picture of the income distribution and its trends because survey estimates fail to fully

capture the highest incomes. In contrast, the tax-based data used in the top income shares

literature do a much better job of capturing the highest incomes. (For the seminal article on U.S.

top incomes, see Piketty and Saez 2003; for a review of this literature, see Atkinson, Piketty, and

Saez 2011.)

         This tax data benefit is gained at the cost of being constrained to use the definitions of

income and income-sharing unit mandated by each country's tax administration (definitions that

differ from the survey-based ones) and being restricted to summary inequality measures that do

not incorporate differences across the full income range (i.e., top income shares). However,

because we are primarily focusing on the middle class and are using a median rather than a mean




8
  Size-adjusted household income accounts for economies of scale in household consumption by dividing household
income by the square root of household size. This income measure is commonly used in U.S. and cross-national
studies of inequality (see, e.g., Gottschalk and Smeeding 1997; Atkinson and Brandolini 2001; Burkhauser et al.
2011), as well as by the OECD in its official measures of income inequality and poverty (d'Ercole and Förster
2012). It also closely matches the adjustments for household size implied by the Census Bureau's poverty thresholds
(Ruggles 1990). This measure assumes that income is shared equally among all household members, so each
member receives the same amount for personal consumption.
9
  The International Expert Group on Household Economic Statistics (Canberra Group) was convened as an initiative
of the Australian Bureau of Statistics under the auspices of the United Nations Statistical Commission. Its report was
largely adopted as the standard for measuring household income by the International Conference of Labour
Statisticians. In 2011, the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe provided an updated reference,
outlining its latest standards and recommendations.

                                                          6
income measure to track changes in middle-class income, under coverage of income at the very

top of the distribution is unlikely to affect the results on median income we report. In addition,

survey data allow us to consider various definitions of income and sharing units, and to consider

different units of analysis. This is not possible when using tax record­based data.

       Likewise, those using tax record­based data in the standard labor economics literature are

forced to focus on the median wage earnings of workers or tax units. As a result, they do not

account for the fact that many workers live in households that share labor earnings as well as

other resources, which can lead to a misrepresentation of the distribution of income available to

all Americans. The set of seven measures of median income from the survey- and tax-based

literatures we discuss in the next section are all derived, as noted above, from data contained in

the unrestricted, public-use ASEC-CPS and decennial Census. These are the most common

cross-sectional, survey-based, sources of data for those interested in measuring the incomes and

income distributions of Americans. The ASEC-CPS contains a detailed questionnaire on the

sources of income for household members and is commonly used to evaluate levels and trends of

income and income inequality (see, e.g., Gottschalk and Danziger 2005; Daly and Valletta 2006;

Blank 2011; and Burkhauser et al. 2011).

       Drawing on previous work, we use the public-use ASEC-CPS to construct estimates of

household income building on income series from Burkhauser et al. (2012b) and Armour et al.

(2014), and supplemented with cell-means from Larrimore et al. (2008) to address top-coding of

high sources of income in households. With these data we extend the ASEC-CPS household

income series created in Larrimore, Burkhauser, and Armour (2015) back to 1959--the last

business cycle peak year before major increases in government cash and in-kind transfers related

to both the maturing of Social Security (Old-Age, Survivor and Disability Insurance) and the



                                                 7
launch of New Frontier and Great Society programs in the 1960s--and forward to include the

current business cycle through 2016.

        To do so, we must address two important breaks in the ASEC-CPS data during this

period. The first is the well-known break in the data that occurs between income years 1992 and

1993, caused by a redesign of the survey questions covering income sources. We follow

Larrimore et al. (2015) and adjust for this break by assuming that the entire decrease in median

income between 1992 and 1993 is caused by the improvement of ASEC-CPS data collection

efforts, and therefore we adjust median income in 1992 and in all preceding years by the same

percentage, resulting in no change in measured median incomes between 1992 and 1993. (See:

Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez, 2011; Burkhauser et al., 2012a; and Armour et al. 2014 for

examples of this correction method.)

        The second break occurs for income year 2013. In that year the ASEC-CPS used past

years' methods for one part of the survey population and a new method for the other part, to test

the impact of the new method on outcomes. We use the median value based on these new

methods for 2013 and adjust median income in all preceding years by the ratio of median values

in 2013 based on the new and the old methods, similar to our adjustment for the break between

1992 and 1993.

        The modern ASEC-CPS series begins in 1968 (income year 1967). We use these data to

estimate the labor earning and market income of tax units back to 1967, utilizing methods that

are consistent with those in the tax-record-based inequality literature. However, we then contrast

our findings with alternative definitions of income using methods that are consistent with those

in the household-survey-based literature. 10 Because many major Great Society programs began


10
  We extend our ASEC-CPS series back to 1967 rather than to 1965 or earlier even though ASEC-CPS data does
exist for these years. We do so because sample sizes are smaller and because income questions in these years are

                                                        8
before 1967, including Medicare and Medicaid, this is not an ideal year to begin a study of the

importance of government taxes and transfers on household income. Furthermore, to separate

trends in income growth from variations introduced by business cycles, previous studies have

compared peak years in the business cycle. Since 1967 is not a peak year in the business cycle,

the earliest year in a series beginning in 1967 that we can consistently compare with subsequent

peak years is 1969.

         For these reasons, we create a second set of income series using the decennial Census of

1960. This corresponds to income year 1959, which is a peak year in the business cycle. Thus,

we can make comparisons between peak years 1959 and 1969 and thereby capture the

importance of in-kind transfers including the insurance value of Medicare and Medicaid during

the 1960s. To establish that the Census-based data points in 1959 can reasonably be combined

with those of our ASEC-CPS income series, we repeat the process for the 1970, 1980, and 1990

decennial Censuses that can be directly compared to data for the same years in the CPS, and find

that the ASEC-CPS and Census values are similar.

         We briefly describe the seven measures we will use to document median income trends

below. In all cases we will compare trends in real median income using the Consumer Price

Index Research Series (CPI-U-RS). 11 We more fully discuss the details of our sources of income

imputations in these series in the Appendix.




considerably less detailed. This makes it more difficult to establish income categories consistent with those
beginning in 1967.
11
   We do so since the CPI-U-RS is the standard deflator used in the survey-based income inequality literature.
However, we test the sensitivity of our results using the Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) price index that
is a chain-type (or Tornqvist) price index, so it does not systematically overstate inflation like the CPI-U and its
variations, which are Laspeyres indices. Again, we use this price index rather than the Chained-CPI-U, which only
begins in 2000, because it has been available since 1947. See Appendix figure 1A at the end of this paper which
shows that though this deflator slightly increases real growth in median income, our main findings are not sensitive
to this deflator choice.

                                                         9
         Labor Earnings of Tax Units. The first measure is the labor earnings of the median tax

unit. This income measure only looks at one source of market income, labor earnings (i.e., wages

and salaries, self-employment income, and farm income), and uses the tax unit as both its sharing

unit and its unit of analysis. 12 Such a measure is in the style of the tax record­based literature

because labor earnings are a component of market income and the sharing unit is the tax unit.

Tax units are not explicitly defined in the ASEC-CPS or the decennial Census, and so we assign

tax units using the same assumptions from Piketty and Saez (2003).

         Important in its own right, we also use this measure of median income as an additional

check on the comparability of our decennial Census and ASEC-CPS series. We do this because

these data sets ask similar questions with respect to the labor earnings of tax units. This is not the

case with respect to the market income of tax units, necessitating some imputation (see the

Appendix for details).

         Market Income of Tax Units. The second is the market income of the median tax unit. A

major new international literature based on data from administrative tax records of rich countries

traces the share of income held by the very top part of the income distribution of these countries

back to the early part of the 20th century. However, for the United States, this literature's

measure of income is limited to taxable market income (wages, interest, dividends, etc.) of tax

units. See Atkinson et al. (2011) for a review of this international literature and Piketty and Saez

(2003) for the first effort to measure top U.S. income shares in this way.




12
  There are a substantial number of individuals who report large negative farm income values, especially in earlier
years when a larger share of workers were self-employed farmers. These individuals to some degree cause the mean
values to be low in the lowest quintile and our estimates of growth in mean income in this quintile to be volatile. But
this is not the case for the rest of the distribution. When we restrict farm incomes to be non-negative, we generate
nearly identical results outside of the lowest quintile. However, the results for the bottom quintile remain fairly
volatile. This is largely due to a much larger number of non-working tax units in this quintile that results in a low
base level of income such that even small or moderate income variation produce large percentage changes.

                                                          10
       We follow Piketty and Saez (2003) and define market income to include gross income

from wages and salaries, farm income, self-employment and business income, retirement income

from pensions, dividends, interest, rent, and alimony. These sources of income are summed

across individuals in a tax unit within each ASEC-CPS household, without adjusting for number

of persons in a tax unit. Our unit of analysis, therefore, is the tax unit. While some of these

separate sources of income are combined in earlier ASEC-CPS years, each is included in some

questions back to 1967. Some of these sources of income are not specifically included as

decennial Census questions. In particular, in earlier years, retirement and pension income,

dividends, interest, rent, and alimony are grouped as "other" income, a category that also

includes some non-market sources of income such as Social Security. Some of these sources are

covered separately in later years while other sources continue to be grouped as "other" income.

As a result, imputation of these sources varies, both across decennial Census and ASEC-CPS

surveys and over time within the decennial Census. See the Appendix for details.

       Although the level of median income of this measure is likely to be greater than one that

looks at labor earnings alone, its trend will depend on the relative growth of other sources of

market income.

       Household Size-Adjusted Labor Earnings of Persons. The third is the household size-

adjusted labor earnings of the median person. Consistent with the survey-based literature, this

measure of median income expands the sharing unit from the tax unit to the household and

makes the unit of analysis the person. We adjust this measure's household income using the

square root of the number of people in the household and assume equal sharing across household

members. This size adjustment is common in U.S. and international research studies of median




                                                 11
income trends and inequality (for example, see Ruggles, 1990; Gottschalk and Smeeding, 1997;

Atkinson and Brandolini, 2001; d'Ercole and Förster, 2012).

       Burkhauser et al. (2012b) first showed that because the number of tax units within

households has grown over time, while the number of people in those households has fallen,

these demographic characteristics will tend to increase this measure of median income over time

relative to a tax unit­based measure of labor earnings.

       Household Size-Adjusted Market Income of Persons. The fourth is the household size-

adjusted market income of the median person. In the same manner as discussed above this

measure of median income expands the sharing unit from the tax unit to the household and

makes the unit of analysis the person. For the same reasons as discussed above this measure of

median income will increase over time relative to a tax unit­based measure of market income.

       Household Size-Adjusted Pre-Tax Post-Transfer Income of Persons. The fifth is the

household size-adjusted pre-tax post-transfer income of the median person. While the Census

Bureau reports the pre-tax, post-transfer income of households in the first figure of its annual

report (Semega, Fontenot, and Kollar 2017), the Census Bureau uses this household size-

adjusted median income measure in its more sophisticated discussions of income trends. To

calculate this income measure it adds government cash transfers to the income measure used in

the previous series. These programs include: Aid to Families with Dependent Children and its

successor, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, as well as social insurance programs such

as Social Security and Workers' Compensation. This measure excludes, however, transfers

directly tied to the tax system, such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). It also excludes

any in-kind government transfers, such as food and housing assistance, and the market value of

Medicare or Medicaid insurance.



                                                 12
       Because this measure adds government cash transfers but does not subtract government

taxes, its level of median income will be greater than one that looks at market income alone, but

its trend will depend on the relative growth of other sources of government cash transfers to

market income.

       As with market income, the income categories covering these income sources are less

granular in earlier ASEC-CPS surveys. However, when aggregated, the various categories are

still covered by some questions in the ASEC-CPS back to 1967. This is also the case with respect

to the decennial Census. Therefore, unlike our measure of market income, it is not necessary for

us to impute any decennial Census income sources to align them with the ASEC-CPS for this

measure of income. The reason is that while the different income categories are grouped by

survey questions, the groups all align with the income sources included as pre-tax post-transfer

income. For example, retirement, investment, and public assistance income are all grouped under

a single question in the 1960 decennial Census. This mixes market sources of income with

government transfers, but all three sources of income are included in a pre-tax post-transfer

measure of income. As a result, this is our most comparable income series over all our years

since it requires no income source or tax unit imputations.

       Household Size-Adjusted Post-Tax Post-Transfer plus In-Kind Transfer Income of

Persons. The sixth measure is the household size­adjusted post-tax, post-transfer income

(including some in-kind transfers) of the median person. This lower bound disposable income

measure more fully captures the importance of government tax and transfer policies for the

resources of the median person. It uses NBER's TaxSim 9.3 (Feenberg and Coutts 1993) to

estimate Federal and State taxes and liabilities, including Social Security and Medicare payroll

taxes. In addition, it captures the market value of some in-kind transfers. The Census Bureau



                                                13
reports or imputes the value of SNAP (the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program--food

stamps), housing subsidies, and school lunches on an annual basis beginning in 1979. We use

these values in our estimates. All are now generally recognized as important resources that are

primarily available to low-income households, and the Census Bureau now includes them as

resources in its Supplemental Poverty Measure (Garner and Short 2012). Larrimore et al. (2015)

use this measure in their analysis. Because it both adds government in-kind transfers and tax

credits (e.g., the EITC) but subtracts taxes, the level of median income of this measure could be

higher or lower than the Census Bureau's median (pre-tax, post-cash transfer) income values as

well as median market income alone. Its trends will depend on the relative growth of net

government transfers to market income.

        We discuss the details of how we extend these tax and in-kind series back to 1967 in the

Appendix. Our decennial Census series does not provide a measure of in-kind transfers in 1959

or in any other Census year. This is not a problem for the years in which we have ASEC-CPS

values of these transfers. But in our analysis we effectively assume that there were no federal in-

kind transfer programs in 1959 with the exception of housing subsidies and ESI, which we

impute. 13

        Household Size-Adjusted Post-Tax Post-Transfer plus In-Kind Transfer Income

(including Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI) of Persons. The seventh measure is the household


13
  This is only approximately correct. While the Food Stamp Act of 1964 launched the food stamps program, there
was a pilot program from 1961-1964. Housing benefits began with the Housing Act of 1937, but benefits were small
prior to the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965. For instance, total outlays were $80
million in 1959, rose to $327 million in 1966, and to over $1 billion by 1970 in 2016 dollars (See OMB 2016).
Likewise, the school lunch program began in 1946 and was expanded and modified several times in the 1960s. The
National School Lunch Program (NSLP) is somewhat larger, with expenditures of $236 million in 1960 and $591
million in 1970 (USDA 2013). The relatively small size of the benefits in these programs suggests attempting to
estimate their exact value in 1959 would only minimally impact our estimates. A predecessor program to
Medicare/Medicaid (Kerr-Mills) began in 1961, but there were otherwise no Medicare or Medicaid benefits in 1959.
By 1967, the first year for which we have ASEC-CPS estimates, the programs' combined expenditures were over
$20 billion in 2016 dollars.

                                                      14
size­adjusted post-tax, post-transfer income plus in-kind transfers (including the market values of

Medicare, Medicaid and ESI) of the median person. Burkhauser et al. (2012b) were the first to use

the market value of health insurance in a disposable income measure, in order to show the growing

importance of access to health insurance for explaining differences between survey- and tax

record­based analyses of income and its distribution. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO), in

2012, was the first government agency to include the market values of both government- and

employer-sponsored health insurance (ESI) in their measure of income (CBO 2013). Larrimore et

al. (2015) use this same fuller measure of income in an appendix table for the period 1979-2012. 14

Lyons (2015)--as well as Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Lyons (2017)--show its importance for

estimating the income of working age people with disabilities.

        Here we use it to measure after-tax income (including the market values of Medicare,

Medicaid, ESI and other in-kind transfers) and its distribution across American households back

to 1959--just before the major expansions of government tax and transfer programs associated

with the New Frontier and Great Society programs of the 1960s. 15 Due to the rapid growth in

government-provided health insurance and ESI, this upper bound value of the disposable income

of the median American will be greater than all other measures in levels and trends, particularly




14
   A small academic literature has begun to include the market value of health insurance in its measures of income.
See Burtless and Svaton, 2010; Burkhauser, Larrimore and Simon, 2013; Burtless and Milusheva, 2013; CBO, 2013;
Sommers and Oellerich, 2013; Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore, 2014, and Kaestner, R. and Lubotsky, D. 2016).
But because this literature has been dependent on Census Bureau measures of the market value of health insurance,
its analyses only go back to 1979.
15
   Fox et al. (2015) estimate U.S. poverty rates back to 1967 using income concepts from the Supplemental Poverty
Measure (SPM). Hence, they also subtract taxes from gross income and include the market value of some in-kind
transfers as resources and in their threshold measures. However, the SPM ignores the market value of government
and employer-sponsored health insurance (ESI) in its measures of household resources and thresholds. Although the
SPM provides a consistent relationship between the resources counted as income and included in its poverty
thresholds, it fails to capture Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI's growing importance. Instead of treating the market
value of health insurance as a resource, it subtracts medical out-of-pocket expenses from total household resources.

                                                        15
in the bottom half of the income distribution where receipt of the government-provided insurance

sources is concentrated.

         In constructing this measure, we note that in-kind benefits in the form of health

insurance, like all other in-kind benefits, have value to individuals--otherwise government

actors would have a strong incentive to replace Medicare and Medicaid benefits with cash

transfer programs or lower taxes, and employers would have an incentive to replace ESI with

higher wages. Measures that exclude Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI as resources undervalue their

worth by effectively placing a zero value on this form of health insurance. This exclusion

understates not only the level of household resources but also their trend, as the costs of

Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI have substantially increased in real terms and as a share of all

government transfers to households.

         Following the approach of Armour et al. (2014), Burkhauser et al. (2012b) and the CBO

(2012, 2013), we include the market value of Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI in this measure of

income back to 1979 based on the Census Bureau's imputed value of health insurance, although

we use the full market value rather than just its fungible value.

         For government-subsidized health insurance (Medicare and Medicaid), the Census

Bureau determines, by state and risk class back to 1979, the average government cost of

providing Medicare and Medicaid to those persons reporting that they have this insurance. The

two risk classes for Medicare are aged and disabled. The four risk classes for Medicaid are aged,

blind and disabled, nondisabled children (less than 21), and nondisabled adults (21-64). 16 Thus,



16
   The Medicare and Medicaid risk classes reflect the channel through which benefits were accessed. The Medicare
risk class "aged" applies to all persons on Medicare aged 65 or older. The Medicare risk class "disabled" applies to
all persons accessing Medicare benefits through the SSDI program. The Medicaid risk class "children" applies to
children accessing Medicaid benefits through either traditional Medicaid or a state's Children's Health Insurance
Program (CHIP). The Medicaid risk class "adults" applies to all adults under the age of 65 accessing Medicaid
benefits. The Medicaid risk class "aged" applies to all persons accessing Medicaid aged 65 or older. Lastly, the

                                                         16
the imputed average cost of government-provided health insurance varies by state and by the

government insurance pool through which beneficiaries access it.

        In determining the values of Medicare and Medicaid for individuals who qualify for both

programs (dual eligible), we follow the Census Bureau's approach and estimate the value of their

health insurance as the combined cost of insurance from each program. This assumes that the

total value of the insurance dual-eligible individuals receive is not only greater to them than the

value for those insured under only one of these programs, but is greater by the average cost of

the other program. This may overstate this value to the degree that there is overlap in coverage.

However, it might understate it to the degree that dual-eligible individuals have higher than

average medical expenses relative to those who are only covered by one program. Therefore, this

value still may be less than the cost dual-eligible individuals would incur if they purchased

equivalent insurance in the market. 17

        Prior to 1979, the ASEC-CPS contains no information on the value of health insurance

benefits, and no direct information on coverage of health insurance from any source. Thus, to

calculate income under this definition we must impute both receipt and market value of

insurance for Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI. See the Appendix for details on this procedure. The

Census Bureau ceased reporting the market values of Medicare and Medicaid coverage after the

2014 survey. Therefore, these sources are calculated for the income years 2014-2016 based on

methodology published by the Census Bureau.




Medicaid risk class "disabled" applies to all persons accessing Medicaid benefits due to their qualification for SSI
benefits. (See Burkhauser et al., 2017 for a more complete discussion of this issue.)
17
   Given the Affordable Care Act of 2010, this may no longer be the case, since insurance companies, beginning
January 1, 2014, are no longer permitted to adjust their premiums based on pre-existing conditions. However, for the
years in this study prior to 2014 insurers could deny insurance to those with pre-existing conditions and/or charge
such individuals higher premiums. (See Burkhauser et al. 2017 for a more complete discussion of this issue.)

                                                        17
     3. Trends in Median Income 1959-2016

The earliest starting point for ASEC-CPS-based income measures that include both in-kind

transfers and taxes is 1979, since this is the first year that the Census Bureau provides measures

of in-kind transfers. As can be seen in Figure 1, using our estimates of in-kind transfers and taxes

allows us to extend all seven of our income series back to 1967 using ASEC-CPS data, and to

1959 using decennial Census data. It reports trends for these seven measures of real median

income, normalized to 100 percent in 1979.

         The trends found over 1979-2007 are well known in the literature and replicate those

found by Burkhauser et al. (2012b), Armour et al. (2014), and Larrimore et al. (2015), and

extends them to 2016 for all measures. We denote NBER defined business cycles by shading

recession years. Note that, although the total population we include in each of our seven trend

lines is the same, the median person in that population will not be the same person because the

income sources and sharing unit we use to capture income differ. 18

         There are a number of similarities in the trends of five of our seven measures of income.

The median values of the five income measures that use the household as their sharing unit and

the person as their unit of analysis are greater at the ending peaks of the 1980s and the 1990s

business cycles than at their starting peaks. During both cycles, median income falls from its pre-

recession high to a trough (with the year varying by measure). However, in both cycles, we find




18
  The median individual for each measure will also change year-to-year. For instance, substantial shifts in the
composition of the population, such as through the immigration of low-skill workers or the aging of the population
into retirement, may increase the share of the population living in households with low labor earnings, reducing the
household size­adjusted labor earnings of the median person even when, over the same period, the median earnings
of employed individuals is rising. Alternatively, the increase in the share of persons living in two- or three-labor
earner households may reduce the share of the population living in households with low labor earnings, increasing
the household size­adjusted labor earnings of the median person, even when over the same period the earnings of
employed individuals is falling.

                                                         18
that strong post-recession growth increases median income well above its initial prerecession

business cycle high.

       This is not the case for the growth in the labor earnings of the median tax unit. The

median value of this measure is noticeably lower at the end of the 1980s business cycle than at

the beginning. Although it recovers somewhat from its 1984 trough, it remains below its 1979

high in 1989. During the 1990s cycle, post-recession growth is strong enough to lift it above its

pre-recession high, but it only manages to return to just above its 1979 pre-recession high in

2000, well below the other five household size-adjusted measures of income in 2000. Those

focusing on the growth in the labor earnings of the median tax units will greatly understate the

actual increase in labor earnings available to the median American during this period because

that median American lives in a household that may contain more than one tax unit. The same is

true for using growth in the labor earnings of the median worker to make inferences about the

labor earnings available to the median American.

       As can also be seen in Figure 1, growth in the market income of the median tax unit is

above the growth in the labor income of the median tax unit in all years. Nevertheless, it is still

substantially below the median income of the five measures that use the household as their

sharing unit and the person as their unit of analysis.

       These five measures all take into consideration the fact that workers live in households,

not in tax units or by themselves, and that these household members share their individual labor

earnings. Some also include other sources of market income, as well as the net returns of

government taxes and transfers. All show substantially higher growth in the resources available

to the median American over these first two post-1979 business cycles than do either the labor

earnings or market income of the median tax unit.



                                                 19
       The inconsistency of tax unit measures vis-à-vis the other five measures continues during

the 2000-2007 business cycle. Both tax unit measures dramatically fall from 2000 to 2004.

Although they then increase, both are substantially below their 2000 value by the end of the

business cycle in 2007. Both measures then fall precipitously during the Great Recession and do

not begin increasing until 2013. Since then, both have slowly recovered, but by 2016 they were

still well below their value at the start the current business cycle, and even further below their

2000 business cycle peaks.

       However, both these measures fail to recognize the social insurance value of living in a

household--which is the pooling of income over all household members. Thus, sharp reductions

in the income (labor earnings or other forms of market income) from one tax unit in a household

are softened by the continued income from its other tax units. At the same time, the number of

people living in each household falls during this period, so fewer people are sharing household

resources. These are important distinctions.

       Although our preferred measure of median labor earnings, the household size­adjusted

labor earnings of the median person, also falls at the start of the 2000 business cycle, during the

recovery years it increases and almost reaches its 2000 level by 2007. This measure then falls

precipitously during the Great Recession and does not begin increasing until 2012. It then

increases and is closer to its 2007 peak level by 2016 than is the flawed labor earnings of the

median tax unit measure. More important, the pooling of labor earnings in households reduces

the depth of the drop in median income in the years between the business cycle's pre-recession

and post-recession peaks.

       The household size­adjusted market income of the median person follows a very similar

path within business cycles. Growth by the end of the 2000-2007 cycle was not enough to raise



                                                 20
median market income above its level in 2000. However, because nonwage market income has

grown faster at the median during the current cycle, this measure of median income almost

reaches its 2007 pre­Great Recession peak by 2016 and experiences a less severe drop in the

years between 2000 and 2016.

         The household size­adjusted pre-tax, post-transfer income of the median person, as used

by the Census Bureau--which adds cash transfers to market income--closely follows the market

income trends. Growth by the end of the 2000-2007 business cycle was not quite enough to raise

it to its level in 2000, but government transfers offset market income declines during the cycle,

so its interim-year declines were smaller. Because government transfers have grown faster than

market income during the current cycle, this measure of median income finally exceeded its pre­

Great Recession high by 2016, greatly offsetting market income declines in the interim years.

What is less clear is the degree to which this observed growth in net government transfers for the

median American had negative effects on their employment, and hence on measures of labor and

market income in the previous series. 19

         The measure household size­adjusted post-tax, post-transfer income (including some in-

kind transfers) of the median person--which is recommended by the OECD and is used by most

European Union members--is also our preferred lower bound measure of median total income

because it more fully takes into consideration both government taxes and transfers. Doing so

shows how effective government tax and transfer policy has been in increasing the median

income of Americans and in offsetting the decline in their market income during both the 2000-


19
  Mulligan (2012) finds that the expanded safety net programs over the Great Recession substantially increased the
marginal tax on work. He concludes that this caused at least half the drop in hours worked between 2007 and 2009.
Moffitt (2015) presents a counterpoint to Mulligan's analysis, arguing that Mulligan overestimates the marginal tax
rates faced by workers moving from the social safety net to employment and that the actual rates imply much
smaller reductions in labor supply as a result. Similarly, Moffitt's review of the literature on the labor supply effects
of individual programs suggest much weaker labor supply responses to these changes, although Moffitt
acknowledges that these effects are generally estimated outside recession periods.

                                                           21
2007 business cycle and the present cycle. Although the growth of median income during the

first two cycles is much greater than during the last two, this fuller measure of income shows

growth over all four business cycles since 1979. More important, it shows that government tax

and transfer policies since 2000 have largely offset the interim-year declines in median market

income during this period.

        The measure household size­adjusted post-tax, post-transfer income plus in-kind

transfers (including the insurance value of Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI) of the median person,

our upper bound measure of disposable income, is somewhat controversial, because it adds the

market value of health insurance provided by the government (i.e., Medicare and Medicaid) as

well as by employers (ESI) to the previous measure. Because of the rapid growth in the value of

health insurance provided by the government and employers since the mid-1980s, this measure's

median income trends are considerably greater than all the other median income trends shown in

Figure 1 through 2006. Median values then fall somewhat until 2009 and are flat through 2014,

but exceed its previous high in 2015 and 2016. 20

        But how does our understanding of these trends from 1979 to 2016 change once we are

able trace back our seven measure of median income back to 1959?

        The labor earnings of the median tax unit rose substantially between the peak years of the

1959-1969 business cycle. However, 1969 would prove to be the second highest yearly value for

this measure of income. Its business-cycle-peak year 1973 only barely exceeded its 1969 peak,

and it then dropped substantially over the late 1970s and 1980s business cycles. While it did rise



20
   The Census Bureau discontinued its series on the market value of Medicare and Medicaid in 2014 (income year
2013). In addition, Burkhauser et al. (2017) argue that the Affordable Care Act's rules regarding community ratings
of health insurance, which came into effect in 2014, by law reduced the cost of private market health insurance to
persons with above-average expected healthcare costs. This, in turn, reduced the market value of Medicare and
Medicaid to their beneficiaries because they are now eligible for this less expensive community-rated private market
health insurance.

                                                        22
over the 1990s business cycle, returning to its 1979 level in 2000, it then fell over the 2000-2007

business cycle and remained far below its 2007 peak in 2016, nine years later.

       The market income of the median tax unit also rose substantially between the peak years

of the 1959-1969 business cycle. However, this peak was not surpassed until the final growth

years of the 1990s business cycle before falling substantially over the 2000-2007 business cycle,

and remained far below its 2007 peak in 2016. Hence, the secular decline in both the labor

earnings and market income of the median tax unit found in studies beginning in 1979, and

therefore first observed over the two peak years of the 1980s business cycle, was in fact an

extension of a secular decline in both these measures beginning in 1969.

       However, once we look at labor earnings and market income within a household sharing

unit and focus on the household size-adjusted income of the median person, our findings are

more consistent with those based on our other three measures of income using a household

sharing unit and the person as the unit of analysis. All five measures increase over the 1959-1969

business cycle. But unlike the two measures using the tax unit as sharing unit and unit of

analysis, all five measures increase over the two business cycles of the 1970s as well. However,

unlike subsequent business cycles, differences in trends over these three business cycles are

much smaller across these five measures, especially compared to the trend since 1999, as

discussed earlier.

       Figure 1 shows that a measure of income that focuses solely on either the labor earnings

or market income of tax units as a measure of the resources available to the median American

from 1959 to 2016 will dramatically understate how important labor earnings and market income

are to the median Americans household size-adjusted income. Rather than trending downward

since their 1969 peak when measured at the tax unit level, labor earning and market income



                                                23
sources increased over every business cycle from 1959 through 2000. Since then they fell

slightly over the 2000-2007 business cycle, fell precipitously during the Great Recession and its

aftermath, and still had not reached their 2007 levels by 2016. But this is a far more optimistic

story than the one told by those who focus on the labor earnings or market income of tax units

since 1959.

       Figure 1 also shows that the growth in the redistribution of market income via

government tax and transfer policies dating back to the Great Society has not only mitigated the

cyclical decline in the median American's household size-adjusted market income during

recessions but has, more importantly, mitigated the secular stagnation of median labor and

market income since 2000.



   4. Trends in the Distribution of Income

The importance of taxes and transfers over this entire period can be seen in more detail in Table

1. Row 1 (Panel A) reports cumulative median income growth, controlling for inflation (CPI-U-

RS), for the entire period of our data from 1959 through 2016 for each of our income definitions

based on values underlying Figure 1.

       In the rest of the rows, it shows how cumulative income growth has varied over the entire

income distribution. It does so by estimating cumulative mean income growth for each quintile

and the top 5 percent, for each of our income definitions. (As discussed in footnote 5 data

limitations in the public use version of the ASEC-CPS prevent us from capturing the top 1

percent.) However, since 2016 is not a peak year in a business cycle, and thus the interpretation

for income growth ending in that non-peak year also contains cyclical effects (the cyclical effects

of the Great Recession and its aftermath between 2007 and 2016), we will primarily focus on


                                                 24
trends in income growth between business cycle peak years 1959 through 2007. Those values are

reported in Table 1 (Panel B). As discussed earlier in the text and in footnote 19, the quintile

composition is not constant across measures--that is, persons may switch quintiles for different

measures of income.

       As was the case in Figure 1, the first two columns in Table 1 present the growth in labor

earnings and market income of tax units. The remaining five columns use the household as the

sharing unit and the person as the unit of analysis.

       Growth in the first two columns in Table 1 (Panel A) is consistent with growth estimates

by Piketty and Saez (2003), Atkinson et al. (2011), and others who focus on tax units without

adjusting for the number of persons in those tax units. When focusing solely on either labor

earnings or market income of tax units in Panel A, the rich get richer, the poor get poorer, and

median income has been mostly stagnant since 1959. Mean market income among the top 5

percent of tax units increased by 155.0 percent (1.66 percent annual rate) between 1959 and 2016

while declining by 75.5 percent (2.43 percent annual decrease) for those in the bottom quintile

and increasing by only 24.3 percent (0.38 percent annual increase) for those in the middle

quintile. Note that this mean value of the middle quintile is close to the 23.0 percent growth (0.36

percent annual growth) in the median value from the entire distribution of market incomes in the

second-column of Panel A that we also use in showing trends in middle class income in Figure 1.

       Part of the slow growth in both the labor earnings of tax units and the market income of

tax units captured at the median and more generally for the mean value of each of the bottom

four quintiles of those measures of income is the result of comparing 1959 with 2016. The

former is a peak year while the latter is the most recent year of our data, but one in which this

part of the income distribution (using these two measures of income) is still recovering from the



                                                 25
Great Recession. In contrast, the top income quintile (and the top 5 percent) had fully recovered

from the Great Recession by 2016 and the mean value of these two measures of income

exceeded their mean values in 2007.

       Hence, growth rates for all but the top quintile are higher when peak year 1959 is

compared with peak year 2007, as can be seen in Panel B. But even when we control for this

difference in the timing of recovery with the current business cycle and focus on 1959-2007, the

differences in growth in these two measures of income are still dramatic across the distribution.

The lowest quintile has negative growth in market income, while the growth in the middle

quintile is quite small over this 48-year period. The poorest got poorer, the growth of the middle

three quintiles of the income distribution is dramatically lower than the top quintile and the rich

captured here as the top 5 percent.

       But as Table 1 also shows, when we broaden our measure of income across the remaining

columns in Panels A and B to those used in the standard survey-based income and income

inequality literatures, the growth in median income and in the mean value of the bottom four

quintiles dramatically increases relative to the top quintile.

       Growth in median market income between 1959-2007 increases from 36.2 percent

(column 2) in Panel B (the stagnation of the middle class) to 92.4 percent (column 4) when we

expand our sharing unit to the household from the tax unit, make the unit of analysis the person

rather than the tax unit, and adjust our sharing unit's income to account for the number of people

in the household. All the other columns of Panel B show the result of adding additional sources

of income. Median income growth increases to 100.8 percent when other cash income including

government transfers are added to market income (column 5). Median income growth increases

to 126.4 percent in our lower bound measure of disposable income (column 6) when we subtract



                                                  26
taxes and add income from in-kind transfers (but not the values of Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI).

Finally, median income growth increases to 141.2 percent in our upper bound measure of

disposable income when we add the market values of Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI (column 7).

        For the bottom quintile income growth reverses from a decrease of -20.4 percent to an

increase of 34.9 percent when we more properly capture market income using our preferred

household sized-adjusted income of persons measure, and jumps to 108.9 percent when looking

at pre-tax post-transfer income--an increase greater than that found in the second and third

quintiles. When taxes and in-kind transfers (but not Medicare, Medicaid or ESI) are included,

income growth in the bottom quintile increases to 188.1 percent--an increase greater than that

found in all other quintiles and the top 5 percent. The growth rate rises to 246.8 percent when we

add the market values of Medicare, Medicaid and ESI, far greater than the increases found in all

the other quintiles as well as the top 5 percent. While this last comparison is controversial since it

assigns the full market values of Medicare and Medicaid as well as ESI to income, even when we

effectively assign a value of zero to this major in-kind transfer in our lower bound measure of

median disposable income in column 6, growth in the bottom quintile from 1959-2007 was

greater than for all other quintiles.

        Furthermore, when using this lower bound disposable income measure we can see the

importance of government taxes and transfers in redistributing market income gains across the

income distribution. While growth in the mean value of the income of the top 5 percent (165.4

percent) was higher than growth in the mean value of four of the five quintiles, mean income in

all five more than doubled over this period and in fact the bottom quintile had the largest

increase in average income, albeit off a much lower base level. And unlike our measures of labor

earnings and market income of tax units, the median income and the mean income in all five



                                                 27
quintiles as well as the top 5 percent are greater in 2016 than they were in 2007. Hence, even

using the lower bound measure of disposable income, not only did the rich get considerably

richer between 1959 and 2016, but so did the rest of the population.

       Gini Coefficient Trends. The single most common scalar measure of income inequality

is the Gini Coefficient. Using our seven measures of income in Table 2 we report Gini values for

peak years of all business cycles over the period 1959-2007 as well as for the most recent year of

our data 2016. For all business cycle peak years and for 2016, Gini values are highest (most

unequal) when we use our most restrictive income definitions--labor earnings or market

income--and a tax unit as both our sharing unit and our unit of analysis and fall as we

increasingly take into account government taxes and transfers.

       This is reassuring since one of the goals of government tax and transfer policy is to

transfer market income from Americans living in higher income households to Americans living

in lower income households, and this occurred in all years. But what our new data set now shows

is how Gini value trends have changed across each of these income measures since 1959.

Focusing solely on the market income of tax units or the household size-adjusted market income

of persons, Gini values increase over the period from 1959 to 1979--0.488 to 0.495 and 0.411 to

0.419 respectively. However, the reverse is the case when government in-cash transfers are taken

into account. Gini values fall from 0.392 to 0.366. Gini values decline even more when using our

preferred lower and upper bound measures of disposable income which fell from 0.362 to 0.304

and 0.350 to 0.288 respectively. Since 1979, income inequality has increased over all business

cycles peak to peak years regardless of how we measure income. However, it is also the case that

over the entire period from 1959 to 2007, income inequality has risen less, the fuller the measure

of income chosen. As discussed previously, the current business cycle began in 2007 and is not



                                                28
yet complete since median income continued to grow from its business cycle trough up through

2016, our last year of data. Over the period 2007 through 2016 income inequality has also grown

but it is still the case that this growth is slowest in our fuller measures of income.

        Our results with respect to the distribution of income in these last three sections are

largely consistent with the findings of Moffitt (2015) and Fox et al. (2015). Moffitt (2015)

focuses on government spending on both in-cash and in-kind welfare programs. He found

significant growth in the early 1970s, slow growth in the late 1970s to the mid-1980s, and higher

growth from the late 1980s onward. Fox et al. (2015) compare U.S. poverty rates back to 1967

using income concepts from the Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) that uses a measure of

income similar to our lower bound disposable income measure of income, and comparing this

measure to the Official Poverty Measure that excludes in-kind transfers. Our findings show that

these are roughly the periods during which in-kind transfers including Medicare, Medicaid, and

ESI (which neither Moffitt 2015 nor Fox et al. 2015 include in their analyses), largely mitigated

income inequality in market income.



   5. Mean (per capita GDP) and Median Income Growth since 1959

A new literature attempts to capture the long-term relationship between aggregate measures of

growth using National Accounts data--e.g., per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP/N)--and

the real income of the median person (median real GDP). This literature argues that median real

GDP is a more appropriate measure of the resources available to the average person than is a

measure of mean income like GDP/N that can rise even when most of the income growth accrues

to the top end of the distribution. While median real GDP may be conceptually appropriate,

operationally it is not possible to directly capture median real GDP using National Accounts data


                                                  29
alone. To solve this problem, researchers have turned to either survey or administrative tax

record data or some combination of the two to capture trends in median income. But it is critical

that the sources of income used in the National Accounts match those used in the survey or

administrative tax record data or "like is not compared to like." (See: Nolan, Roser and

Thewissen, forthcoming for a review of this literature). 21 Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018)

create the first comprehensive "distributional national accounts" by starting with tax return

microdata, adding in income sources covered in survey data such as in-kind transfers, and

distributing items in the national accounts that are not included in microdata across tax units. By

including these sources of income, they attempt to create estimates that are consistent with

macroeconomic growth, and find a dramatic rise in income inequality consistent with their prior

work using the market income of tax units.

        Gordon (2016 Table 18.4) uses such a measure of median income derived from survey

data in his estimates of median real GDP from 1975 to 2012. This measure is based on CBO

estimates using ASEC-CPS data statistically matched to income from tax record data. But while

the CBO has been including the market value of Medicare and Medicaid in its measures of

income since 2012, these values are not included in previous years. More problematic, for earlier

years Gordon estimates median real GDP using top income data from the World Top Income

Database (Alvaredo et al., n. d.). However, these data contain information on the taxable market

income of the median tax unit as it comes from the series developed by Piketty and Saez (2003).

        In Figure 2 we use our new survey-based data set to show the problem of comparing

trends in real GDP/N to trends in real market income of the median tax unit. We first compare


21
  Atkinson et al. (2015) use data from EU-SILC country surveys from 2004 to 2011 to demonstrate the problems of
replicating National Accounts measures of mean income with survey data. To the degree that the survey data
captures mean income based on National Accounts concepts of income, it allows researchers to compare such a
measure with a median income measure, which can be captured in survey data.

                                                      30
growth in GDP/N from 1959 to 2016 taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis to growth in

the real market income of the median tax unit based on the same ASEC-CPS and decennial

Census data that underlies the values reported for this income measure in Figure 1. 22

        We normalize these two trends to 1.00 in 1959 to show differences in growth. Between

1959 and 1969 the market income of the median tax unit increased at approximately the same

rate as real GDP/N. But since then GDP/N has increased substantially while the market income

of the median tax unit has trended downward.

        But this picture changes when we compare it to our lower and upper bound measures of

the median American's disposable income--household size-adjusted disposable income

excluding and including the market values of Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI of persons-- in

Figure 1, measures more in line with GDP/N than the market income of the median tax unit.

While growth in real GDP/N has outpaced both of these fuller measures of the median

Americans household size-adjusted disposable income, the difference is much less than when

GDP/N is compared to the market income of the median tax unit, especially since 1973.



     6. Summary and Conclusion

Using Census Bureau estimates of the market value of in-kind transfers and Current Population

Survey (ASEC-CPS) data over the period 1979 to 2007, Burkhauser et al. (2012b) construct

measures of income and its distribution. Here we extend their work forward to 2016 and back to




22
  Between 1959 and 1969 real GDP per capita increased from $22,321 to $30,566 (36.9 percent) while the real
median market income of tax units rose from $30,628 to $39,806 (40.9 percent) in 2018 dollars. But since then the
increase in real mean GDP has substantially outpaced the growth in median market income of tax units. Both series
were adjusted using the CPI-U-RS. When we instead use the PCE index to adjust both series (See Appendix Figure
2A), the qualitative conclusions are identical, but measured GDP per capita grows slightly faster as the PCE
measures inflation to be lower than the CPI-U-RS, particularly after 1980. The same is the case for our
measurements of tax unit or household income when comparing the two different indices.

                                                       31
1967 using ASEC-CPS data and couple it with decennial Census data for 1959. With this newly

linked data set, we provide a fresh look at the twenty-year period from 1959 to 1979 and show

that the choice of income sources, sharing unit, and the unit of analysis substantially change our

understanding of how the American middle class fared both absolutely and relative to the rest of

the income distribution over a period stretching from near the end of the Eisenhower

Administration in 1959 to the end of the Obama Administration in 2016.

       Focusing solely on the market income of tax units which is the most common measure of

income in the tax-based income inequality literature (e.g. see Atkinson, Piketty and Saez, 2011

for a review of this literature) we find that over the business cycle of 1959-1969 cumulative real

market income of the median tax unit rose substantially and the Gini coefficient of this measure

of income fell as a growing economy "lifted all boats."

       This result is more pronounced when using our broader measures of income. The launch

of New Frontier and Great Society programs during this business cycle, which were heavily

tilted toward the bottom part of the income distribution, as well as the maturing of Social

Security led to even larger increases for the bottom of the income distribution and a reduction of

overall income inequality. However, since 1969 the growth in the median market income of tax

units has trended flat or downward. Researchers focusing on this narrow measure of economic

wellbeing since 1969 will find that the rich got richer, the poor got poorer and the income of the

middle class stagnated.

       Consistent with accepted standards in the survey-based literature this dismal picture

dramatically changes when we: broaden our measure of income to include government taxes and

transfers; expand our sharing unit to include all members of the household; make the person our

unit of analysis; and adjust household income to account for the number of persons in the



                                                32
household. After doing so, we show that between 1969 and 1979, rather than declining, income

increased for the median American and Gini coefficients continued to fall.

       Thus by extending our survey-based data set back to the business cycle peak year 1959

and using it as the starting point for our study of median income and income inequality we are

able to demonstrate that the stagnation of the market income of the median tax unit effectively

began in 1969 as did the increase in Gini coefficients for that measure of income.

       However, we also show that government tax and transfer policies have transformed a

23.0 percent cumulative increase (0.36 percent annual rate) in the market income of the median

tax unit between 1959 and 2016 into a lower bound 130.4 percent or an upper bound 153.7

percent increase (1.47 and 1.65 percent annual rate, respectively) when we more fully account

for taxes and transfers, and use the proper sharing unit and unit of analysis. Doing so we show

that while over this period the rich got substantially richer, so did poor and middle class

Americans.

       Measures of median income and income inequality that exclude the market value of in-

kind transfers will substantially understate the impact of government policies in offsetting the

stagnation in median market income and the rise in market income inequality since 1969.




                                                 33
References

Achenbaum, W. A. (1986). Social Security: Visions and Revisions A Twentieth Century Fund

       Study. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Alvaredo, F., Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., Saez, E., and Zucman, G. (n.d.) WID ­ The World

       Wealth and Income Database. Accessed at: http://www.wid.world/ (May 25, 2016).

Armour, P., Burkhauser, R. V., and Larrimore, J. (2014). "Levels and Trends in U.S. Income and

       its Distribution: A Crosswalk from Market Income towards a Comprehensive Haig-

       Simons Income Approach." Southern Economic Journal, 81(2): 271­293.

Atkinson, A. B., Guio, A-C, and Marlier, E. (2015). "Monitoring the Evolution of Income

       Poverty and Real Incomes over Time." Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion, Number

       188 (March).

Atkinson, A. B., and Brandolini, A. (2001). "Promises and Pitfalls in the Use of Secondary Data

       Sets: Income Inequality in OECD Countries as a Case Study." Journal of Economic

       Literature, 39(3): 771­779.

Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., and Saez, E. (2011). "Top Incomes in the Long Run of History."

       Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1): 3­71.

Blank, R. (2011). Changing Inequality. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Bureau of Economic Analysis, NIPA Table 7.1. Accessed at:

       http://www.bea.gov/iTable/index_nipa.cfm (May 25, 2016).

Burkhauser, R. V., Feng, S., Jenkins, S. P., and Larrimore, J. (2012a). "Recent Trends in Top

       Income Shares in the USA: Reconciling Estimates from March CPS and IRS Tax Return

       Data." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(2): 371­388.




                                               34
Burkhauser, R. V., Larrimore, J., and Simon, K. (2013). "Measuring the Impact of Valuing

       Health Insurance on Levels and Trends in Inequality and how the Affordable Care Act of

       2010 Could Affect Them." Contemporary Economic Policy, 31(4): 779­794.

Burkhauser, R. V., Larrimore, J., and Simon, K. I. (2012b). "A `Second Opinion' on the

       Economic Health of the American Middle Class." National Tax Journal, 65(1): 7­32.

Burkhauser, R., Larrimore, J. and Lyons, S. (2017). "Measuring Health Insurance Benefits: The

       Case of People with Disabilities." Contemporary Economic Policy, 35(3): 439­56.

Burtless, G., and Milusheva, S. (2013). "Effects of Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Costs

       on Social Security Taxable Wages." Social Security Bulletin, 73(1): 83­108.

Burtless, G., and Svaton, P. (2010). "Health Care, Health Insurance, and the Distribution of

       American Incomes." Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 13(1). DOI: 10.2202/1558-

       9544.1194.

Canberra Group. (2011). Handbook on Household Income Statistics, 2nd ed. Geneva: United

       Nations Economic Commission for Europe.

[CBO] Congressional Budget Office. (2012). The Distribution of Household Income and

       Federal Taxes, 2008 and 2009. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

[CBO] Congressional Budget Office. (2013). The Distribution of Household Income and Federal

       Taxes, 2010. Supplemental data. Accessed at: http://www.cbo.gov/publication/44604.

[CMS] Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2005). "Key Milestones in Medicare and

       Medicaid History, Selected Years: 1965-2003." Health Care Financing Review. 27(2):1-

       3.




                                               35
Collinson, R., Ellen, I. G., and Ludwig, J. (2016). "Low-Income Housing Policy". In R. A.

       Moffitt (ed.), Economics of Means Tested Transfer Programs in the United States.

       Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press for the NBER, Vol. 2. pp. 59-126.

Daly, M., and Valletta, R. (2006). "Inequality and Poverty in United States: The Effects of

       Rising Dispersion of Men's Earnings and Changing Family Behaviour." Economica,

       73(289): 75­98.

d'Ercole, M. M., and Förster, M. M. (2012). "The OECD Approach to Measuring Income

       Distribution and Poverty: Strengths, Limits and Statistical Issues." In D. J. Besharov and

       K. A. Couch (eds.), European Measures of Income and Poverty: Lessons for the U.S.,

       New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 27­58.

Feenberg, D., and Coutts, E. (1993). "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model." Journal of Policy

       Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189­94.

Fox, L., Garfinkel, I., Kaushal, N., Waldfogel, J., and Wimer, C. (2015). "Waging War on

       Poverty: Historical Trends in Poverty using the Supplemental Poverty Measure." Journal

       of Policy Analysis and Management, 34(3): 567­592.

Garner, T., and Short, K. (2012). "The Supplemental Poverty Measure: A Joint Project between

       the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics." Interagency Technical Working

       Group.

Gordon, R. (2016) The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the

       Civil War, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gottschalk, P. and Smeeding, T. (1997). "Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings and Income

       Inequality." Journal of Economic Literature, 35(2): 633­687.




                                               36
Hoynes, H., Schanzenbach, D. W. and Almond, D. (2016). "Long-Run Impacts of Childhood

       Access to the Safety Net." American Economic Review, 106(4): 903-934.

Kaestner, R. and Lubotsky, D. (2016). "Health Insurance and Income Inequality." Journal of

       Economic Perspectives 30(2): 53-78.

Kramer. F. D. (1988). From Quality Control to Quality Improvement in AFDC and Medicaid.

       National Academy Press. Washington, DC.

Larrimore, J., Burkhauser, R. V., and Armour, P. (2015). "Accounting for Income Changes over

       the Great Recession: The Importance of Taxes and Transfers." National Tax Journal,

       68(2): 281-318.

Larrimore, J., Burkhauser, R., Auten, G. and Armour, P. (2017). "Recent Trends in U.S. Top

       Income Shares in Tax Record Data Using More Comprehensive Measures of Income,

       Including Accrued Capital Gains." NBER Working Paper 23007. Cambridge, MA:

       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Larrimore, J., Burkhauser, R. V., Feng, S., and Zayatz, L. (2008). "Consistent Cell Means for

       Topcoded Incomes in the Public Use March CPS (1976­2007)." Journal of Economic

       and Social Measurement, 33: 89­128.

Lyons, M. (2015). Health Reform, Physician Market Power, and Income Disparity. Ph.D. diss.,

       Cornell University.

Mittag, N. (2019). "Correcting for Misreporting of Government Benefits." American Economic

       Journal: Economic Policy. 11(2): 142-164.

Moffitt, R. A. (2015). "The Deserving Poor, the Family, and the U.S. Welfare System."

       Demography, 52(3): 729­749.

Moon, M. (1993). Medicare Now and in the Future. Washington DC: Urban Institute Press.



                                               37
Mulligan, C. (2012). The Redistribution Recession: How Labor Market Distortions Contracted

       the Economy. New York: Oxford University Press.

Nolan, B., Roser, M., and Thewissen, S. (forthcoming). GDP per Capita versus Median

       Household Income: What Gives Rise to Divergence over Time. Review of Income and

       Wealth.

[OMB] Office of Management and Budget. (2016). Table 12.3 ­ Total Outlays for Grants to

       State and Local Governments, by Function, Agency, and Program: 1940-2017. Accessed

       at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget/Historicals.

Piketty, T., and Saez, E. (2003). "Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998." The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 1­39.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., and G. Zucman. (2018). "Distributional National Accounts: Methods and

       Estimates for the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2): 553­609.

[OECD] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2008). Growing Unequal?

       Income Distribution and Poverty in OECD Countries. Paris: OECD Publishing.

------. 2011. Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising. Paris: OECD Publishing.

------. 2015. In It Together: Why Less Inequality Benefits All. Paris: OECD Publishing.

Rowland, D. (2005). "Medicaid at Forty." Health Care Finance Review, 27(2): 63-77.

Ruggles, P. (1990). Drawing the Line: Alternative Poverty Measures and their Implication for

       Public Policy. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.

Ruggles, S., Flood, S., Goeken, R., Grover, J., Meyer, E., Pacas, J. and M. Sobek. IPUMS USA:

       Version 9.0 [1960, 1970, 1980, 1990]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.

       https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0




                                               38
Semega, J., Fontenot, K. and Kollar, M. (2017). "Income and Poverty in the United States:

       2016." U.S. Census Bureau, Washington.

Sommers, B. D., and Oellerich, D. (2013) "The Poverty-Reducing Effect of Medicaid." Journal

       of Health Economics, 32(5):816­832.

Stewart, K., and Reed, S. (1999). "Consumer Price Index Research Series Using Current

       Methods, 1978­98." Monthly Labor Review, 122(6): 29­38.

U.S. Census Bureau (1973). Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 1967-1978. Accessed at:

       https://www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical abstract.html.

U.S. Census Bureau (2000). Historical National Population Estimates, 1900-1999. Accessed at:

       http://www.census.gov/popest/data/national/totals/pre-1980/tables/popclockest.txt.

U.S. Department of Agriculture (2013). National School Lunch Program Fact Sheet. Accessed

       at: http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/NSLPFactSheet.pdf.

U.S. Department of Agriculture (2014). National Level Annual Summary Tables: FY 1969-2014.

       Accessed at: http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/child-nutrition-tables.




                                               39
Figure 1. Alternative Measures of Median Income Normalized to 1979 Levels (1959-2016)
 1.45

 1.35

 1.25

 1.15

 1.05

 0.95

 0.85

 0.75

 0.65

 0.55

 0.45
        1959   1962   1965   1968    1971    1974      1977     1980      1983   1986        1989   1992    1995     1998    2001     2004    2007   2010   2013   2016

                                     Recession                                                  1: Tax Unit Labor Income
                                     2: Tax Unit Market Income                                  3: Household Size-Adjusted Labor Income
                                     4: (3) + Market Income                                     5: (4) Pre-tax post-transfer size-adjusted income
                                     6: (5) + taxes + in-kind transfers                         7: (6) + Medicare + Medicaid + ESI

Sources: Authors' calculations using the ASEC-CPS, NHEA, White House Budget Historical Tables, Statistical Abstracts of the U.S., Census Bureau population
estimates, USDA SNAP Data Tables and Child Nutrition Tables, BLS CPI for Medical Care in U.S. City Average, CMS Medicare Enrollment Data, MACPAC
Medicaid Enrollment Data, Kramer (1988), Collinson et al. (2016), Hoynes et al. (2016). Taxes calculated using NBER TaxSim.
Notes: Median income trends normalized to one in 1979 with NBER recession dates in gray. In keeping with previous work (Armour et al., 2014; Burkhauser et
al., 2012b; Larrimore et al., 2015), "Series 1: Tax Unit Labor Income" measures the size-unadjusted labor income of tax units. Series 2 adds market income. In
series 3-7 we adjust for persons in the household using the square-root of household size. Vertical dashed lines signify breaks in the data due to start of our use of
ASEC-CPS data with our new imputations in 1967; start of standard ASEC-CPS data in 1979; and assumption that all changes in income between 1992 and 1993
and between 2013 and 2014 were due to the change in CPS survey methods with prior years adjusted accordingly.



                                                                                        40
Figure 2. Trends in Real GDP per Capita, Real Taxable Market Income of the Median Tax Unit and Real Disposable
Household Size-Adjusted Income (Lower and Upper Bound) of the Median Person Normalized to 1959
 2.75


 2.55


 2.35


 2.15


 1.95


 1.75


 1.55


 1.35


 1.15


 0.95
        1959   1962   1965   1968    1971   1974    1977     1980   1983    1986      1989   1992   1995    1998   2001   2004   2007   2010   2013   2016

                 Recession                                      GDP per capita                                 Tax Unit Market Income
                 Lower bound real median disposable income      Upper bound real median disposable income

Sources: Market income of the median tax unit and the upper and lower bound household size-adjusted disposable income of the median person are from
authors' calculations using ASEC-CPS and the 1960 decennial Census. Income per-capita from the Bureau of Economic Analysis NIPA Table 7.1. All series
adjusted using CPI-U-RS.
Notes: Income series reported here are the same as in Figure 1 except with values normalized to income year 1959.



                                                                                 41
Table 1. Income Growth for 1959-2016 and 1959-2007 using Alternative Measures of Income by Quintiles
                                                                       Household Size-Adjusted Post-Transfer
                                                      Household                                    Post-Tax
                                                         Size-                                     Income +
                  Labor                Household       Adjusted                    Post-Tax     In-Kind Income
                 Income      Market   Size-Adjusted     Market       Pre-Tax     Income + In-    + Medicare +
                     of     Income Labor Income        Income        Income      Kind Income      Medicaid +
                    Tax         of          of             of            of            of            ESI of
                  Units    Tax Units     Persons       Persons       Persons        Persons         Persons
                    (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)
 Panel A:
 Median            6.4%       23.0%       75.1%         91.3%        103.1%         130.4%          153.7%
 Q1              -52.7%      -75.5%      -61.3%         18.0%        109.0%         183.8%          262.0%
 Q2               -4.7%       20.7%       35.5%         63.3%         88.5%         119.7%          157.6%
 Q3                8.6%       24.3%       75.7%         91.9%        103.8%         130.4%          154.5%
 Q4               41.6%       54.0%      103.4%        116.2%        120.4%         145.1%          162.2%
 Q5              110.6%     121.2%       149.8%        160.4%        157.2%         164.7%          175.7%
 Top 5%          146.7%     155.0%       190.6%        193.4%        184.9%         179.3%          186.8%
 Panel B:
 Median               24.0%          36.2%           78.2%             92.4%           100.8%           126.4%              141.2%
 Q1                  -75.7%         -20.4%          -30.9%             34.9%           108.9%           188.1%              246.8%
 Q2                   21.0%          47.9%           45.7%             68.2%            85.3%           116.5%              144.9%
 Q3                   28.5%          37.1%           78.0%             93.4%           101.0%           126.7%              141.9%
 Q4                   56.4%          63.7%           99.5%            113.5%           115.4%           140.0%              149.1%
 Q5                  108.5%         119.2%          135.5%            148.0%           144.0%           154.0%              155.7%
 Top 5%              134.5%         142.2%          168.6%            173.9%           164.9%           165.4%              163.5%
Sources: Authors' calculations using ASEC-CPS, NHEA, White House Budget Historical Tables, Statistical Abstracts of the U.S., Census Bureau population
estimates, USDA SNAP Data Tables and Child Nutrition Tables, BLS CPI for Medical Care in U.S. City Average, CMS Medicare Enrollment Data, MACPAC
Medicaid Enrollment Data, Kramer (1988), Collinson et al. (2016), Hoynes et al. (2016). Taxes calculated using NBER TaxSim.
Notes: Panel A: 1959-2016, Panel B: 1959-2007.



                                                                          42
Table 2. Gini Coefficients for Business Cycle Peaks (1959-2007) and 2016
                                                                      Household Size-Adjusted Post-Transfer

                                                                                                                             Pre-Tax
                                                 Household         Household                                                Income +
                                                   Size-             Size-                                Pre-Tax            In-Kind
                     Labor         Market         Adjusted          Adjusted                             Income +           Income +
                    Income         Income          Labor             Market            Pre-Tax            In-Kind           Medicare +
                       of             of          Income            Income             Income             Income            Medicaid +
                      Tax            Tax             of                of                 of                 of               ESI of
                     Units          Units         Persons           Persons            Persons            Persons            Persons
                      (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)
 1959                0.507          0.488          0.423             0.411              0.392              0.362              0.350
 1969                0.496          0.479          0.409             0.401              0.363              0.319              0.308
 1973                0.519          0.498          0.430             0.419              0.366              0.320              0.306
 1979                0.532          0.495          0.443             0.419              0.366              0.304              0.288
 1989                0.566          0.523          0.479             0.451              0.401              0.346              0.326
 2000                0.595          0.558          0.505             0.480              0.436              0.369              0.342
 2007                0.603          0.568          0.509             0.485              0.439              0.376              0.342
 2016                0.635          0.594          0.532             0.502              0.448              0.384              0.341
Sources: Authors' calculations using the March ASEC-CPS, NHEA, White House Budget Historical Tables, Statistical Abstracts of the United States, Census
Bureau population estimates, USDA SNAP Data Tables and Child Nutrition Tables, BLS CPI for Medical Care in U.S. City Average, CMS Medicare Enrollment
Data, MACPAC Medicaid Enrollment Data, Kramer (1988), Collinson et al. (2016), Hoynes et al. (2016). Taxes calculated using NBER TaxSim.
Notes: Gini values are for all business cycle peaks and the final year of the Obama administration.




                                                                          43
APPENDIX

The major data tasks of this paper are to use data from the yearly CPS-ASEC and the decennial

Census to first, create seven income series for 1959 and for all years from 1967 through 1978

that are consistent with those developed by Burkhauser et al. (2012b)--using the CPS-ASEC for

1979-2012--and second, to extend these series to 2016. 23 While the CPS-ASEC includes

estimates of the values of in-kind transfers, including school lunches, food stamps, housing

subsidies, Medicare and Medicaid, and employer-sponsored health insurance (ESI), for the years

1979-2013 (survey years 1980-2014), this is not the case for prior years. Furthermore, beginning

in 2014 the CPS-ASEC stopped providing estimates of the market value of Medicare and

Medicaid, although it continued to include other sources of in-kind income. Since 1992 CPS-

ASEC surveys include some estimates of federal tax liability and credits; however these are not

available in most years and do not include estimated state and payroll tax liabilities in earlier

years. No information on in-kind resources or taxes and credits are available in the 1960 Census.

Hence, to consistently build the seven income series over all the years we use in the text, we

must impute both the receipt and market value for these missing resources in our data set. Below

we discuss the construction of the decennial Census and CPS series we use in the text with our

major focus on the imputed components of our seven income measures.

Comparing Decennial Census-based and CPS-based Income Measures

        The seven income series we use in the text require us to subdivide total income into

subsets based on the source of that income. The CPS-ASEC asks more detailed questions



23
  Both the Census and the CPS-ASEC collect data on income during the calendar year prior to the survey. Thus, the
1960 Census covers income year 1959, and the 1968-2017 CPS covers income years 1967-2016. This appendix
refers to the year during which the income was received, excepting when references are regarding specific survey
years (e.g. the 1960 Census or 1968 CPS) or unless otherwise noted.

                                                       44
regarding sources of income than does the decennial Census data so we must make some

imputations to construct a decennial Census data series-based equivalent in four of the income

series we use in the text. 24 The income series requiring imputations in the Census data are (1)

Market Income of Tax Units; (2) Household Size-Adjusted Market Income of Persons; (3)

Household Size-Adjusted Post-Tax Post-Transfer Income of Persons; and (4) Household Size-

Adjusted Post-Tax Post-Transfer Income plus Medicare, Medicaid, and ESI of Persons. 25 Since

there is no CPS-ASEC data for income year 1959, we make our imputations for the 1960 Census

data (income year 1959) using the 1968 CPS data (income year 1967) for any sources of cash

income, and using the 1980 CPS data (income year 1979) for income from in-kind transfers.

        Using the 1968 CPS data, it is straightforward to measure (1) since the CPS from 1968 on

contains separate questions for: a) wage and self-employment income, b) business income, c)

farm income, d) Social Security, e) dividends, interest, and rent, f) welfare or public assistance,

g) unemployment and workmen's compensation, h) alimony, i) private pensions, and j) anything

else. While the 1960 decennial Census contains separate questions for a, b, and c, it lumps all

other income into a single "all other income" question. Hence, it combines all these other sources

of income into a single category.

        We add categories (a, b, c, e, h, and i) in the 1968 CPS to estimate market income. This is

not possible in the 1960 decennial Census, however, since (e, h, and i) are grouped with (d, f, g,


24
   These Census surveys cover income years 1959, 1969, 1979, and 1989. Only 1959 is included in the income series
in the main text. The other Census years are used to demonstrate the compatibility of our CPS and Census estimates.
25
   "Household" refers to all individuals who occupy a house, apartment, or group of rooms constituting a housing
unit, regardless of their relationships with each other. Aside from the two tax-unit measures (labor- and market-
income of tax units), all our measures are aggregated to include the resources from all household members.
However, for several resources, for example ESI and foods stamps, we impute receipt for families rather than
households, as this is the level at which eligibility would be determined and because this is consistent with the
estimates of these benefits in the CPS survey since 1980. A family is a group of related (by blood or marriage)
individuals within a household. In some cases a household and a family are equivalent, but many households have
multiple families or unrelated individuals. But as mentioned, while resources may be imputed to families, they are
aggregated to households when estimating our income series.

                                                        45
and j). Both the decennial Census and CPS ask increasingly detailed questions in later years, but

the decennial Census questions are always relatively less detailed, and even in the 1990

decennial Census some sources of market income, specifically alimony, are still grouped in the

"other income" category. Therefore, it is necessary to impute the proportion of "other income" in

the Census that should be included in market income for individuals in each decennial Census

year.

        To do so, we construct a separate definition of income in the CPS that includes all of the

income sources in the "other income" category for the decennial Census in the same year except

for the 1960 Census when we use the 1968 CPS. We then follow a procedure similar to the

HBAI-SPI2 adjustment in Burkhauser et al. (2016). We start by ordering individuals in the CPS

for the relevant year by earned income (the sum of wage, farm, and self-employment and

business income). We then assign them to percentiles, and within each percentile in the CPS

calculate the fraction of the "other income" category that comes from the CPS categories that

should count as market income. We match these percentiles to the individuals in the equivalent

percentiles in the Census, and use the estimated fractions to assign individuals in the Census an

appropriate amount of their "other income" when estimating market income.

        This imputation performs well for the higher income quintiles, but less so in lower-

income quintiles, and especially the lowest quintile. This problem results from substantial

heterogeneity in the composition of low-income tax units and households relative to those in

higher income quintiles. Specifically, low-income units have large shares of those who have low

market income because they are relatively young, and those who have low market income

because they are past retirement age. However, these groups have rather different amounts and




                                                46
sources of other income, and so estimates assigning the same fraction of other income to both

groups perform less well when we compare our decennial Census series to the CPS.

       To address this issue, we take the imputation one step further. In addition to estimating

the fraction of other income by earned-income percentiles, we split this imputation into three

separate groups: young (< 20 years), middle (> 19 and < 65 years), and old (> 64 years). In doing

so, the relevant fraction of other income is estimated from a population that has more

consistently similar sources of other income. While the decennial Census estimates of mean

incomes for the first quintile are still less accurate than those for higher income quintiles, the

estimates are significantly more accurate than those estimated using only earned income

percentiles.

       To evaluate our efforts to recreate our CPS income series using the decennial Census, we

compare the overlapping years of the two data sets (1969, 1979, and 1989) in Appendix Table

1A. We use five different income measures to compare the series: (1) size-adjusted earned

income of tax units, (2) size-adjusted market income of tax units, (3) size-adjusted market

income of households, (4) size-adjusted pre-tax post-transfer income of households, and (5) size-

adjusted post-tax post-transfer income of households. We compare both the median and mean of

each measure for each year.

       While there are random differences due to sampling, we expect some of the measures to

be more similar than others. In particular, we would expect measure (4): size-adjusted pre-tax

post-transfer income of households to be the most similar across data sets as it is the only series

for which no imputations are necessary. Both the decennial Census and the CPS are household

surveys, so there is no estimation of analysis units. Furthermore, all of the questions in both

surveys regarding income sources counted in pre-tax post-transfer income are grouped such that



                                                  47
no imputation is necessary. 26 Thus, we expect measure (4) to be the closest. Measures (1), (2),

and (5) all require imputation of tax units, and measures (2) and (3) require imputing sources of

market income in the decennial Census.

        Panel A compares the medians of the five measures across the two data sets. For each

year the estimates of each data set are shown, followed by the percentage difference between the

decennial Census estimate and the CPS. As expected, measure (4) is the most consistently

similar of the series overall, with the decennial Census estimates slightly overestimating the CPS

estimates, but by a difference of 1.0 percent or less in all three years. The other measures have

larger differences between the CPS and the decennial Census measures, but the differences are

smaller than 4 percent, with a few exceptions: measures (1) (the labor income of tax units) and

(3) (the market income of households) in 1979, and measure (2) (the market income of tax units)

in 1989. This is not unexpected as all three of these measures involve some of the most important

imputations: the imputation of market income or of tax units themselves.

        Panel B compares the means of each measure. While the mean deviations are slightly

larger, size-adjusted pre-tax post-transfer income of households is still overall the closest

measure, with the largest deviation being a 2.1 percent underestimate of the CPS measure in

1979. Measure (3), the market income of households, now has the largest difference of 5.1

percent in 1979, but otherwise the results are largely similar to those of Panel A. Overall, it is

encouraging that our Census series relatively accurately replicates the measures of our CPS

series, thereby supporting our use of the 1960 Census to create an initial point for the series.




26
  Reported incomes may also differ across the two surveys if there are systematic differences in peoples' responses
due to, for instance, answering more questions in the CPS survey about more specific sources of income.

                                                        48
Estimating Taxes

        Similar to Armour et al. (2014) we impute tax liabilities using NBER Taxsim 9.3 based

on the year and state of residence for each tax unit within a household. Tax units are assigned

using the procedure from Armour et al. (2014), as described in Burkhauser et al. (2012b) and

Piketty and Saez (2003). Married couples, divorced or widowed individuals, and single

individuals over the age of 20 are all considered their own tax unit, as are never-married children

under 20 who live alone.

        Estimating tax liabilities and credits is straightforward for 1979-2007, the years

considered by Armour et al. (2014), as well as years after 2007. However, estimating taxes in

earlier years poses additional challenges that require additional assumptions. Specifically, NBER

Taxsim does not estimate state taxes prior to 1977, and the CPS does not uniquely identify all 51

states prior to 1976. Smaller states are grouped as several states in some cases; for instance,

between 1968 and 1971 Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont are

all assigned the same state code.

        To address these issues, we use a procedure similar to Fox et al. (2015). We first compute

each tax unit's state tax liability for the year 1977 for all households surveyed prior to 1977,

regardless of the year the tax unit appeared in the CPS. Tax units for which a unique state is not

identifiable are assigned to the state in the region with the largest population in 1977. These state

tax liabilities are then deflated using the CPI-U-RS. Determining tax unit status of filers versus

non-filers is also a difficulty. We follow Burkhauser et al. (2012b) and include all tax units

regardless of filing status as it is not possible to differentiate between filers and non-filers prior

to 1993. For a discussion of median income analyzing only filers after 1993, see Burkhauser et

al. (2012b). As with imputations for income sources using the CPS for years prior to 1979, this



                                                   49
simple tax model is a first approximation and subject to greater noise than the NBER model used

for more recent years.

Imputing Medicare Receipt and Value

           The primary data contribution of this paper is providing the first estimates of the value of

government- and employer-provided health insurance at the household level for 1959-1978. This

process consists of two steps: first imputing whether a family or individual is covered by

Medicare, Medicaid, or ESI, and second imputing the (ex-ante) value of health insurance

conditional on source and receipt.

           We assign Medicare receipt to all individuals age 65 or older starting in 1967 since

Medicare was almost universal for these eligible adults, even in the early years of the program.

Beginning in 1973 Medicare eligibility was extended to nearly 2 million additional individuals

that were under age 65 but had been receiving Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) for at

least two years. The CPS only reports receipt of Social Security benefits and does not distinguish

between Old-Age Insurance (OAI), Survivors Insurance (SI), and Disability Insurance (DI), nor

does it provide information on how long benefits have been received.

           Because OAI cannot be received before age 62, we assume that only those under the age

of 62 who report receiving Social Security benefits for the years 1973-1978 were potentially

receiving Medicare. However, we exclude widows age 60 or 61 because post-1965 they could be

receiving Social Security through DI or through SI (Achenbaum 1986). We also cannot

distinguish those receiving OAI and DI who are age 62-64 and assume no one in this age group

is receiving DI. 27




27
     Questions related to a person's disability were not asked in the CPS until 1980.

                                                            50
       Our imputation will overstate the number of Medicare recipients to the extent that

individuals age 65 or older have not enrolled in the Medicare program, for instance because they

are still working and have private health insurance, or for individuals under age 62, because they

have been receiving DI for less than 24 months and hence are not yet eligible for Medicare. We

understate Medicare participation for those aged 62-64 whose Social Security benefits are from

DI and for widows' age 60-61 who are also receiving DI. In practice, simply assigning Medicare

receipt to all individuals who report Social Security income, are under age 62 and are not

widows age 60-61 overstates the number of Medicare enrollees based on a disability in the

administrative data.

       We correct this imputation by probabilistically assigning receipt of Medicare to only a

subset of individuals between 18 and 61 who receive Social Security income and are not widows

age 60-61. To estimate the probability of Medicare receipt in the years 1967-1978 for such

individuals, we predict the probability of receipt for this same group of individuals in 1979 (CPS

survey year 1980), which contains receipt of both Social Security income and Medicare, using a

probit model. The outcome is whether or not an individual received Medicare coverage, and the

predicting variables are the individual's age, race, sex, educational attainment, and marital status.

Using these predicted probabilities for the years 1967-1978, we probabilistically assign Medicare

receipt such that the number of recipients imputed to receive Medicare due to DI receipt is equal

to the number of such recipients in administrative data. We adjust these administrative totals

downward in every year by the fraction of DI Medicare recipients captured in 1979. This

approach for assigning receipt of Medicare receipt probabilistically according to the estimated

probabilities, rather than to the individuals estimated to be most likely to receive coverage,

follows the approach recommended by Mittag (2019).



                                                 51
         To estimate the market value of Medicare receipt for the years 1967-1978, we first obtain

the market values of Medicare from the CPS in 1979, separately by state and risk class (aged or

disabled). We assign these market values to the corresponding imputed recipients for 1967-1978

after deflating the 1979 values by the ratio of average per-recipient expenditures in the target

year relative to average per-recipient expenditures in 1979. These per-recipient averages are

calculated using total spending and enrollees from the National Health Expenditure Accounts. As

with estimating taxes, one obstacle in estimating the market value of Medicare by state is that

some states are not uniquely identified prior to 1976. For these states and years, we assign a

population-weighted average of the market value in each risk class for states within the same

grouping based on 1970 Census population counts.

Estimating Medicaid Receipt and Value

         Unlike Medicare, Medicaid is administered at the state level. In addition, its

implementation was staggered across states. While Medicaid was created at the federal level in

1965, state-level programs were optional but incentivized by matching federal funds. 28 By 1966,

25 states had implemented Medicaid. By 1972 all but one had done so. 29 Medicaid receipt was

initially closely linked to receipt of cash welfare, and from income year 1967 and on, the CPS

includes "Welfare or public assistance" as a source of income. Additionally, SSI was added as a

separate income category in 1976. 30 In any year after a given state implements Medicaid, we



28
   States had substantial flexibility in designing their Medicaid programs, but were required to cover children in low-
income families with single parents on welfare as well as those receiving aid from state programs for the elderly,
blind, and disabled. Many states had programs to cover these individuals prior to the implementation of the federal
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program in 1974. Because states who chose to expand were required to cover
both these groups, enrollment in Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and SSI automatically made
individuals eligible for Medicaid in expansion states (CMS 2005, Rowland 2005).
29
   Arizona first implemented a Medicaid program in 1982.
30
   Before 1976, the CPS includes AFDC, SSI, payments from state-based old-age assistance programs, or state
payments to the blind or disabled prior to the implementation of SSI. After 1976, receipt of public assistance and
SSI are reported separately.

                                                          52
assign coverage to all members of a family receiving welfare or public assistance, but exclude

adults who did not themselves receive AFDC or SSI payments.

         Imputing Medicaid receipt is also complicated by the state-level program implementation

combined with non-unique identifiers for some states in pre-1976 CPS samples. For respondents

in these states, it is not possible to identify the year in which they would first have been able to

obtain coverage. To assign Medicaid receipt to respondents in states that were not uniquely

identified, we assign receipt probabilistically, with the assignment probabilities in each year

created using the population share of the states in the grouping that had implemented Medicaid

in that year using the 1970 Census population.

         We estimate the market value of Medicaid receipt using the average value by risk class in

each state for income year 1979 (CPS survey year 1980), again weighted by population shares

for states that are not uniquely identified. We form risk classes based on age but not disability

status because the CPS contains insufficient information to identify disabled individuals in these

early years. 31 The 1979 Medicaid market values are then scaled down to the years from 1967-

1978 using the ratio of average per-recipient expenditures in that year to average per-recipient

expenditures in 1979 as measured using the National Health Expenditure Accounts and

administrative counts on the number of Medicaid recipients, analogous to our procedure for

estimating the value of Medicare receipt.

Estimating Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance (ESI)

         Imputing receipt of private health insurance is more difficult than for Medicare and

Medicaid because private coverage is neither universal nor based on uniform eligibility criteria,

and no questions were asked relating to coverage in the CPS prior to 1980. We predict receipt of


31
  Implicitly this assigns all individuals imputed to receive Medicaid a market value that is an average of the market
value for the disabled risk class and the non-disabled risk class for individuals in their age group.

                                                         53
employer-sponsored health insurance (ESI) to family units with at least one working member in

years prior to income year 1979 using a probit model estimated using the 1980 CPS. The

outcome variable is whether any family member received ESI. The predicting variables are the

age, sex, race, educational attainment, marital status, and full- versus part-time work status of the

family head, total family income, and the number of workers in the family. Following Mittag

(2019), receipt is probabilistically assigned according to the estimated probabilities, rather than

to the families estimated most likely to receive coverage, until the number of covered individuals

equals our estimate of the number of people with ESI coverage each year.

       We are unaware of administrative counts or other estimates of the number of ESI

recipients in years prior to 1979. To estimate the number of ESI recipients, we divide ESI

expenditures recorded in the NHEA for 1959 through 1979 by our estimate of the average value

of ESI per-recipient in those years. In each year, we reduce the total expenditures by the ratio of

estimated benefits captured in the CPS in 1979 to the amount reported in the NHEA in 1979 so

that our series captures a consistent fraction of ESI spending. We estimate the average, per-

recipient value of ESI benefits from 1979 and deflate this amount to prior years using the

medical expenditures CPI. Dividing the adjusted NHEA expenditure totals by these estimates of

per-recipient ESI benefits provides a first approximation of the total number of recipients in each

year. We then use it to estimate the number of imputed recipients in each year. The use of the

medical expenditures CPI may understate growth in the real value of ESI benefits as this

implicitly assumes the real value of these benefits was constant between 1959 and 1978.

       We estimate the value of receiving ESI coverage using a linear model estimated on the

subsample of ESI recipients in the 1979 where the value of ESI benefits received is the outcome

and the predicting variables are the number of adults in the family, the number of children, and



                                                 54
the family's state of residence. We then use these estimates to predict the value of ESI benefits

for those imputed to be covered by ESI from 1967-1978. The value for each individual person is

then deflated according to the health expenditures CPI in each year relative to 1979. As with

other in-kind benefits, we assign a population-weighted average value of ESI to families in states

that are not uniquely identified in the CPS.

Estimating Food Stamps, School Lunches, and Housing Subsidies

       Our method of estimating the receipt and market value of food stamps for 1967-1978 is

conceptually similar to Fox et al. (2015), in that we estimate a model of benefit receipt for a year

in which data on benefits are available, and we then use these estimates to assign receipt of

benefits to individuals for years in which benefit data are not available. We predict whether

families (rather than households) receive food stamps in 1979 (1980 CPS survey) using a linear

probability model where the outcome is whether any family member reports food stamp benefits.

The variables we use to predict receipt include the numbers of adults and children in the family,

the age, sex, race, and marital status of the family head, whether the family received cash

welfare, and the family's total pre-tax cash income. We apply the estimates from 1979 to predict

family receipt of food stamps from 1967-1978.

       The food stamp program implementation varied across counties within states. However,

the smallest geographic area identifiable for all observations in the CPS is the state. To account

for varying implementation dates across counties within states, we scale each family's predicted

probability of food stamp receipt based on the share of a state's population residing in counties

that had implemented the program for each year. Information on county implementation dates

are obtained from Hoynes et al. (2016). County population counts are from the 1970 Decennial

Census. Similar to other programs' imputations, for families in states that are not uniquely



                                                 55
identified prior to 1976 we weight the share of population in counties with a food stamp program

by the share of the population in each state in the group.

       Based on these predicted family probabilities we assign receipt again following the

probabilistic method from Mittag (2019) so that the imputed number of families receiving food

stamps matches administrative counts for the number of enrollees in each year. This

administrative count is the actual administrative total reported by the USDA beginning in 1969

(USDA 2014) and by Kramer (1988) for years prior to 1969, scaled by the ratio of food stamp

recipients reported in 1979 to the administrative count of enrollees in 1979.

       To estimate the value of food stamp benefits conditional on receipt, we estimate a linear

model on the data for income year 1979 (1980 CPS survey) with the estimated family-value of

food stamps as the outcome variable, and using the number of adults and children in the family

interacted with family income as well as income squared and cubed as predicting variables. We

then apply the estimates from this linear model to the predicted food stamp recipients in the CPS

from 1967-1978 with the predicted values winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles. We scale the

values for food stamp receipt so that the aggregate value in each sample year equals the total

spending on food stamps recorded in administrative data, with the administrative totals adjusted

in each year by the total fraction of benefits captured in 1979.

       We use a similar method in our imputations for school lunches and housing with only

minor differences. The school lunch program was available in all states from 1967-1978, and

thus receipt probabilities are not scaled based on county implementation dates. Housing subsidy

imputations are identical to imputations of school lunches except that our aggregate counts are of

the number of covered families and not the number of individuals. Thus, we target the number of

families covered in our CPS imputation to the administrative count of the number of families



                                                 56
covered, and scale these totals in each year by the ratio of CPS-to-administrative families

measured in 1979 to maintain a constant share of families covered. In addition to 1967-1978, our

imputation for housing benefits applies to our 1960 Census sample as well. Food stamp and

school lunch benefits were insignificant or zero in 1960. Because the 1960 Census sample

contains fewer income categories than the 1968 CPS, welfare receipt is not included in

predicting housing subsidy receipt in 1960.




                                                57
APPENDIX FIGURES AND TABLES
Appendix Figure 1A recreates Figure 1 using the PCE index instead of the CPI-U-RS to adjust
for inflation. While overall growth is slightly higher since 1959 (because the PCE measures
inflation as being slightly lower than the CPI), the qualitative results are essentially unchanged.
Appendix Figure 2A repeats this exercise for Figure 2. Appendix Table 1A compares the CPS-
based and decennial Census-based medians and means of each income series, for years in which
both data sources are available.




                                                58
Appendix Figure 1A. Alternative Measures of Median Income Normalized to 1979 Levels (1959-2016)


 1.5




 1.3




 1.1




 0.9




 0.7




 0.5
       1959   1962   1965   1968   1971    1974     1977     1980       1983   1986    1989      1992    1995     1998    2001     2004     2007   2010   2013   2016

                                   Recession                                                  1: Tax Unit Labor Income
                                   2: Tax Unit Market Income                                  3: Household Size-Adjusted Labor Income
                                   4: (3) + Market Income                                     5: (4) Pre-tax post-transfer size-adjusted income
                                   6: (5) + taxes + in-kind transfers                         7: (6) + Medicare + Medicaid

Sources: Data from Figure 1 combined with annual PCE series from BEA.




                                                                                      59
Appendix Figure 2A. Trends in Real GDP per Capita, Real Taxable Market Income of the Median Tax Unit and Real
Disposable Household Size-Adjusted Income of the Median Persons Normalized to 1959

 2.95




 2.45




 1.95




 1.45




 0.95
        1959   1962   1965   1968    1971   1974    1977     1980   1983    1986      1989   1992   1995    1998   2001   2004   2007   2010   2013   2016

                 Recession                                      GDP per capita                                 Tax Unit Market Income
                 Lower bound real median disposable income      Upper bound real median disposable income

Sources: Median market tax unit income and the upper and lower bound median disposable income from authors' calculations using March CPS
and the 1960 decennial Census. Income per-capita from the Bureau of Economic Analysis NIPA Table 7.1. All series adjusted using PCE.
Notes: Same series as in Figure 1 with values normalized to income year 1959.




                                                                                 60
Appendix Table 1A. Comparisons of CPS-based and Decennial Census-based Medians and Means (1969, 1979 and 1989)
                                       1969                            1979                            1989
                                      Decennial                       Decennial                        Decennial
                            CPS        Census       %        CPS       Census      %         CPS        Census                    %
 Panel A:
 Medians
 Tax Units
 Labor income              40,723      41,595     -2.1%     36,719     38,483    -4.6%      35,401       35,294                  0.3%

 Market income                   43,157        42,809        0.8%        40,675      41,624       -2.3%        40,815   43,137   -5.4%
 Size-adjusted households
 Market income                   27,893        27,634        0.9%        32,411      31,113        4.2%        34,824   35,053   -0.7%

 Pre-tax post-transfer           29,125        28,903        0.8%        34,431      34,088        1.0%        37,560   37,411   0.4%

 Post-tax post-transfer          24,707        24,342        1.5%        28,720      28,450        0.9%        31,603   31,652   -0.2%

 Panel B:
 Means
 Tax Units
 Labor income                    44,950        46,443       -3.2%        44,732      46,895       -4.6%        47,475   48,128   -1.4%

 Market income                   49,378        49,304        0.2%        51,398      51,643       -0.5%        55,953   57,842   -3.3%
 Size-adjusted households
 Market income                   32,643        31,986        2.1%        37,543      35,727        5.1%        42,694   42,885   -0.4%

 Pre-tax post-transfer           34,594        33,927        2.0%        40,472      39,658        2.1%        46,227   45,898   0.7%

 Post-tax post-transfer          27,878        27,667        0.8%        31,566      32,050       -1.5%        36,391   37,412   -2.7%
Sources: Authors' calculations using the March CPS and the decennial Census. Taxes calculated using NBER TaxSim.
Notes: Percentage differences are the deviation of the decennial Census from the CPS.




                                                                    61
