                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              HOW DO NYPD OFFICERS RESPOND TO TERROR THREATS?

                                       Steven F. Lehrer
                                      Louis Pierre Lepage

                                      Working Paper 26438
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26438


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We are grateful to the editor, one anonymous reviewer, seminar participants at the 2016 CLEF/
CEA meetings, John Bound, Charles Brown, Michael Mueller-Smith and Jeffrey Smith for
helpful comments and suggestions on this project. NYC Stop-and-Frisk data is publicly available
at https://nycopendata.socrata.com as well as at the ICPSR website at the University of Michigan.
Lehrer thanks SSHRC for research support. We are responsible for all errors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Steven F. Lehrer and Louis Pierre Lepage. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do NYPD Officers Respond to Terror Threats?
Steven F. Lehrer and Louis Pierre Lepage
NBER Working Paper No. 26438
November 2019
JEL No. C33,J15,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

Using data from the New York City Police Department's Stop-and-Frisk program, we evaluate
the impact of a specific terrorist attack threat from Al Qaeda on policing behavior in New York
City. We find that after the Department of Homeland Security raised the alert level in response to
this threat, people categorized as "Other" by the NYPD, including Arabs, were significantly more
likely to be frisked and have force used against them yet no more likely to be arrested. These
individuals were in turn less likely to be frisked or have force used against them immediately
after the alert level returned to its baseline level. Further, evidence suggests that these impacts
were larger in magnitude in police precincts that have a higher concentration of mosques. Our
results are consistent with profiling by police officers leading to low-productivity stops, but we
cannot rule out that it constitutes efficient policing given important differences between
deterrence of terrorism versus other crimes.


Steven F. Lehrer
Dunning Hall 336, 94 University Avenue
Department of Economics
Queen's University
Kingston, Ontario
Canada
K7L 3N6
and NBER
lehrers@queensu.ca

Louis Pierre Lepage
University of Michigan
lepagelp@umich.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26438
1         Introduction
Following the terrorist attacks on 9/11, law enforcement's focus has evolved to also include
domestic terrorist threats. A large number of plots have been foiled including two attempts
to bomb the New York City (NYC) Subway and a car bombing attempt in Times Square on
May 1, 2010.1 Yet, survey research shows that while most people are generally satisfied with
the way the police perform their duties, beliefs that individual police officers treat suspects
of different races or ethnicities differently have grown.2 These potential racial differences
have attracted substantial controversy, and in response many police departments introduced
policies to deter racial profiling in order to reduce these beliefs and restore public support.
        Being a police officer can be challenging, particularly when faced with the additional
challenges posed by terrorism. Police officers occasionally have to make life-and-death split-
second decisions which may leave room for unconscious racial bias to arise regardless of
training or department policies and procedures. Evidence of unconscious racial bias among
police officers is summarized in Fridell (2008, 2016) who notes that while certain interventions
can reduce associations between race or ethnicity and crime, they do not fully eliminate them.
        More generally, theories of statistical discrimination often posit that racial differences in
policing arise at least partly due to the effect of perceptions of identity.3 A key implication
from such models is that differentials in outcomes by race or ethnicity may be quite responsive
to changes in perceptions. To empirically test this prediction requires a salient and exogenous
event that could plausibly alter individual police officer's racial perceptions of a group.
    1
      A complete list of foiled attempts since the terrorist attacks of 9/11 is provided at
http://www.nyc.gov/html/nypd/html/pr/plots targeting nyc.shtml.
    2
      For example, see Tankebe (2013), Mazerole et al. (2013) and Schuck et al. (2008) as well as surveys of
the literature on perceptions of the police. While much research focuses on black and white differences, Sun
and Wu (2015) survey Arab Americans and find that the majority have a great deal or a lot of confidence
in the local police. They also find no statistically significant difference in confidence between Muslims, who
accounted for 40% of their sample, and those of other religious affiliations.
    3
      See Fang and Moro (2011) for a recent survey of the literature on statistical discrimination. Within
this literature, perceptions of identity are defined as stereotypes which relate to situations where a police
officer observes the group identity of the suspect and assigns them a perceived value from a latent index of
criminality based on these stereotypes.


                                                      2
In this paper, we argue that an August 1, 2004 announcement made by the Department
of Homeland Security provided such salient information to law enforcement officials. The
announcement warned of an immediate terrorist threat to financial institutions in New York,
Washington, DC, and New Jersey and was accompanied by a change in the color-coded
Homeland Security Advisory System (HSAS) scale. The HSAS was designed to warn citizens
and lead to additional security measures taken by various government institutions, generally
including both federal agencies and law enforcement.
       We use detailed data from the Stop-and-Frisk program of New York City to examine
whether this increase in the alert level from yellow (elevated risk) to orange (high risk) had
an impact on police officer behavior based on the race or ethnicity of alleged perpetrators.
We conjecture that racial minorities from the Middle East and North Africa may have
received additional scrutiny given the association between Al Qaeda and those regions.4 This
conjecture is motivated by the intuitive notion that terrorism is an area where individuals
may be particularly prone to making assumptions regarding the ethnicity of perpetrators.5
Similarly, any unconscious biases held by individual police officers may likely emerge in
situations where threats and stakes are higher; and these situations may lessen the criteria
of reasonable suspicion needed to stop and frisk individuals irrespective of their race or
ethnicity.
       Our empirical tests examine not only if the rate of stops leading to an arrest differed
after the HSAS announcement,6 but also explore if it altered police officer behavior in terms
of the number of stops as well as whether they frisked the suspect or used force as part of
   4
     Consistent with this hypothesis, Jobard et al. (2012) find that Arab passengers were more than seven
times likelier to be stopped and searched on the Paris metro than Whites, and cases of racially-discriminatory
police stops in France and Spain have recently been brought to the European Court of Human Rights (Seydi
and others v. France, Muhammed v. Spain).
   5
     Legewie (2013) suggests that terrorist attacks can have a profound short-term effect on individual percep-
tions, while Legewie (2016) argues that local events related to police shootings can influence police behavior
related to force.
   6
     During high-alert times, there is a change in how officers are deployed, and additional patrols are allocated
to high-profile locations across cities. This change in deployment is well documented in the popular press
and used for identification in both Klick and Tabarock (2005) and Draca et al. (2011).



                                                        3
these stops. Complimentary to Draca et al. (2011) who studied how the July 2005 London
terror attacks influenced police deployment and reported crime levels across districts, we
focus on differential individual officer responses by suspect race or ethnicity. We motivate
our empirical test with a model which extends the hit rates test from Knowles et al. (2001) to
consider the addition of terrorism-related duties, how terrorist threats may affect perceptions
of officers, and the possibility that deterring a terrorist attack offers larger benefits to a police
officer than other crimes.
   Our analysis uncovers that the August 1, 2004 increase in the alert level led to a substan-
tial and statistically significant 13% increase in the probability of being frisked for people
characterized as "Other", including Arabs. This constitutes a 6% additional increase in
frisking compared to other racial groups and we also find evidence of a disproportionate 9%
increase in the use of force; yet no higher odds of them being arrested or stopped. Further
evidence suggests that these increases in frisking were particularly large during rush hour
times and in areas with higher concentration of mosques. When the threat subsided, the
relative probability of being frisked or have forced use against them in turn decreased for
this group. A natural question is whether it is possible to distinguish between statistical and
taste or bias-based discrimination in this setting. Although the additional frisks of Arabs led
to no additional arrests which points towards an irrational explanation, caution is warranted
when interpreting our results. The results are consistent with the idea that making threats
salient can bring out potentially latent discrimination which appears inefficient in our ap-
plication since there was no increase in arrests. Still, given important differences between
terrorism and other crimes as well as the larger stakes at play, we cannot rule out that these
changes in behavior constitute efficient policing.
   This paper has a natural link to two contentious literatures on law enforcement related to
racial bias in the Stop-and-Frisk program and the effects of Homeland Security terror alerts.
On the latter, Shapiro and Cohen (2007) note that the HSAS was not viewed in a good
light by citizens who claimed it was vague and uninformative regarding details of potential


                                                 4
threats.7 Changes in alert levels have been examined by Klick and Tabarrok (2005) who find
that crime decreased in Washington D.C. during high-alert periods prior to July 2003 due to
increased police presence and Omer et al. (2007) who find that changes in alert levels did not
increase stress levels as proxied by calls to a law-enforcement peer support hotline. On the
former, despite front page headlines and criticism in the popular press,8 Coviello and Persico
(2015) do not find evidence of racial discrimination in the New York Police Department's
(NYPD) Stop-and-Frisk program when using the hit rates test, but along with Goel et
al. (2016), present evidence supportive of discrimination against African-Americans when
restricting attention to stops relating to the possession of a concealed weapon. Lehrer and
Lepage (2019) also use the hit rates test and additionally account for the fact that the
category of stop reported reflects a behavioral choice of police officers. They report evidence
of discrimination for crimes related to weapons and drugs. While this paper does not answer
questions of how police officers should be monitored,9 it provides relevant evidence on how
their behavior adapts to exogenous changes in information on criminality by racial or ethnic
group.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide an
overview of the data and research design employed to identify changes in policing. Our
empirical results are presented in Section 3, along with robustness checks and a discussion
on interpreting our results. Lastly, Section 4 summarizes our main findings and concludes.



2         Empirical Setting and Test
In this section, we first describe the event which provides an exogenous information shock
to police officer perceptions. We then describe the data set utilized and provide an outline
    7
     See also Fischhoff (2002) regarding the vagueness of the HSAS more generally.
    8
     See for example New York Civil Liberties Union, Stop-and-Frisk Data, www.nyclu.org/content/stop-
and-frisk-data.
   9
     Shi (2009) provides compelling evidence that officers reduce policing intensity when faced with greater
expected penalties by exploiting events surrounding the April 2001 riot in Cincinnati.


                                                     5
of the empirical strategy.


2.1       The Terror Alert of August 2004

The HSAS warning system for terrorism was activated on March 12, 2002 and the threat
level was raised six times from "yellow" to "orange" corresponding to a move from elevated
to high threat.10 The HSAS increase that took place on August 1, 2004 was accompanied
by a specific warning that identified financial institutions in New York City, Washington,
DC, and New Jersey as being targeted by Al Qaeda.11 This was the only increase of the
six total alert increases that was specific about the potential targets and also explained the
sources and quality of the intelligence upon which the threat was based.12 The increase
from yellow to orange is also particularly important in our context since orange is the first
level to explicitly require the coordination of security efforts with local law enforcement
agencies, including the NYPD. Further, Morris (2003) reports that the NYPD commissioner
mentioned that an orange alert level generally meant an "orange plus" level for the city and
led to additional security measures such as increased security at public events and important
locations, additional police presence in mass transit systems, and additional checkpoints at
bridges, tunnels and other locations.
       Since the alert had a marked emphasis on NYC, it may have been particularly salient
to NYPD officers. It was also particularly long in that the Orange status was maintained
for nearly 100 days. The New York Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly publicly stated
that that the NYPD would respond by providing "significant security" at selected buildings
and step up both random and targeted searches of vehicles entering the city. Since the
  10
      Threats are first transmitted through governmental channels to federal agencies and other government
bodies before being transmitted to governors, state authorities, major law enforcement agencies and mayors.
They are then shared with selected private sector entities before being publicly announced through a press
conference.
   11
      See Eggen, Mintz and Pope (2004), Aguirre (2004), Jehl and Johnston (2004) and Taylor (2005) for
details regarding the August 1st threat discussed here.
   12
      The dates of other alert changes are provided in the online appendix along with an analysis of their
effects on policing outcomes.


                                                    6
information concerning the threat suggested an attack by car or truck bomb, several streets
near financial centers in midtown Manhattan were initially closed and trucks were banned
from entering bridges and tunnels leading to Wall Street.
       The head of the Department of Homeland Security Tom Ridge mentioned being very
confident in the information, some of which had been seized from an Al Qaeda operative
as part of a CIA-Pakistani operation in Pakistan not long before and included detailed
planning information as well as sketches of potential targets including the Stock Exchange
and Citigroup Center in New York. Further, information was found that suggested scouting
by potential terrorists had recently been done to identify security in and around specific
buildings, midweek pedestrian traffic counts of the number of people per minute on each
side of the street, identifying the best places for further reconnaissance, tips on how to make
contact with employees who work in the buildings, general traffic patterns and locations
of hospitals and police departments.13 The alert level was lowered to yellow on November
10, 2004 once permanent protective measures were put in place around specific locations
throughout the financial services sector.
       Even with these additional measures taken by the NYPD, it appears unlikely that incre-
ased targeting of Arabs during the period would be the product of a (likely illegal) top-down
policy representing a conscious, concerted effort by the NYPD. While officers were certainly
encouraged to be vigilant and may have been directed to increase stops and searching of
suspicious individuals, we found no evidence of any explicit targeting, and New York City
police commissioner Raymond Kelly has referred to racial profiling as a counter-terrorism
measure as being "just nuts".14
  13
     The media later reported that there may also have been "test runs" in days prior to the alert increase,
although this information was never corroborated by the Department of Homeland Security.
  14
     Social psychologists also provide evidence that modern day bias among law enforcement is most likely
to be in the form of implicit bias, while Harcourt (2007) makes clear that we have no evidence or theory
to suggest whether racial profiling may be an effective counter-terrorism measure or instead be completely
inadequate.




                                                     7
2.2     Data

Our primary data is gathered from NYC Open Data and comprises all recorded stops from
the Stop-and-Frisk program between 2003 and 2012, which we restrict to stops from 2003 to
the end of the HSAS in April 2011. For every stop, we are provided with detailed personal
characteristics of the suspect including age, sex, ethnicity, height, weight, hair and eye color;
the date and location of the stop as well as detailed information about the type of crime,
weapons found and whether force was used.15 In addition, we are provided with the officer's
self-reported basis of search and reason for frisk as well as whether an arrest was made or
summons issued to the suspect. The race/ethnicity categories used by the NYPD for the
suspects are white, black, white Hispanic, black Hispanic, Asian, unrecognized, American-
Indian and Other.16 The race/ethnicity category, along with other stop information, is
reported by the police officer who performed the stop. We focus on "Other" as the group
of interest in our application and pool whites, Asians and Hispanics as the reference group.
While it is not possible to specifically identify which racial groups enter in "Other" or in
what proportion, these are unlikely to change due to alert increases. Further, considering
the different categories, it seems unlikely that estimated impacts of alert changes would be
driven by racial subgroups other than Arabs and people from North Africa and the Middle
East potentially contained in the "Other" category. According to the 2010 Census, the New
York Metro Area had the second largest Arab-American population in the United-States
with 371,233 residents, an estimated 1.68% of the population which could account for up
to 40% of the group "Other." Following Coviello and Persico (2015) and other papers using
  15
     Force is defined by the NYPD as a stop which involved one or more of the following: physically man-
handling the suspect with hands, physically having to put the suspect on the ground or against a wall,
drawing and or pointing their service weapon, using a baton, handcuffs or pepper spray, or other scenarios
which involved a specific physical threat or action against the suspect. Approximately 35% of stops involving
force did not lead to frisking.
  16
     We do not include African-Americans in the primary analysis since they constitute a large fraction of
practicing Muslims in the United-States and may therefore be inappropriate as a comparison group. See
for example Bagby (2012). The main results are robust if we include African-Americans in the comparison
group and Online Appendix 1.7 presents results contrasting Others to African-Americans directly.



                                                     8
the Stop-and-Frisk data, we consider this data representative of all stops even though police
officers are not required to report those which do not involve the use of force or lead to a frisk,
search, arrest or summons.17 Our final sample restricted to the treatment and comparison
groups of interest consists of 1,792,781 unique stops.
       Table 1 presents summary statistics on the average number of daily stops and outcomes
of interest. The average number of stops per day was 595 over the 3012 days studied in our
sample, of which about 9.4% involved members of the racial group "Other". Throughout our
analysis, we re-scale the binary outcome variables to 100 or 0, therefore allowing coefficient
estimates to be interpreted as direct percentage point effects. About half of the stops in the
sample (48.42%) involved frisking for all racial groups combined, while the mean for suspects
of the racial group "Other" was slightly lower at approximately 45.1%. The likelihood of an
arrest is on average 5.82% overall and 4.2% for Others. Lastly, unconditionally there is little
difference in the likelihood of force being used by the NYPD between the two groups, the
daily mean being around 23% for both.


2.3       Effect on Racial Profiling by Police

In Appendix 1, we provide a stylized model outlining how exogenous changes in terror alert
levels could influence a variety of policing behaviors. It differs from the original hit rates
model from Knowles et al. (2001) by allowing the behavior of terrorists to differ from that
of other criminals, mainly by considering the case where they may not be deterred by the
threat of apprehension. The model generates clear testable predictions on how police officers
respond to alert level increases by increasing the relative number of stops and the probability
  17
     In the sample, 35% of all stops were not stops which officers had to report by law, hinting at some
possible incentive scheme in which police officers want to convey that they are making efforts. The sample
cannot be restricted to only stops which have to be reported due to conditioning on ex-post information. The
external validity of the results rely on the sample being representative of all stops in the city, an assumption
which is untestable with our data but seems plausible given the high percentage of stops which did not have
to be reported. In addition, we may worry that police officers specifically under-report racially sensitive
stops to avoid outside criticism or over-report them to signal efforts in preventing terrorism, making the net
effect on reporting ambiguous.


                                                       9
of frisking Arabs relative to suspects of other ethnicities. It provides a useful lens to interpret
the results but does not allow us to differentiate between statistical and taste or bias-based
discrimination.
       Our model, along with the data structure and plausibly exogenous variation from the
HSAS, suggests that a statistical comparison of time trends before and after the intervention
will provide an unbiased estimate of the causal effect of the change in the HSAS level. Since
the data consists of a time series, we collapse the data at the daily level and adopt an
interrupted time series design which additionally accounts for secular trends. The simple
logic of the time series experiment is analogous to a regression discontinuity design (RD), in
that if the graph of the dependent variable shows an abrupt shift in level or trend precisely
at the point of the event, then the event is a cause of the effect on the dependent variable.18
       Given the institutional details of the HSAS, we consider the following estimating equation
to analyze the impact of the NYC-specific alert change on policing outcome Yit :




                Yipt = 0 + 1 AIt + 2 OT HERi + 3 (AIt  OT HERi ) + 4 ADt
                                                                                    L
                +5 (ADt  OT HERi ) + 6 Tt + 7 (Tt  OT HERi ) + 8                         Yi,t-l             (1)
                                                                                   l=1
                +9 T IM Et + 10 P RECIN CTp + 11 (P RECIN CTp  Y EARt ) + ipt


where AIt is an indicator variable corresponding to the period after the alert increase at
time t. ADt is an indicator variable corresponding to the period after the decrease in the
alert and the interaction terms AIt *OTHERi , ADt *OTHERi capture additional changes in
response by police officers on those categorized as Others. Throughout, we control for a
comprehensive set of calendar time and precinct fixed effects as well as their interaction. In
our most general specifications, we also capture state dependence by conditioning on a set
  18
     The major distinction is that time series data is discretized and generally not independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.), whereas RDs conceptually require that the assignment variable be continuous with no
selective heaping on either side of the discontinuity.


                                                      10
                                       L
of lagged dependent variables          l=1   Yi,t-l which accounts for potential auto-correlation. The
number of lags to include was selected using the most parsimonious specification suggested by
either the Akaike information criterion (AIC) or the Bayesian information criterion (BIC).
The primary coefficients of interest are given by 3 and 5 which capture the additional
jumps in the probability of an outcome for Others when compared to the comparison group
from respectively increasing or decreasing the threat level. Equation (1) also allows us to test
whether the behavioral responses of police officers offset as alert levels change in opposite
directions.19



3      Results
We first provide graphical evidence of how alert levels influence dimensions of policing beha-
vior. We regressed each outcome variable on a linear trend, a set of month, year, precinct,
day of week and year by precinct fixed effects. We then computed the residuals at the
monthly level for those categorized as Others and the comparison group which are plotted
over time in Figure 1. Intuitively, it illustrates the portion of the variation in each outcome
variable that could not have been predicted using predetermined characteristics. We would
expect the relationship between our residualized outcomes and the calendar date to be flat,
except for the potential impacts of alert level increases. Looking across the panels in Figure
1, we first observe that the NYC alert seems to have had little impact on policing for out-
comes related to the number of stops and the arrest rate. In contrast, the remaining panels
suggest that it was associated with disproportionate increases in the rate of frisk and force
for Others compared to the comparison group. Last, the panels in this figure also provide
graphical evidence suggestive of the validity of the common trends assumption necessary
for the validity of our design. All four residualized policing outcomes follow similar trends
  19
     While the increases received greater media attention and results concerning alert decreases may yield
less clear results if there are lags between the end of a threat and the lowering of the HSAS level, decreases
are important to consider if alerts impacted day-to-day NYPD activities and led to additional tasks and
measures.


                                                      11
throughout the sample for the treatment and comparison groups outside of the higher alert
periods.
   Table 2 presents estimates of equation (1) where the outcomes are the daily number of
stops per precinct in the top panel and the probability of being frisked in the bottom panel.
The columns differ on the basis of whether time and precinct fixed effects as well as lag-
ged outcomes are included and whether heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent
(HAC) standard errors calculated using the test proposed in Cumby and Huizinga (1992) are
reported. Lagged values of the dependent variable are included to account for path depen-
dency which captures the idea that police behavior may be persistent over time depending
on local conditions and not react immediately to a changing environment. Adding these
lagged values often reduces the magnitude of other estimated coefficients, but helps ensure
that the remaining effect of alert changes is a contemporaneous response to the information
shock. Adjusted standard errors account for potential serial correlation in the error term
which may arise given the time series nature of our data.
   In the top panel of Table 2, we consider the daily number of stops per precinct as a proxy
for policing activity since we do not have rich data on deployment like that in Draca et al.
(2011). Across all four columns we observe that the NYC-specific alert increase leads to a
decrease in the number of stops, which is consistent with the police shifting resources to other
terrorism-prevention tasks. Further, we find that when only considering contemporaneous
variables, the interaction term between "Other" and the alert increase suggests a relative
increase of around 4% in the number of stops for Others. The magnitude of the interaction
term shrinks to a statistically insignificant 1% increase once lagged outcome values are
included to capture state dependence in the number of stops.
   Regarding frisking in the bottom panel of Table 2, following the NYC-specific alert, all
columns provide evidence of a statistically significant general increase as well as an additional
statistically significant increase in the probability of being frisked for those classified as the




                                               12
racial group "Other" relative to the comparison group.20 Based on estimates in columns
3 and 4, all groups experienced on average a 2.76 percentage point increase (6% increase
from the mean) in the probability of being frisked, and members of the group "Other"
experienced an additional 2.66 percentage point or additional 6% increase. Interestingly,
we also observe a statistically significant differential decrease in being frisked for those in
the group "Other" which closes most of the estimated differential in frisking once the NYC-
specific threat subsides and the alert level is decreased to yellow. We cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the opposite alert changes offset eachother, as indicated by the p-value listed
in the third panel of Table 2.
       Table 3 presents estimates of equation (1) where the likelihood of an arrest and use of
force are the dependent variables. In the top panel, we do not observe any statistically
significant effects on arrests in general and no differential effect for Others. It is worth
pointing out that the hit rates test introduced by Knowles et al. (2001) is nested within our
specification and in this case it would provide evidence of discrimination against members of
the group "Other" since there is a statistically significant lower baseline arrest rate (nearly
30% lower) for that group compared to the comparison group.
       Turning to the bottom panel of Table 3, we find that following the NYC-specific increase,
there is little change in overall use of force but a statistically significant differential increase
in the likelihood that force is used on the racial group "Other" relative to the comparison
group. The magnitude for the NYC-specific alert level corresponds to an additional increase
of 9% for Others. Again, most of this differential dissipates after the alert level is decreased
and we cannot reject that both changes offset.
       As a whole, both the graphical and regression evidence discussed above suggest that
  20
     General disparities in the probability of being frisked should not be interpreted as evidence of racial
profiling. The decision to frisk once having stopped a suspect relies on private information obtained by the
officer before and during the stop. Persico and Todd (2008) stress that the hit rates test cannot be performed
in this case and that this alone does not constitute evidence of profiling. This problem does not apply when
considering whether the alert level changes may create profiling because the change in the probability of
being frisked is caused by an exogenous information shock.



                                                     13
the NYC alert did not change the productivity of stops. We do not observe any substantial
change in arrest rates even when officers disproportionately frisk Others and use force against
them. The apparent decrease in the number of stops following the alert increase could
mean that officers were more selective about which stops to make given their additional
responsibilities, but this would in turn be expected to lead to an increase in the arrest rate,
which there is no evidence of. Rather, the evidence is consistent with officers being no more
selective but more "thorough" or forceful in their stops, especially for Others.
   If we additionally make the assumption that the impact of the NYC-specific alert was
focused on Arabs, then the estimated differential impacts on this subgroup using the 2010
Census estimate for the Arab population of NYC would be of nearly 15% for frisks and
23% for force used. Thus, the analysis presents robust evidence that the NYC-specific alert
increase influenced policing behavior differentially by racial group.
   To shed additional light on the disparate increase in the probability of being frisked for
Others after the NYC-specific alert, we present regression estimates by precinct and time
of day to assess whether there was systematic geographic or temporal heterogeneity in our
results.21 On the former, we carried out an analysis at the precinct level shown in Figure 3
which illustrates in darker shade the precincts that observed larger-than-average disparate
increases in the likelihood that Others were frisked. Figure 3 also provides the location of
mosques in the city as a proxy for the concentration of Arab-Muslims.22 The interpretation
of this figure is a priori theoretically unclear. On one hand, we may expect larger impacts
in precincts where the Arab population is lower since police officers may be more likely to
have unconscious biases against people which they interact less with. On the other hand, we
may expect that the impact would be larger where more Muslims live and congregate and in
precincts with more high-value targets. The former appears to be what is shown in Figure 3
since the impact on frisk appears to be primarily driven by areas with higher concentration
  21
     Geographical coordinates of stops are not available in the data until 2006, preventing more precise
heterogeneity analyses around the NYC alert increase.
  22
     The list of mosques was obtained from http://hirr.hartsem.edu/mosque/database.html.


                                                  14
of mosques and in high priority areas like lower or mid Manhattan. To shed further light
on how the presence of mosques influences frisking by precinct, we expanded equation 1 to
allow for differential responses by the number of mosques in the precinct. The results are
shown in online Appendix 1.1 and confirm that differential increases in frisking for Others
were larger in precincts with more mosques.
       Turning to temporal heterogeneity, online Appendix 1.2 provides evidence that the in-
creases in frisking occurred primarily during rush hour (5-10AM, 5-7PM) and late in the
evening (11PM-4AM). The rush hour periods represent times where the risk of terrorism
threat is greater and potentially deadlier, while activity late at night is more likely to appear
suspicious to law enforcement.


3.1        Robustness of the Main Findings

To complement and explore the robustness of both the graphical evidence in Figure 1 and
results in Tables 2 and 3, we considered a more general method to explore whether alert levels
influenced policing. Specifically, we estimated a restricted version of equation (1) that does
not include indicators for alert changes or their interactions with other covariates. In their
place, we ran the model repeatedly with a single indicator for each two-week or one month
interval in the sample along with an interaction of this indicator with the racial category
"Other". This exercise has many uses; it allows us to observer the timing of any jump and
see whether it corresponds to an actual alert level change, further examines pre-alert trends,
investigates the length of policing responses, and conducts a placebo test over the entire
sample.
       Figure 2 provides the results from this exercise at the two-week level where each data
point presents the estimate for that specific two week window.23 Notice that there is a sus-
tained spike in the frisk differential around the NYC-specific threat. Statistically significant
  23
       Performing the analysis at the monthly level leads to similar conclusions, as shown in online Appendix
1.3.



                                                      15
estimates are denoted by numbers above each panel. In total, only four (2) two-week periods
are estimated to have had a statistically significant impact on the frisk (force) differential
for the entire sample period, including one during the NYC-specific threat.24 For both out-
comes, the increase associated with the alert increase of interest also appears much more
sustained.
       We also considered a RD design relaxing the continuity requirements of the running
variable (time) and extrapolating from the discretization around the cutoff given by the
dates of alert increases. From a conceptual standpoint, both an interrupted time series
analysis and RD are similar in the region of interest as they approximate the conditional
expectation on both sides of the cutoff. A graphical analysis as well as the corresponding
estimates for the NYC-specific alert are presented in online Appendix 1.4.25 We do not focus
on the RD approach given the time series nature of our data, but it serves as a robustness
exercise which does not rely on a comparison group for validity. The RD design yields
similar conclusions to our main specification for arrests and frisks. For the likelihood of
frisk, the estimates for the group "Other" are positive, large in magnitude (around 13%)
and statistically significant while those for the comparison group are small and statistically
insignificant. For arrests, there was little change for either group as the estimates are small
and statistically insignificant. For the outcomes of force used and the number of stops, the
impacts are also estimated to be small and statistically non-significant for both groups. This
contrasts with our main specification which finds a decrease in overall stops as well as an
increase of force used on "Others".
       We conducted three additional robustness checks. First, we estimated equation (1) at
the hourly level with hour of day fixed effects rather than at the day level as shown in online
  24
     There is suggestive evidence that some of the placebo periods associated with a higher frisk differential
were linked to other terrorist plots such as the arrest in November 2003 of a terrorist suspected to have links
with another terrorist who plotted an attack on the Brooklyn Bridge and the arrest in December 2005 of a
man suspected of plotting an attack on oil and natural gas targets in NYC and New Jersey.
  25
     We follow the bias-corrected estimation procedure with robust inference in Calonico, Cattaneo and
Titiunik (2014) with MSE-optimal bandwidth selection when undertaking this analysis.



                                                      16
Appendix 1.5. We prefer the daily specification given the uncertainty about which time of
day the different alerts were announced, but the main results are similar. Second, in online
Appendix 1.6, we present results from equation (1) where we condition the outcomes on
the number of stops. That is, we calculate the daily number of frisks, arrests and events
involving force per stop to partial out the effects of the change in stops from the effects
of other police behavior. Our main findings are robust to this empirical strategy. Third,
we conducted the analysis using only African-Americans as the comparison group in the
online Appendix 1.7 and the main results are quantitatively similar except for the estimated
differential change in the probability of force used for Others, which is smaller and becomes
statistically insignificant.


3.2     Interpretation of the Main Results

Following the 9/11 attacks and the 2003 invasion of Iraq, there was much discussion of
threats from terrorist organizations such as Al Qaeda and the HSAS was often referred to
as the "terror alert level". Intuitively, the HSAS can be seen as introducing a signal into
the policing environment that could influence both police officers and citizens since it affects
the tasks and focus of the police force which may in turn lead to strategic responses from
criminals. Additional efforts by police officers in specific areas could deter criminals or have
them change the location of their crime.26 This is less likely to arise in the case of terrorism
since potential terrorists may be unlikely to be deterred by the threat of apprehension or
change their target after months of planning. As such, unlike for common crimes, allocating
more police officers alone is unlikely to prevent terrorism unless it is accompanied by active
measures such as frisking. New information regarding the source of threats may in turn
lead police officers to revise their beliefs about the likelihood that individuals from different
backgrounds will yield a successful stop for a given type of crime. If police officers associated
  26
    We may expect this to be particularly true for traditional criminals from racial groups perceived as likely
to be targeted by the NYPD as part of counter-terrorism measures. This would go in the opposite direction
of what we find and lead to relative decreases in stops, frisks and uses of force for those groups.


                                                      17
Al Qaeda threats with Arabs or Muslims, then they may naturally have targeted them more
after the alert increase, either consciously or subconsciously.
   This stresses that one should be cautious when interpreting our main results since chan-
ges in policing by ethnic group or race may not represent racial prejudice. These policing
responses indicate increased targeting or profiling of a certain group, but result from infor-
mation regarding an increased likelihood of a threat with an associated increase in the stakes
regarding the success of stops.
   A model encompassing these considerations and motivating our empirical analysis is
presented in Appendix 1. The model modifies the hit rates test by focusing on the impact of
an exogenous information shock on policing behavior, rather than looking at static outcome
differentials. It incorporates the additional duties of law enforcement officials related to
terrorism and allows officers to update their beliefs about the likelihood that Arabs may
engage in terrorist acts during periods of high alert levels. The model generates the following
key predictions: periods of high alerts should be associated with disproportionate increases
in frisking, the relative quantity of stops (holding resources allocated to the Stop-and-Frisk
program constant) and potentially the use of force for Arabs or Muslims if officers believe
them to be relatively more likely to engage in terrorist acts. This is consistent with our
empirical findings apart from that regarding the number of stops, which could be explained
by manpower re-allocations and task changes in response to the threat.
   While our model and related tests cannot distinguish between statistical and taste or
bias-based discrimination, using intuition similar to Abaluck et al. (2016) provides additional
insight. Our results indicate that following the alert level increase, police officers frisked and
used force against relatively more members of the group "Other" without an increase in the
arrest rate. This suggests that the return to additional frisks was low, consistent with a non-
rational behavioral reaction. Nevertheless, this is again complicated by the fact that police
officer stops may not have a deterrent effect on potential terrorists as in the standard hit
rates test. Successful stops or arrests regarding terrorism are also rare events with very high


                                               18
payoffs to law enforcement such that even veteran officers may not have much experience in
this context. They may in turn less accurately assess potential risks, resorting to biases and
broader profiling of specific groups as a result. Thus, an explanation for our findings is that
limited cognitive capacity could have led to profiling given the strong associations between
the Middle-East, 9/11 and other terrorist threats during that period as well as evidence
from Lichtbau and Drew (2004) suggesting that changes in the HSAS may place undue
stress upon police officers, particularly when the threat is more salient.27 Since stress has
also been shown to influence decision making,28 the judgment of officers may have changed
following terrorist threats and less attention was paid to being unbiased and fair.
       Our results thus appear particularly consistent with a broad attempt at statistical discri-
mination influenced by group stereotypes, although we cannot reject that terrorist threats
led to increased taste for discrimination against Arabs or Muslims. Similarly, while the
response appears unwarranted due to the lack of successful stops, we cannot rule out that
additional frisking was efficient given that terrorists may not otherwise be deterred. The in-
terpretation of our results thus hinges on a careful consideration of the daily duties of police
officers regarding both terrorism and common crimes and of differences in behavior between
the two types of criminals. In times of a terrorist threat, the responsibilities of police officers
partly shift away from minimizing crime towards prevention and protection.



4        Conclusion
It is well established that the duties of police officers in cities like New York changed greatly
after September 11, 2001, due to increased terrorism concerns. On August 1, 2004, a specific
terrorist threat lead the US Department of Homeland Security to warn the country that Al
Qaeda had apparently studied financial institutions in three cities, including New York, and
  27
      Dowling et al. (2006) present evidence that the events of 9/11 led to the manifestation of psychological
issues in NYPD officers.
   28
      See Starcke and Brand (2012) or Morgado et al. (2015) for recent interdisciplinary reviews of this
literature.


                                                     19
were possibly planning an imminent attack. This warning led to an increase in the terror
alert level from yellow to orange associated with additional security measures taken by the
NYPD. The news of this terrorist threat also plausibly provided salient information to law
enforcement about changes in the risk of an attack, potentially affecting the day to day
decisions of individual officers.
   In this paper, we examine if this change in the HSAS level led to differential changes
in policing as part of the Stop-and-Frisk program for suspects classified as "Other" racial
group by the NYPD, including Arabs. Our empirical results provide robust evidence that
the alert level increase led to a disproportionate increase in the likelihood of being frisked or
having force used against them for this group. Yet, there was no corresponding increase in
arrests or the likelihood of being stopped. These outcome differentials in turn reverted back
to normal after the alert was lowered to yellow.
   Racial profiling and police accountability have been at the center of important ongoing
public debates. Policing is an area where biases may be particularly likely to emerge, either
consciously or unconsciously, in response to changing information about potential threats
from organizations commonly associated with certain ethnic groups. Bias may be unconsci-
ous and discrimination latent, but the consequences in New York City for Arab citizens are
very real as illustrated by disproportionate increases in frisking and force used in periods
when the alert level was heightened. One interpretation of our findings is that latent discrimi-
nation emerged when alert levels were more salient to police officers. This is consistent with
racial profiling which did not lead to additional productive stops as proxied by arrest rates.
Nevertheless, we cannot isolate the source of discrimination or rule out that this policing
response to the higher alert level was efficient. This is due to both deterrence considerations
and the important distinction between traditional criminal activity and preventing terrorist
attacks, as shown in the theoretical model.
   These considerations also provide a potential rationale for the low test-retest reliability
and predictive validity of psychological tests designed to measure implicit bias if both evol-


                                               20
ving social context and current events affect views of groups such as Arabs.29 Negative
views that individual officers hold about a group are more likely to emerge and affect their
decision-making following salient events associated with the group.30 In summary, our ana-
lysis suggests that to inform debates on racial profiling and police accountability, future work
is needed to develop more general tests of discrimination in settings which consider the full
set of duties faced by police officers that go well-beyond traditional crime minimization.




  29
     Psychologists have designed tests to detect an individual's ability to engage in discriminatory beha-
vior by either considering differences in subject response times (Correll at al., 2007) to images or tracking
physiological response such as one's heart rate.
  30
     In addition, our results also point to the importance of changing contexts to detect potentially latent
discrimination, an issue that deserves further study not only for policing behavior but also in considerations
of algorithmic fairness since decisions are increasingly made by automated statistical or machine learning
predictive models.


                                                     21
References
[1] Abaluck, J., Agha, L., Kabrhel, C., Raja, A. and Venkatesh, A., 2016. The determi-
   nants of productivity in medical testing: Intensity and allocation of care. The American
   Economic Review, 106(12), pp.3730-64.

[2] Aguirre, B.E., 2004. Homeland Security Warnings: Lessons Learned and Unlearned.
   International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 22(2), pp.103-115.

[3] Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M.D. and Titiunik, R., 2014. Robust nonparametric confidence
   intervals for regression discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6), pp.2295-2326.

[4] Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C.M., Wittenbrink, B., Sadler, M.S. and Keesee, T., 2007.
   Across the thin blue line: police officers and racial bias in the decision to shoot. Journal
   of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), pp.1006-1023.

[5] Coviello, D. and Persico, N., 2015. An economic analysis of black-white disparities in the
   New York Police Department's Stop-and-Frisk program. The Journal of Legal Studies,
   44(2), pp.315-360.

[6] Cumby, R.E. and Huizinga, J., 1992. Testing the autocorrelation structure of distur-
   bances in ordinary least squares and instrumental variables regressions. Econometrica,
   60(1), pp.185-95.

[7] Dowling, F.G., Moynihan, G., Genet, B. and Lewis, J., 2006. A peer-based assistance
   program for officers with the New York City Police Department: Report of the effects
   of Sept. 11, 2001. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(1), pp.151-153.

[8] Draca, M., Machin, S. and Witt, R., 2011. Panic on the streets of London: Police, crime,
   and the July 2005 terror attacks. The American Economic Review, 101(5), pp.2157-2181.




                                             22
 [9] Eggen,     D.,      Mintz,    J.   and        Priest,   D.,    2004.   Financial    Sec-
    tor   Is   Put    on    High    Alert.    The      Washington   Post.   Retrieved    from
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2004/08/08/financial-sector-is-
    put-on-high-alert/c216bcd4-675c-480c-bd73-4cb2951ebddc/?utm term=.7f6f1c4b77c6
    [Date Published 08/08/2004, Date Accessed 02/10/2019]

[10] Fang, H. and Moro, A., 2011. Theories of statistical discrimination and affirmative
    action: A survey, Handbook of Social Economics, vol. 1A, ed. Jess Benhabib, Matthew
    O. Jackson, and Alberto Bisin, pp.33-200. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

[11] Fischhoff, Baruch. (2002). Assessing and Communicating the Risks of Terrorism, In
    Albert H. Teich, Stephen D. Nelson, and Stephen J. Lita (eds.), Science and Technology
    in a Vulnerable World. Washington, DC: AAAS, pp. 5164.

[12] Fridell, L.A., 2008. Racially biased policing: The law enforcement response to the impli-
    cit black-crime association. In Lynch, M., Patterson, E.B., & Childs, K. (Eds). Racial
    Divide: Race, Ethnicity and Criminal Justice. Monsey, NY: Criminal Justice Press,
    39-59.

[13] Fridell, L.A., 2016. Racial aspects of police shootings. Criminology & Public Policy,
    2(15), pp.481-489.

[14] Goel, S., Rao, J.M. and Shroff, R., 2016. Precinct or prejudice? Understanding racial
    disparities in New York City's stop-and-frisk policy. The Annals of Applied Statistics,
    10(1), pp.365-394.

[15] Harcourt, B., 2007. Muslim profiles post 9-11: Is racial profiling and effective counter-
    terrorist measure and does it violate the right to be free from discrimination?. Security
    and Human Rights. Edited by Benjamin, J. Goold and Liora Lazarus. Oxford: Hart
    Publishing, pp. 7398.


                                              23
[16] Jehl, D. and Johnston, D., 2004. Threats and Responses:               The Overview; Re-
    ports That Led to Terror Alert Were Years Old, Officials Say. The New York
    Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/03/us/threats-responses-
    overview-reports-that-led-terror-alert-were-years-old.html [Date Published 08/03/2004,
    Date Accessed 02/10/2019]

[17] Jobard, F., L´
                  evy, R., Lamberth, J., N´
                                          evanen, S. and Wiles-Portier, E., 2012. Measuring
    appearance-based discrimination: an analysis of identity checks in Paris. Population,
    67(3), pp.349-375.

[18] Klick, J. and Tabarrok, A., 2005. Using terror alert levels to estimate the effect of police
    on crime. The Journal of Law and Economics, 48(1), pp.267-279.

[19] Knowles, J., Persico, N. and Todd, P., 2001. Racial bias in motor vehicle searches:
    Theory and evidence. Journal of Political Economy, 109(1), pp.203-229.

[20] Legewie, J., 2013. Terrorist events and attitudes toward immigrants: A natural experi-
    ment 1. American Journal of Sociology, 118(5), pp.1199-1245.

[21] Legewie, J., 2016. Racial profiling and use of force in police stops: How local events trig-
    ger periods of increased discrimination. American Journal of Sociology, 122(2), pp.379-
    424.

[22] Lehrer, S.F., and Lepage, L., 2019. Does selective crime reporting influence our ability
    to detect racial discrimination in the NYPD's stop-and-frisk program? in Advances in
    Econometrics (Volume 39) - The Econometrics of Complex Survey Data: Theory and
    Applications, edited by Kim P. Huynh, David T. Jacho-Chavez and Gautam Tripathi,
    Emerald Press, 259-286.

[23] Lichtblau, E. and Drew, C., 2004. Ridge's record: color alerts and mixed security re-
    views. The New York Times. Retrieved from

                                               24
    https://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/01/politics/ridges-record-color-alerts-and-mixed-
    security-reviews.html [Date Published 12/01/2004, Date Accessed 10/28/2019]

[24] Mazerolle, L., Bennett, S., Davis, J., Sargeant, E. and Manning, M., 2013. Legitimacy
    in policing: A systematic review. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 9(1), pp. i-147.

[25] Morgado, P., Sousa, N. and Cerqueira, J.J., 2015. The impact of stress in decision
    making in the context of uncertainty. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 93(6), pp.839-
    847.

[26] Morris, V., 2003. Edgy City Moves to Orange+. New York Post. Retrie-
    ved from https://nypost.com/2003/12/23/edgy-city-moves-to-orange/ [Date Published
    12/03/2003, Date Accessed 02/10/2019]

[27] Omer, S.B., Barnett, D.J., Castellano, C., Wierzba, R.K., Hiremath, G.S., Balicer, R.D.
    and Everly Jr, G.S., 2007. Impact of Homeland Security Alert level on calls to a law
    enforcement peer support hotline. International Journal of Emergency Mental Health,
    9(4), pp.253-257.

[28] Persico, N. and Todd, P.E., 2008. The hit rates test for racial bias in motor-vehicle
    searches. Justice Quarterly, 25(1), pp.37-53.

[29] Schuck, A.M., Rosenbaum, D.P. and Hawkins, D.F., 2008. The influence of
    race/ethnicity, social class, and neighborhood context on residents' attitudes toward
    the police. Police Quarterly, 11(4), pp.496-519.

[30] Shapiro, J.N. and Cohen, D.K., 2007. Color bind: Lessons from the failed homeland
    security advisory system. International Security, 32(2), pp.121-154.

[31] Shi, L., 2009. The limit of oversight in policing: Evidence from the 2001 Cincinnati riot.
    Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2), pp.99-113.


                                              25
[32] Starcke, K. and Brand, M., 2012. Decision making under stress: a selective review.
    Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(4), pp.1228-1248.

[33] Sun, I.Y. and Wu, Y., 2015. Arab Americans' confidence in police. Crime & Delinquency,
    61(4), pp.483-508.

[34] Tankebe, J., 2013. Viewing things differently: The dimensions of public perceptions of
    police legitimacy. Criminology, 51(1), pp.103-135.

[35] Taylor, A., 2005. The Government's Response to Terrorism. Independent Institute. Re-
    trieved at http://www.independent.org/publications/policy reports/detail.asp?id=9260
    [Date Published 12/27/2005, Date Accessed 02/10/2019]




                                            26
Figure 1: Residualized Policing Outcomes in Periods of Orange Alert Level




Series represent the monthly mean residual outcomes for Others and the comparison group. The series represent
the residuals from a regression of the raw data on a linear trend and month, year, precinct, precinct X year and day
of week fixed effects.




                                                        27
Figure 2: Bi-weekly Estimates of the Impact of Changes in the HSAS Alert Level
on Policing Outcomes




     Numbers above panels denote statistical significance at the 5% level.

                                      28
Figure 3: Impact of the NYC Alert Change on the Probability of Frisk by
                               Precinct




                                  29
Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                      Full Sample                            Others
             Variable                Mean     St. Dev.                   Mean       St. Dev.
       Outcomes
       Frisk                         48.43          (49.98)              45.13            (49.76)
       Arrest                         5.82          (23.41)               4.20            (20.06)
       Force                         23.41          (42.34)              23.45            (42.37)
       Daily # of Stops             595.21         (252.31)              54.55            (29.61)
       Demographics
       Male                          92.43         (26.45)               90.90            (28.76)
       Age                           28.08         (11.90)               28.48            (12.92)
       Youth                         54.06         (49.84)               53.98            (49.84)
       Time
       Night                         59.34         (49.12)               60.79            (48.82)
       Friday-Sunday                 43.22         (49.54)               45.60            (49.81)
       Winter                        27.32         (44.56)               27.17            (44.48)
       Spring                        28.34         (45.06)               28.15            (44.97)
       Summer                        21.52         (41.09)               22.04            (41.45)
       Fall                          22.83         (41.97)               22.65            (41.86)
       Race
       White                         20.99         (40.72)
       Hispanic                      63.46         (48.16)
       Asian                          6.19         (24.10)
       Other                          9.37         (29.14)
       Observations                1,792,781                            167,920
       Standard deviations in parentheses. Columns 1 and 2 refer to the sample of all observations
       while columns 3 and 4 refer to the subsample composed of observations pertaining to the racial
       group "Other". Youth refers to the fraction of suspects aged below 25. Night refers to the
       fraction of stops performed between 7PM and 6AM.




                                                    30
Table 2: Impact of the NYC Alert Change on the Number of Stops and on the
Probability of Frisk

          Number of Stops
          Other                             -0.567***          -0.646***        -0.0297          -0.0297
                                              (0.032)            (0.031)         (0.024)          (0.025)
          Alert Increase                    -0.411***          -0.655***       -0.104***        -0.104***
                                              (0.039)            (0.048)         (0.038)          (0.039)
          Alert IncXOther                   0.191***           0.163***          0.0397           0.0397
                                              (0.056)            (0.059)         (0.048)          (0.049)
          Alert Decrease                    1.061***           0.473***         0.109**          0.109**
                                              (0.040)            (0.055)         (0.047)          (0.045)
          Alert DecXOther                   -0.674***          -0.524***        -0.0605          -0.0605
                                              (0.054)            (0.061)         (0.048)          (0.048)
          N. Observations                    415,341            415,341         415,341          415,341
          P-value H0: I=D                      0.000              0.000           0.257            0.259
          P-value H0: I=D*-1                   0.000              0.000           0.580            0.585
          Outcome Mean                         4.316              4.316           4.316            4.316
          Frisk
          Other                             2.949***            0.963**         1.862***         1.862***
                                              (0.425)           (0.416)          (0.417)          (0.465)
          Alert Increase                     -0.915*           2.962***         2.764***         2.764***
                                              (0.479)           (0.508)          (0.506)          (0.544)
          Alert IncXOther                   3.702***           3.207***         2.659***          2.659**
                                              (1.026)           (0.984)          (0.983)          (1.073)
          Alert Decrease                    -3.951***           -1.255*          -1.208*           -1.208
                                              (0.463)           (0.698)          (0.696)          (0.740)
          Alert DecXOther                   -3.211***          -1.993**         -2.192**         -2.192**
                                              (1.005)           (0.971)          (0.969)          (1.059)
          N. Observations                    415,341           415,341          415,341          415,341
          P-value H0: I=D                      0.000             0.005            0.009            0.017
          P-value H0: I=D*-1                   0.418             0.041            0.431            0.483
          Outcome Mean                        44.925            44.925           44.925           44.925
          Time and Precinct FE                   N                 Y                Y                 Y
          Dep. Variable Lags                     N                 N                Y                 Y
          HAC SE                                 N                 N                N                 Y
Robust or HAC standard errors in parentheses. * 0.1, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. The binary outcome variable Frisk is rescaled
to 100 or 0. Additional covariates include a linear trend, an interaction between the trend and the treatment group,
fixed effects for month, year, day of week, precinct and year X precinct. The p-values refer to tests of the differential
impact of the alert increase for Others being equal and equal but of opposite sign to that of the decrease.




                                                          31
Table 3: Impact of the NYC Alert Change on the Number of Stops and on the
Probability of Arrest and Force

           Arrest
           Other                          -2.696***        -1.997***        -1.913***       -1.913***
                                            (0.206)          (0.209)          (0.209)         (0.210)
           Alert Increase                 -1.433***           0.252            0.252           0.252
                                            (0.248)          (0.270)          (0.270)         (0.271)
           Alert IncXOther                   0.472            0.456            0.422           0.422
                                            (0.460)          (0.459)          (0.459)         (0.457)
           Alert Decrease                 -1.559***           0.189            0.179           0.179
                                            (0.235)          (0.363)          (0.363)         (0.364)
           Alert DecXOther                   0.481            0.324            0.319           0.319
                                            (0.442)          (0.446)          (0.446)         (0.443)
           N. Observations                 415,341          415,341          415,341         415,341
           P-value H0: I=D                   0.991            0.878            0.904          0.9037
           P-value H0: I=D*-1                0.001            0.005            0.008          0.0085
           Outcome Mean                      6.680            6.680            6.680           6.680
           Force
           Other                           -0.776**         -0.893**           0.113            0.113
                                            (0.390)          (0.390)         (0.390)          (0.445)
           Alert Increase                 -2.912***           -0.018           0.108            0.108
                                            (0.427)          (0.457)         (0.456)          (0.470)
           Alert IncXOther                2.503***          2.495***         2.088**          2.088**
                                            (0.919)          (0.901)         (0.899)          (0.961)
           Alert Decrease                 -3.746***           0.411            0.287            0.287
                                            (0.406)          (0.633)         (0.631)          (0.654)
           Alert DecXOther                  -1.608*          -1.469*         -1.496*           -1.496
                                            (0.890)          (0.877)         (0.875)          (0.924)
           N. Observations                 415,341          415,341          415,341          415,341
           P-value H0: I=D                   0.017            0.020            0.034            0.046
           P-value H0: I=D*-1                0.093            0.053            0.264            0.304
           Outcome Mean                     23.013           23.013           23.013           23.013
           Time and Precinct FE                N                 Y               Y                Y
           Dep. Variable Lags                  N                 N               Y                Y
           HAC SE                              N                 N               N                Y
Robust or HAC standard errors in parentheses. * 0.1, ** 0.05, *** 0.01. The binary outcome variables Arrest and
Force are rescaled to 100 or 0. Additional covariates include a linear trend, an interaction between the trend and the
treatment group, fixed effects for month, year, day of week, precinct and year X precinct. The p-values refer to tests
of the differential impact of the alert increase for Others being equal and equal but of opposite sign to that of the
decrease.




                                                         32
Appendix 1: Economic Model
The Knowles et al. (2001) hit rates test remains the major avenue through which researchers
examine police racial bias. This test was developed in the context of motor vehicle searches
and is based on a simple model where police officers decide which vehicles to subject to
searches and motorists decide whether to break the law by carrying drugs or illegal weapons.
Motorists are assumed to have ex-ante taken into account the probability of being searched
and the penalty if they are caught. Racial bias is introduced as a preference parameter
that reduces the perceived cost of searching vehicles of minority groups. This framework
stipulates that in the absence of racial bias, each officer would pursue a monitoring strategy
that maximizes the number of successful search outcomes given a cost of search, where a
successful search is defined as one that uncovers some contraband.
   Our model has several parallels, but is adapted to consider that individual officers must
allocate their efforts to conducting stops s relating to either potential terrorist threats t or
other criminal activity o. To ease exposition, pedestrians are considered to be in one of two
racial groups: Arabs (A) and an aggregated group comprising of all other races (G ). The key
element of the model for our empirical analyses relates to the possibility of there being two
terrorism threat levels l: baseline b and high h. By exploiting changes in terror alert levels
as exogenous information shocks, we are able to overcome standard issues of conditioning
on ex-post information when performing a hit rates test on frisking suspects of different
races. We next describe the behavior of each actor in the model, the characteristics of an
equilibrium and theoretical predictions from a change in the HSAS alert level on policing
outcomes, in turn.


Criminals
Individuals can be either type of criminal (t or o) and police officers correctly identify their
type. We use r  {A, G} to denote the race of the individual and c  {1, ..., C } to represent
other characteristics that are observed by the police (but potentially unobserved by the
econometrician) at zero cost and assumed to be independent of threat levels. The number of
individuals in group (r, c) is expressed by N r,c . An individual of type o receives a benefit of vo




                                                33
from committing a crime and faces a cost of ho if subsequently stopped by the police.1 Since
criminals may be aware of potential changes in policing activities in response to changes in
the likelihood of a terrorist attack, we allow the expected number of daily stops made to
target group (r, c) to depend on the terrorism alert level (l) and define this value as l .
       An individual who engages in criminal activity of type o has an expected payoff of

                                                                       l
                                    ur,c,o (vo , ho , l ) = vo - ho
                                                                      N r,c

and commits a crime if ur,c,o (vo , ho , l )  0. Defining Fr,c (vo , ho ) to represent the group-
specific joint conditional distribution of vo and ho , the crime o rate for group (r, c) denoted
    r,c
by Ko   (l ) is given as
                                              l           r,c
                                P (vo - ho          0) = Ko   (vo , ho , l )
                                             N r,c
                              r,c              r,c
                             Ko   (l )        Ko   (vo , ho , l ) dFr,c ( vo , ho ) .

       Similarly, an individual of type t faces benefits and costs respectively denoted by vt and
ht . We define Mr,c (vt , ht ) as the joint conditional distribution of vt and ht . We assume
criminals of type t have a simplified payoff function of the form

                                       ur,c,t (vt , ht ,  ) = vt - ht ,

since they are assumed to not attach any weight to the likelihood of being stopped or
arrested. In other words, this assumption implies that potential terrorists, unlike other
criminals, cannot be deterred by the threat of judicial sanctions.2 Thus, a terrorist activity
will be undertaken if and only if vt - ht  0, the probability of which is given by M (vt - ht ).
We do not require this assumption for our empirical tests to be valid, but it influences
the interpretation. Rather, we aim to show that the model can be extended to motivate
empirical tests even in the case where terrorists cannot be deterred. If terrorists behave as
common criminals do, then the standard hit rates test applies and we can interpret outcome
   1
     This modeling for crime type o has a one to one correspondence to the hit rates model of Knowles et al.
(2001), to ease comparisons.
   2
     This does not mean that would-be terrorists are non-responsive to any police measure, but we assume
that they will not abandon their plan of committing an attack due to the likelihood of being caught or the
threat of being sanctioned.



                                                      34
differentials accordingly.


Police Officers
Assume there is a mass P of police officers who, after having exogenously been assigned to
a given precinct, draw a type p from a uniform distribution on [0, 1] .3 Given each officer's
search capacity Sp , the total number of stops is given by

                                                            1
                                  S (r, c, s, l) = P            Sp (r, c, s, l)dp.
                                                        0


Since each officer allocates their efforts between both types of crimes, the following condition
must be satisfied
                               o
                              Sp              t
                                 (r, c, l) + Sp                               ¯p .
                                                (r, c, l) = Sp (r, c, s, l) = S

Under the NYPD Stop-and-Frisk program, each police officer first chooses whether or not to
                                                                                       r
stop a suspect and then decides whether to additionally frisk that suspect. We define yp,s,l
as the benefit an officer receives from a successful stop (arrest). Officers are assumed to face
a cost  to stop a suspect and an additional cost  to frisk the suspect. For stops related to
crimes o, we define

                                                                    r,c
                  Wo (r, c, l) = P ( Guilty of crime o| r, c, l) = Ko   (Sp (r, c, o, l))

and for stops related to crimes t4

                       Wt (r, c, l) = P ( Guilty of crime t| r, c, l) = Fr,c (M, l)
   3
     We abstract from precinct assignment considerations in our setting by assuming that it is exogenous of
terrorism considerations and unaffected by changes in the terrorism threat level.
   4
     Police officers' main tasks and formation primarily relate to non-terrorist crimes for which they likely
have better information. Terrorism crimes are such that it would be difficult to credibly estimate a rate of
crime by ethnic group, and may thus be more likely to be affected by stereotypes. It also seems that threats
of attacks may be more likely to affect perceptions of guilt of certain minorities than give police officers
additional utility from stopping those minorities. Having discrimination enter as in the usual hit rates test
would ignore the possibility that alert levels hold salient information about the threat of terrorism from
the Middle East, whether founded or not. This explicitly highlights the difficulty in distinguishing between
statistical and taste-based discrimination in this setting.




                                                       35
where Wt is the subjective probability that an officer assigns to an individual being guilty of
a terrorism crime and Fr : [0, 1] × {b, h}  [0, 1] is a distortion function which can vary by
racial group and depends on the true probability of guilt and on the alert level. In general,
                      r        r
we would expect that yp,t,l > yp,o,l and Wt < Wo since i) the benefits of stopping a terrorist
attack likely outweigh that from arresting a suspect for a common crime, and ii) the crime
rate for terror activities is lower than that of other crimes. To understand police officer
behavior in equilibrium, we use backward induction and solve a two-stage decision process
outlined below.5

Second stage equilibrium

Conditional on having made a stop, a police officer decides whether or not to frisk the
suspect. Presumably, the decision to frisk the suspect relies on a different information set
than that available when stopping the suspect, since the officer is likely to have gathered
additional information during the stop. Denote  as the unobserved (to the econometrician)
additional signal of guilt. The officer, conditional on Ws ,6 optimizes

                                                          r
                                   2 = M ax{0, H (Ws , , yp,s,l ) - }.

       where H is a function representing the benefits of frisking which is increasing in Ws , 
     r
and yp,s,l .
       The optimal choice is given by
                                      
                                      1 H (W , , y r ) -   0
                                             s    p,s,l
                                      0 otherwise

Intuitively, the officer chooses to frisk a suspect if the value of the additional information
which they gain during the stop exceeds the cost of undertaking the frisk.7
   5
     We suppress the more straightforward arguments of functions in the next subsections for ease of notation.
   6
     At the time of the decision, the officer has already formed his beliefs regarding the probability of a
suspect's guilt given (r, c), therefore Ws is not a random variable but rather the realization of one.
   7
     This value could be negative if the officer believes the suspect is less likely to be guilty after having
performed the stop, or have a value near 0 if either the officer did not gain valuable information or is already
highly confident of the suspect's guilt. In each of these cases, the suspect would not be frisked.



                                                      36
       Further discussion regarding  is warranted. It is well recognized in the traditional hit
rates model that  precludes the use of standard regression analysis since a disparity in the
rate of frisk cannot be interpreted as evidence of profiling or discrimination given that the
decision to frisk relies on unobserved private information acquired by the officer during the
stop. By imposing an additional assumption on  , we can overcome this limitation since
our focus is not on the disparity in the rate of frisk but rather the additional difference in
the disparity in the rate of frisk caused by an exogenous information change. Changes in
the terror alert level are uncorrelated with  . Therefore, our tests require that  is stable
across sudden changes in the terrorism threat level such that the quality of the unobserved
information acquired by police officers during stops be the same whether the HSAS alert
level is yellow or orange, ruling out the possibility that the difference in frisking hinges on  .

First stage equilibrium

In the first stage, the officer decides whether or not to stop a suspect taking into account
both the costs and expected benefits if they subsequently frisk the suspect. The officer simul-
taneously allocates their total number of stops between the two types of crimes.8 Formally,
each officer maximizes

                                    o o              t t                s      r
                     1 =           Sp 1 +           Sp 1 =             Sp {Ws yp,s,l -  + E [2 ]}.
                           r,c,l            r,c,l            r,c,s,l


       Ignoring capacity constraints, an officer will stop an individual of group (r, c) for a crime
of type s in a period of alert level l if

                                                   r
                                      Ws (r, c, l)yp,s,l -  + E [2 ] > 0

       Without imposing additional restrictions, this model cannot provide a prediction on the
fraction of stops that are allocated to each type of crime or racial group.9 However, under
some mild additional assumptions, we can expect an interior solution in which individuals
   8
     Realistically, we may expect the marginal benefit of stopping a given group for a specific type of crime
to decrease with the amount of stops if police officers first target the most "suspicious" individuals. We
abstract from this possibility in the main model for simplicity but discuss the implications of allowing this
feature below.
   9
     In other words, there is no closed-form solution for the allocation of stops.


                                                             37
are stopped for both types of crime. First, consider a scenario where police officers allocate
their entire effort to terrorism crimes.10 In this case, criminals of type o would rationally
expect l = 0, and they would not be searched in equilibrium. This would naturally lead
to Wo (r, c, l) = 1 and it would therefore be optimal for an officer to start stopping suspects
for other crimes provided the payoff from a guaranteed arrest outweighs the cost of stopping
the suspect plus the foregone expected benefit of stopping an additional terrorist.
       While this remains an assumption, we believe it is fairly innocuous and evidently satisfied
in the data. It states that even in periods associated with high terrorist threats, police officers
would continue focusing on their full slate of duties and not devote their entire attention
to preventing terrorism. However, officers may change the emphasis they place on each of
their duties as the risk of a terrorist attack changes. Conversely, a parallel assumption is
needed to guarantee that police officers not completely ignore terrorism threats, no matter
the terror alert level. This assumption is also fairly mild and consistent with NYPD protocols
as described in section 2 of the main text.


Predicted effects from an exogenous change in the alert level
Having described the general model, we use it to study the impact of changes in the terrorism
alert level on policing and derive testable implications. We assume the following

                                     a)Fr,c (M, h)  Fr,c (M, l)
                                     b)FA,c (M, h)  FG,c (M, h)
                                     c)FA,c (M, l) = FG,c (M, l)
                                        r       r          A       G
                                     d)yp,t,h  yp,t,l and yp,t,h  yp,t,h .

       Condition a) suggests that officers believe a terrorist attack to be more likely during
periods of elevated threat and condition b) suggests that officers may update their beliefs
and consider Arabs relatively more likely to engage in terrorist acts during periods of high
alert levels. Condition c) is a simplifying assumption which rules out baseline discrimination
to focus on the impacts of alert levels.11 Condition d) suggests that any payoff to thwarting
  10
     This could occur if the (presumably) much higher benefit of a successful terrorism-related arrest out-
weighs the (presumably) much lower probability of arresting a terrorist.
  11
     This assumption is not necessary for our empirical tests to be valid but simplifies the exposition.


                                                    38
a terrorist attack may be higher during periods of increased threat even though stopping a
terrorist attack from any group may yield an identical benefit. In the prior subsection, we
implicitly assumed that the payoff and cost of successfully carrying a terrorist attack (i.e.
G(vt - ht )) did not change with the alert level, such that changes in alert levels simply reflect
changes in the information set of law enforcement officers.
   The difference in the likelihood of carrying out a frisk between a period of high alert
versus a periods of baseline alert level is

                                             r                            r
                          H (Fr,c (M, h), , yp,s,h ) - H (Fr,c (M, l), , yp,s,l )

   and given the previous assumptions

                   A                          A                           G                          G
H (FA,c (M, h), , yp,s,h )-H (FA,c (M, l), , yp,s,l )  H (FG,c (M, h), , yp,s,h )-H (FG,c (M, l), , yp,s,l ).

Our model thus predicts that, following an increase in the alert level, Arabs would be frisked
more in equilibrium and that this increase is larger than for other racial groups. A racial
differential in the probability of frisking a suspect in this setting can be explained by either
an asymmetric increase in the benefits of preventing an attack from Arabs or from changes
in beliefs about guilt. If we rule out changes in beliefs, then potential bias is introduced only
through the payoff modifier as in the standard hit rates test, and a difference in frisking could
be interpreted as taste-based discrimination. In the presence of both channels, we cannot
distinguish between taste-based, or statistical discrimination based on correct or incorrect
beliefs.
   Nevertheless, we can assess whether these additional frisks were productive, reflecting
true changes in the probability of terrorism crimes. Statistical discrimination implies that
officers use race as a proxy for the likelihood of committing a certain crime and conduct
stops based on productivity. Therefore, an increase in the probability of frisking should be
accompanied by an increase in the arrest rate. Otherwise, if police officers frisk more suspects
but make no more arrests, this suggests a low return on the additional frisks performed and
thus makes an explanation based on stereotypes, biases or taste more likely.
   Now consider the impact of an alert level increase on the first stage. The model has an
unambiguous prediction on the direction of expected changes in the allocation of stops. An


                                                    39
increase in alert level under the previous assumptions increases the value of stops related
to terrorism. Therefore, we would expect a relative increase in the share of stops which are
related to terrorism. The model does not provide a closed form solution for the allocation
of stops and we cannot identify terrorism-related stops (or any reason for the stop or type
of crime suspected), but we may expect this to be reflected by an increase in the number
of stops of Arabs. In the presence of decreasing returns to stopping members of a given
group, the differential impact of alert levels on Arabs may be smaller, but the same logic
and conclusions apply. Since terrorism stops are relatively more important in periods of high
alert, more Arabs will be stopped if police officers are more likely to associate that group
with the terrorist threats. Since we assume that  is constant before and after alert changes,
this would also translate into a higher probability of frisk.




                                              40
