                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         VOTING FOR DEMOCRACY:
  CHILE'S PLEBISCITO AND THE ELECTORAL PARTICIPATION OF A GENERATION

                                          Ethan Kaplan
                                         Fernando Saltiel
                                         Sergio S. Urzúa

                                       Working Paper 26440
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26440


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We thank seminar participants at the Inter-American Development Bank, Universidad de los
Andes (Colombia), Universidad de los Andes (Chile), ITAM and Bocconi University for helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank Felipe Gonzalez for providing television penetration data
from 1987. We thank Jose Cabezas and Mateo-Uribe Castro for helpful comments as well as
Ming Fang for excellent research assistance. We thank the Electoral Commission (SERVEL) and
Ministry of Finance of Chile for providing access to de-identified administrative data for research
purposes. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ethan Kaplan, Fernando Saltiel, and Sergio S. Urzúa. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Voting for Democracy: Chile's Plebiscito and the Electoral Participation of a Generation
Ethan Kaplan, Fernando Saltiel, and Sergio S. Urzúa
NBER Working Paper No. 26440
November 2019
JEL No. C21,D72,N46

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper assesses if voting for democracy affects long-term electoral participation. We study
the effects of participating in Chile's 1988 plebiscite, which determined whether democracy
would be reinstated after a 15-year long military dictatorship. Taking advantage of individual-
level voting data for upwards of 13 million Chileans, we implement an age-based RD design
comparing long run registration and turnout rates across marginally eligible and ineligible
individuals. We find that Plebiscite eligibility (participation) significantly increased electoral
turnout three decades later, reaching 1.8 (3.3) percentage points in the 2017 Presidential election.
These effects are robust to different specifications and distinctive to the 1988 referendum. We
discuss potential mechanisms concluding that the scale of initial mobilization explains the
estimated effects. We find that plebiscite eligibility induced a sizable share of less educated
voters to register to vote compared to eligibles in other upstream elections. Since less educated
voters tended to support Chile's governing left-wing coalition, we argue that the plebiscite
contributed to the emergence of one party rule the twenty years following democratization.

Ethan Kaplan                                     Sergio S. Urzúa
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Maryland, College Park             University of Maryland
ethan.kaplan@gmail.com                           3115J Tydings Hall
                                                 College Park, MD 20742
Fernando Saltiel                                 and NBER
Department of Economics                          urzua@econ.umd.edu
Duke University
Fernando.saltiel@duke.edu
1    Introduction
Important political events often make indelible impressions on the minds and future actions of
voters. Mere participation in an election has been shown to impact future partisanship (Kaplan
and Mukand, 2014), the degree of polarization (Mullainathan and Washington, 2009) and voter
turnout (Coppock and Green, 2016; Fujiwara et al., 2016; Meredith, 2009). In fact, early-life po-
litical events which are particularly salient may have even larger long-term effects (Sears and
                                                            ¨
Valentino, 1997; Sears and Funk, 1999; Alesina and Fuchs-Schundeln, 2007; Prior, 2010; Lauden-
bach et al., 2019). In this paper, we examine the long-run impacts of participating in one of the
most consequential elections in recent history: Chile's 1988 plebiscite, which was held to deter-
mine whether the country would return to democracy after a 15-year long military dictatorship.
Augusto Pinochet came to power under a military coup in 1973 and maintained autocratic con-
trol through civil rights restrictions and military rule. In 1980, under international pressure for
human rights abuses, the military government of Augusto Pinochet wrote a new Constitution,
which called for a plebiscite to be held eight years later on the restoration of democratic rule. The
plebiscite was held on October 5th , 1988, and Pinochet unexpectedly lost.1 The success of the `No'
vote then ushered in elections for a new President in 1989 and the restoration of a democratically
elected regime in 1990 (Loveman, 1995).
    In this paper, we analyze the impact of voting on democracy itself on future voter registra-
tion and future electoral turnout. We estimate a regression discontinuity design using age-based
plebiscite eligibility. Only citizens who had turned 18 by the closing of the registration rolls on
August 30, 1988 were allowed to participate in the election. Taking advantage of individual-level
voter data for upwards of 13 million Chileans, coupled with information on individuals' weeks of
birth and registration outcomes, we first show that 56% of marginally age-eligible Chileans reg-
istered for the 1988 plebiscite. Moreover, we find that these registration gaps persisted. Twenty
years later, in 2009, marginally eligible plebiscite participants were still registered at a 12 percent-
age point higher than those born merely one week later. In Chile's old electoral system, citizens
who registered to vote remained on the rolls permanently; as a result, the 2009 effects indicate a
lack of complete catch-up by plebiscite ineligibles. While actual turnout data for pre-2010 elec-
tions is unavailable, we note that voting was mandatory for registered individuals through the
2009 election, and turnout rates exceeded 86% through 2009.
    Chile switched from a voluntary to an automatic registration system after the 2009 election,
which implied that any pre-reform differences in registration rates across the plebiscite cutoff au-
tomatically disappeared. Taking advantage of voter-level data on actual turnout for the 2013 and
2017 Presidential elections as well as for the 2016 municipal election, we thus estimate down-
stream turnout impacts of plebiscite eligibility which are not mediated by registration differences.

    1 The Constitution called for the Plebiscite to be a Yes/No vote on whether a candidate chosen by the military regime

would stay in power for an additional eight years, or whether Chile would return to democratic rule, by holding its
first presidential election in 1989. Boas (2015) has shown that a vast majority of polls conducted in 1988 showed the
'Yes' option to be in a commanding lead.


                                                           2
We find that marginal eligibility to vote in the 1988 plebiscite on the restoration of democracy
raised turnout by 3 and 1.8 percentage points for the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections, or 6%
and 4% of baseline participation rates, respectively.
    We further analyze the downstream effects of actual plebiscite voting by estimating a fuzzy
regression discontinuity design and find that having voted in the plebiscite increased 2013 and
2017 turnout rates by 5.5 and 3.3 percentage points, respectively. We find similar effects for the
lower-stakes 2016 municipal election and show that the results are robust to a number of different
different functional form and sample choices. These results thus indicate that having voted in
Chile's most consequential election had substantial downstream effects even three decades after
the return to democracy.
    Since the existing literature on downstream voting effects has largely focused in the United
States (Coppock and Green, 2016; Meredith, 2009), our estimates are not necessarily comparable to
the literature. As a result, we benchmark the estimated plebiscite turnout effects using age-based
discontinuities around other upstream elections. We focus on Chile's first five presidential elec-
tions, the first of which took place in December 1989, followed by elections in 1993, 1999, 2005 and
2009. We estimate a differences-in-discontinuity design and only find significant turnout effects
in the presidential 2017 election for plebiscite eligibles. We further estimate a fuzzy differences-in-
discontinuity design and show that this result can be explained by the large mobilization effects
of the plebiscite, rather than through a particularly strong persistence effect.
    We also examine heterogeneous impacts across a number of dimensions, a first in this litera-
ture. We find larger effects for males, as plebiscite participation results in 14% higher 2017 turnout
rates relative to their ineligible counterparts. We find suggestive evidence of larger downstream
effects for individuals living in left-leaning municipalities, though the effects are not statistically
significant in the 2013 and 2016 elections.
    In addition, using two other administrative data sources, which contain detailed information
on individuals' educational attainment, we analyze whether the set of compliers responding to
the plebiscite varied across upstream elections.2 We find that plebiscite eligibility induced a siz-
able share of high school dropouts to initially register to vote, compared to high school dropouts
in other upstream elections. Moreover, in specifications with longer bandwidths, which include
plebiscite eligibles who had more time to register, the share of high school dropouts who registered
to vote increases significantly. These results indicate that both the salience of an election and the
time to registration both affect electoral participation heterogeneously by socioeconomic status.
Since Chile's old electoral system implied permanent registration (with high turnout rates), we
note that the 1988 plebiscite induced a larger share of less educated Chileans to vote. Using sur-
vey data, we document that this group tends to support left-learning parties in Chile. As a result,
we lastly posit that the structure of the plebiscite may have contributed to the the 20-year period
of one-party rule -- a common feature in various post-dictatorship countries -- by a left-leaning
   2 We  analyze information linking the educational attainment data to registration outcomes under the old electoral
system, allowing us to explore heterogeneous registration outcomes by education level. Nonetheless, since our turnout
data is de-identified, we cannot examine turnout effects by education.


                                                         3
coalition (Concertacion) in Chile.
    Previous work has examined the impacts of upstream election eligibility on downstream turnout
in the United States, using the age-18 eligibility cut-off as well. Using data from California (Cal-
ifornia Statewide Voter File), Meredith (2009) documents that presidential election eligibility in-
creases subsequent participation up to four years later. Coppock and Green (2016), on the other
hand, show persistent effects of early-life electoral participation on future voter turnout over a
period of two decades. We note, however, that these papers rely on voter files. Nyhan et al. (2017)
have shown that due to selectivity of registration, these data sources do not recover registration ef-
fects across the cutoffs, and as such may lead to biased downstream turnout effects. Our empirical
strategy is robust to this criticism.
    We also contribute to a growing literature analyzing Chile's 1988 plebiscite. Other papers have
used cross-sectional variation to estimate the impact of exposure to military repression (proxied
by distance to a military base) (Bautista et al., 2019) and the penetration of the `No' campaign
(Gonz´
     alez and Prem, 2018), defined by TV-ownership rates across municipalities, on support for
the `No' position in the plebiscite. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to consider
the long-term electoral consequences of the plebiscite. Furthermore, we present the first estimates
of downstream electoral persistence in a non-US context using reliable administrative data.
    We note that our analysis of complier characteristics across upstream elections provides im-
portant evidence as to why downstream effects may vary across elections. In fact, this is the first
paper to document substantial heterogeneity in concurrent registration rates by educational at-
tainment, and we further show that less educated voters are far more likely to register in more
salient elections and when they have more time to do so. We thus contribute quasi-experimental
evidence to an extensive experimental literature considering the factors which drive voter turnout,
see (Green and Gerber, 2019; Arceneaux and Nickerson, 2009; Gerber et al., 2008, 2003; Gerber and
Green, 2000), among others. Moreover, given the prevalence of one-party rule in various coun-
tries after the reinstatement of democracy, we present suggestive evidence that the nature of the
Chilean plebiscite may have contributed to the twenty years of Concertacion rule, by inducing less
educated citizens to vote.
    Finally, this is the first paper to consider the long-term effects of an election held under dic-
tatorial rule. Other work has analyzed downstream effects in developing countries using survey
data, including De Kadt (2017) in South Africa and Holbein and Rangel (2019) in Brazil, but al-
ways under democratic rules. Furthermore, our administrative data sources allow us to sepa-
rately estimate registration and turnout effects. In fact, Chile's electoral reform implies that we
recover a turnout effect which is not explained by differential registration rates but rather reflects
a pure effect of voting on future voting -- a first in this literature. Moreover, we present evidence
on important sources of heterogeneity, analyzing differential effects by gender and partisanship
(measured at the municipality level).3

   3 As discussed below, in the lead-up to the plebiscite, the 'No' campaign focused its advertisements towards women,

yet we find larger downstream effects for men.


                                                         4
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2, we discuss institutional details. In
Section 3, we introduce our data sources and present summary statistics. In Section 4, we present
our empirical strategy. Section 5 presents our main results of the long-run effects of Plebiscite eli-
gibility on persistent downstream registration and voting spanning up to three decades. Section 6
documents how our findings vary by gender, education-level and partisan orientation of munici-
pality. We also discuss the implications of our results for partisan mobilization and relate them to
single party dominance in newly democratized countries. Finally, Section 7 concludes.


2    Institutional Details
Political Background. In 1970, Salvador Allende and the Socialist Party came to power in a nar-
rowly won and highly contested electoral victory. Allende and his Popular Unity coalition of
communists, socialists, social democrats and radicals faced off against the center-left Christian
Democrats, led by Radomiro Tomic, and the right wing National Party candidate Jorge Alessan-
dri. Allende received the 36.6% of the votes as compared to Alessandri's 35.2% and Tomic's 28.1%
and formed a government with the support of the Christian Democrats, giving him 78.5% of the
Congressional roll-call vote.
    On September 11, 1973, Salvador Allende's government was overthrown in a military coup
led by General Augusto Pinochet. Pinochet's regime suspended civil rights, raided the homes
of suspected oppositions supporter and also kidnapped and murdered potential members of the
opposition. The Rettig and Valech reports, conducted after the end of the dictatorship, estimated
that the regime was responsible for the murder of 3,216 individuals and the torture of 38,254
Chileans.
    Under international pressure over human rights abuses, Pinochet sought to legitimize his
regime through a plebiscite proposing a constitutional reform (Varas, 1982).4 The plebiscite took
place on September 11, 1980 and the Constitution was ratified with 67.5% of the vote. The new
Constitution ushered in a new eight-year rule for Pinochet, which began on March 11, 1981 and
was set to last through March 11, 1989. The Constitution called for the military regime to propose
a new candidate for the next eight-year term at least 90 days prior to the end of Pinochet's rule.
This candidate would be ratified in a plebiscite in which a "Yes" vote would imply an eight-year
term for the proposed candidate, beginning on March 11, 1989 and lasting through March, 1997.
A "No" vote would first extend Pinochet's rule for an additional year and then trigger a demo-
cratic Presidential election to be held 90 days prior to the end of Pinochet's extended term -- in
December, 1989 (Nagy and Leiva, 2005).
    While the 1980 Constitution had made voting mandatory, the norms for electoral participation
    4 In1978, the government had held a plebiscite calling for an up or down vote on the following statement: "Faced
with international aggression launched against our fatherland, I support President Pinochet in his defense of the dignity
of Chile and reaffirm the legitimacy of the government." Since the regime had destroyed the voter rolls under the
argument that Allende had manipulated voter registration rolls to secure a win in the 1973 Parliamentary elections, all
Chileans over 18 were allowed to vote. The 'Yes' option won with 71% of the vote, though its legitimacy was highly
questioned (Welp, 2010).


                                                           5
were not defined until the restitution of the Electoral Commission in 1986 (SERVEL in Spanish).
The guidelines established by SERVEL in 1986 did not require Chileans to register to vote -- thus
leaving Chile with a unique system of voluntary registration with mandatory voting only for
registered citizens.5

1988 Plebiscite. The guidelines laid out in the 1980 Constitution implied the plebiscite would
be held in 1988, yet a specific date was not announced in advance. Voter registration opened on
February 25, 1987, and all Chilean citizens older than 18 years old became immediately eligible to
register to vote.6 By the end of 1987, over 3 million Chileans had registered, reaching 40% of the
voting-age population. On August 30th of 1988, the military regime announced that the candidate
for the 'Yes' option would be Augusto Pinochet, and that the Plebiscite would be held on October
5th (Boeninger, 1997). Servel also closed voter registration on August 30, with 7.4 million Chileans
having registered to vote. Over 90% of the voting age population registered. Registration was
even high among young Chileans; 70% of 18-24 year olds registered in time for the Plebiscite.7
    In the lead-up to the Plebiscite, the Pinochet government gave both the 'Yes' and 'No' cam-
paigns fifteen minute-long sequential advertisement slots on national television -- called the
franja-- every night. The regime and the opposition, a coalition of political parties named Con-
certaci´
       on, both presented videos supporting their respective positions and the videos were syndi-
cated on all television stations across the country every day between September 5th and October
1st from 8:30 to 9PM. Gonz´
                          alez and Prem (2018) exploit variation in TV penetration across counties
(comunas) to examine the impact of the franja on the 'No' vote share, finding that a one standard
deviation increase in television exposure increased 'No' support by two percentage points.
    Most polls conducted in 1988 showed the 'Yes' option to be leading among registered voters
(Boas, 2015). However, 97% of all registered individuals voted in the Plebiscite and the 'No' option
won with 54.7% of the vote. As a result, Pinochet's rule was extended for a year, through March
11th , 1990 and Presidential elections were called for December, 1989.8
    During 1989, the military regime and the opposition agreed on a number of reforms to the
Constitution. A Constitutional referendum was held on July 30th and these reforms were ratified
by 85.7% of the electorate. The Concertaci´
                                          on candidate, Patricio Aylwin, won the Presidential elec-
    5 Navia (2004) has argued that the military regime installed this electoral system in order to skew the electorate in its

support. In particular, they assumed that regime supporters would be eager to register whereas the opposition would
fracture on whether to encourage registration and potentially legitimize the results of the plebiscite or boycott it, thus
leading the 'Yes' option to an easy win. This was of particular concern since, as documented in Fuentes (2013), the 1980
plebiscite was replete with voter fraud on behalf of the regime.
    6 SERVEL's electoral guidelines published in 1986 mentioned that citizens who turned 18 prior to an election, but

after the registration closing date could still register to vote. Nonetheless, this rule did not apply for the 1988 Plebiscite
as the Plebiscite date had not been announced in advance. As a result, Chileans who turned 18 between February 25th
1987 and registration closing date for the Plebiscite could only register to vote upon turning 18.
    7 The age cut-off described above combined with the sudden announcement of the registration closing date implies

that Chileans who turned 18 on August 31st were ineligible to vote in the Plebiscite. At the same time, those who turned
18 on August 30 had only one day to register on that day whereas those born earlier in 1970 had a longer time period
during which they could register. For instance, those born on July 30, 1970 had a full month to register.
    8 Electoral registration closed on June 15th in 1989, yet Chileans who would turn 18 by the Presidential election date

(on December 14) were allowed to register to vote for both the Constitutional reforms and the Presidential election.


                                                              6
tion with 55% of the vote, becoming Chile's first democratically-elected President in seventeen
                                                on Presidents.9
years and ushering in twenty years of Concertaci´

Post-Plebiscite Elections and Electoral Reform. In the years following the restoration of Democ-
racy, eligible registrants increasingly registered to vote at lower rates. By the time of the 2009
Presidential elections, only 20% of 18-24 year olds registered to vote. The large decline in voter
registration was in large part blamed on the electoral system which combined voluntary registra-
tion with mandatory voting.10 Since Chile's electoral system never purged citizens from voter rolls
absent death, young potential voters could only exercise their voting rights if they were willing to
commit to a perpetuity of voting or fines. As a result in the decline in youth registration, Chileans
under 30 accounted for one third of all registered voters for the Plebiscite but only a mere 10.9%
of registered voters for the 2009 election (Contreras and Navia, 2013). Moreover, only two-thirds
of the entire voting age population had registered to vote for the 2009 election.11 In contrast to
the plummeting registration rates, electoral participation for the registered remained quite high.
Turnout rates fell from 94.7% for the first presidential election in 1989 to a nadir of 86.7% in 2009.
    Partly motivated by the aging of the electorate, Chile undertook a sizable change in its electoral
system in 2009. It changed the system from a mandatory voting but voluntary registration system
to a universal automatic registration but voluntary voting system. The new registration system,
which is still in place today, thus resembles that of Germany and the United Kingdom.12,13 All
eligible adults were immediately registered and all minors were automatically registered at age 18.
As a result, the number of registered voters increased from 8.5 to 13.4 million. The new electoral
system was first put in place for the 2012 municipal elections, yet despite the sizable increase in
the number of registered citizens, turnout actually fell from 7.0 to 5.8 million voters. The decline in
voter turnout persisted through the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections, falling from 7.25 million
voters in the 2009 election to 6.7 million in both the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections. Table
1 shows registration and turnout over time for all Presidential elections, documenting the large

     9 Important for our results, Chile's post-dictatorship electoral system created a "top two" (two-stage) electoral sys-

tem for President. In the first round, a candidate wins only with an outright majority of the votes. Otherwise, the
election proceeds to a second round with the two top candidates, as was the case in the 1999, 2005, 2009, 2013 and 2017
Presidential elections.
    10 The mandatory voting system was enforced with substantial fines. SERVEL levied a nominal Peso equivalent of

$100 USD in the 1989 Presidential election. The nominal fines increased over time and exceeded $200 by 2009. These
fines had not been put in place by the plebiscite.
    11 Different additional reasons have been put forth to explain the falling registration rates. First, voters were unable

to register during certain times: in off-election years, individuals could only register to vote in the first seven week days
of each month. Second, in election years, registration closed three-to-fourth months prior to the election date. In fact,
Corvalan and Cox (2018) find that contemporaneous registration rates are 20% lower for those who turn 18 the day
after a registration deadline relative to those born one day earlier despite both being eligible to register for an election
months in the future.
    12 Automatic registration combined with voluntary voting is also increasingly popular in the United States. Begin-

ning with Oregon, 16 U.S. states and the Distict of Columbia have all passed automatic registration laws.
    13 After the reform was approved, Chile's President, Michelle Bachelet, argued that "expanding the universe of

voters is of critical importance, as voter rolls have aged significantly, as such, it is important for young people to
express their opinions". Another argument made by the Bachelet government centered around allowing individuals
who became interested in voting close to the day of the election to be able to vote.


                                                             7
registration rates for early elections, along with the sizable decline in turnout following the 2009
electoral reform.
      Our analysis of the impact of plebiscite eligibility and plebiscite participation upon future voter
turnout captures two different margins of downstream effects. First, the permanent registration
feature of Chile's old electoral system implies that our analysis of the effects of Plebiscite eligibility
on long-term registration rates captures differential catch-up by non-registered individuals born
after the Plebiscite cut-off. Second, since the 2012 electoral reform automatically registered all
Chileans, our turnout analysis for the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections recovers the effects of Plebiscite
eligibility on turnout only through a direct turnout effect rather than through a registration effect.
This stands in contrast to the existing literature in the U.S., which does not and historically could
not distinguish between registration and turnout effects (Meredith, 2009; Coppock and Green,
2016). In the next section, we describe our data sources and present summary statistics on our
sample.


3      Data Sources and Summary Statistics
3.1     Data Sources

Our main data source comes from de-identified individual-level voting data provided by SERVEL
for the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections and for the 2016 municipal elections.14 In addition to
individual-level turnout data for the three most recent elections, this data set includes information
on the birth year and week of Chileans, which we use to determine plebiscite eligibility. Moreover,
we observe registration year for those who registered voluntarily under the old electoral system.
We additionally observe gender and comuna of residence at the time of the election.
      We take advantage of voter comuna of residence to merge various comuna-level characteristics.
First, we use data from Chile's last two censuses, conducted in 1992 and 2002, which provide
information on comuna-level covariates including the share of households with electricity, water,
and a toilet in their house respectively, the share of TV ownership and the literacy and the comuna
unemployment rate. To analyze heterogeneous effects by exposure to the franja, we obtain the
share of television ownership by comuna in 1987 from Gonz´
                                                         alez and Prem (2018), which comes
from Chile's 1987 National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN).15 Furthermore, we analyze heteroge-
neous downstream effects of the Plebiscite by political affiliation by merging in SERVEL-provided
comuna-level vote shares in the 1970 Presidential election for Allende as well as for a broader mea-
sure of the left (Tomic plus Allende).16 We note that our analysis of heterogeneous impacts across
comuna-level characteristics necessitates the assumption that individuals lived in the same comuna
in both the upstream and downstream election. While this is a strong assumption, CASEN 2015

    14 ThePresidential election data data only covers first round election results. We do not observe turnout for the
second-stage runoffs in the 2013 and 2017 elections.
   15 Since the 1987 CASEN did not cover all comunas in Chile, we also rely on TV ownership data from the 1992 Census.
   16 We create a cross-walk of 1970 comunas to present-day comunas.



                                                          8
data indicates that fewer than one-third of Chileans adults have moved comunas since birth. For
Chileans who moved since the upstream election, our procedure imputes incorrect comuna-level
characteristics, which would lead to attenuation bias if migration were random.17
    Since the voter turnout data contains limited information on individual-level characteristics,
we complement our analysis using a variety of administrative data sources. First, we use admin-
istrative data from SERVEL, which contains exact date of birth, gender and exact registration date
for individuals who had voluntarily registered in the old system. Unlike the de-identified turnout
data, this data source includes individuals' national identification number.18 Whereas the SERVEL
registration data covers the universe of Chileans who had at some point registered to vote prior to
automatic registration in 2012, it does not include the birth date of non-registered individuals.19
To address this concern, we construct a measure of population size by birth cohort by combining
the SERVEL individual data on registration with two other administrative data sets, in which we
also observe individuals' educational attainment.
    The first of these additional data sources comes from Chile's Unemployment Insurance (UI,
Seguro de Cesant´
                ia) database and contains matched employee-employer data for all formal sec-
tor employment contracts signed since November 2002. As a result, this data source covers all
Chileans who spent at least one month employed in the formal sector since 2002. These records
include upwards of seven million workers. The UI data includes employment status but critically
for our analysis, it also contains educational attainment. Since UI data do not capture individuals
who have not held formal sector employment since 2002, we complement our analysis with ad-
ministrative records from the Bureau of Social Protection (FPS, Ficha de Protecci´
                                                                                 on Social of 2009).
The FPS data includes all individuals (along with their family members) who applied for any
social program in Chile, covering two-thirds of the Chilean population. From the FPS data, we
obtain individuals' educational attainment, as well. These sources of information were merged us-
ing the national identification number, generating individual-level records containing educational
attainment and date of registration.20 To ensure that the sample is representative of the Chilean
population, we compare it to the SERVEL turnout data for the 2013 election. The 2013 turnout
data includes 13.39 million Chileans born before 1995, whereas our data set includes 11.37 million
individuals -- we observe educational attainment for 9.98 million of them. As a result, we recover
educational attainment for 75% of the voting-age population who were eligible to vote in the 2013


   17 Cursory   examination of 2015 CASEN data does not show evidence of selective moving patterns towards comunas
with differential 1970 vote shares or baseline characteristics. As a result, we argue that our comuna-level imputation
procedure is unlikely to be a source of non-classical measurement error. Nonetheless, since our comuna-level analysis
relies upon a strong assumption, we remark that our results are suggestive rather than causal.
                        ´
    18 The RUT or Rol Unico   Tributario is a unique identifier for all Chileans, which allows us to link individuals across
various administrative data sources.
    19 Thus a discontinuity in birth, death or both across the August 30, 1970 birth threshold could potentially confound

our estimates of the impact of plebiscite eligibility on voter registration. Nyhan et al. (2017) make a similar argument
regarding the use of voter registration data in the United States.
    20 Since the education variables are coded differently in the UI and in the FPS data sets, we classify individuals by

whether they were high school dropouts, high school graduates or had at least some post-secondary education by 2009.
These educational categories are measured by both data sources.


                                                             9
presidential election.21
      This data set allows us to present the first estimates of heterogeneous effects of marginal up-
stream election eligibility on actual participation, to examine long-term differences in registration
rates and to examine compliers' educational attainment across different bandwidths and upstream
elections. Nonetheless, we do not observe educational attainment in the SERVEL turnout data.
Thus, we cannot estimate heterogeneous impacts of plebiscite eligibility on downstream turnout.
      Finally, we also use political opinion survey data conducted by the Centro de Estudios Publicos
(CEP) for all the election years from 1989-2009. This data set contains demographic data, most
notably, educational attainment, as well as self-reported turnout and partisanship. We use this
data to examine the likely partisan impacts of the plebiscite and to test for differential turnout in
pre-reform electoral system.


3.2     Summary Statistics

Table 2 presents summary statistics. The combination of our data sources allow us to analyze
voting behavior for over 13 million Chileans. Half of our sample is comprised of males and the
majority of these individuals are high school dropouts, with fewer than 11% having gone beyond
high school graduation. Comuna-level characteristics largely match country-level averages, as
individuals in our sample lived in comunas in which Allende's vote share reached 37.2%, compared
to his 36.6% vote share in the 1970 election. In terms of voting participation, 60% of our sample
had voluntarily registered to vote by 2009, 49.5% and 47.2% actually voted in the 2013 and 2017
presidential elections, respectively.
      In the second and third columns, we divide the sample across age-based plebiscite eligibility.
Those who had turned 18 prior to the plebiscite unsurprisingly have lower educational attainment
relative to their ineligible peers. However, they live in comunas with otherwise similar baseline
characteristics.22 Moreover, close to 90% of plebiscite eligibles had registered to vote by 2009
whereas 55% voted in the 2017 election. The electoral participation of eligibles nonetheless far
outpaces that of younger Chileans, since just 29.8% of individuals in this group had registered by
2009 and 40% of them had turned out for the 2017 election.
      Nonetheless, the differences in electoral participation in these two groups could be explained
by life-cycle voting patterns. As a result, in columns 4 and 5 of Table 2, we compare individuals
who were marginally eligible to participate to those who were marginally ineligible, restricting our
attention to Chileans who turned 18 in a 12-month window across the Plebiscite eligibility cut-off.
In this group, we find similar differences in terms of electoral participation between elgibiles and

   21 The  nature of the two administrative data sources implies that we better recover educational attainment for
working-age individuals in 2013. As a result, our match rate is in the 66% range for individuals born in the 1950s,
rising to 73.1% and 77.5% for those born in the 1960s and 1970s, respectively. We find no significant differences in
match rates for individuals across the birth date threshold, as we observe educational attainment for 75.3% and 75.4%
of Chileans born in 1970 and in 1971, respectively. We formally test for differences in match rates across the various
upstream election cut-offs and find no significant differences. These results are available upon request.
    22 The differences in educational attainment across the Plebiscite cut-off are explained by the increasing participation

in higher education over time in Chile (Ferreyra et al., 2017).


                                                            10
non-eligibles. Fully 86% of eligible individuals had registered to vote by 2009, in contrast to just
69% of marginally ineligible Chileans. Moreover, we find analogous results in terms of voting in
the 2013 Presidential election, with the older group having turned out at 55% rate compared to a
50% turnout rate for their younger counterparts. Similar differences emerge for the 2016 municipal
and 2017 Presidential elections. While these mean comparison suggest that having turned 18 by
the Plebiscite had persistent effects on electoral participation, the effects are not necessarily causal.
In the next section, we introduce our empirical strategy and in subsequent sections present causal
estimates of the impacts of early voting experiences on long-term behavior.


4     Empirical Strategy and Model Selection
While the patterns presented in Table 2 suggest that Chileans who were eligible to vote in the
Plebiscite were more likely to have voted in 2017, this difference cannot be interpreted as causal
given the life-cycle patterns associated with voting behavior. To surmount this identification
challenge, we take advantage of the sharp cut-off introduced by the age-18 eligibility require-
ment, which implied that Chileans born after August 30, 1970 were ineligible to vote in the 1988
Plebiscite. We follow Meredith (2009), Coppock and Green (2016) and Fujiwara et al. (2016) among
others and implement a regression discontinuity design. We regress downstream registration and
turnout on initial eligibility, controlling for the relationship between registration or turnout in the
future election on birth date. Our basic regression model can be specified as follows:

                    j                                                                        j
                  Yi = 0 + 1 Be f orei + µi (Cuto f f ) + Be f orei × µi (Cuto f f ) +  i                         (1)

            j
where Yi is a binary variable which represents either registration by person i in or before the
registration deadline for the election in year j or voter turnout by individual i in downstream
election j. Be f orei is a dummy variable which equals 1 if person i turned 18 prior to the eligibility
cutoff for the 1988 plebiscite.23 µi (Cuto f f ) is a flexible function of the distance (in months) of
person i's age-18 birthday to the same cut-off. The interaction term allows for the relationship
between plebiscite eligibility and long-term voting behavior to vary depending upon the distance
to the cut-off.
     The identifying assumption behind the regression discontinuity design presented in equation
(2) is that the unobserved characteristics of individuals are continuous across the cut-off (Imbens
and Lemieux, 2008), that is, eligible and ineligible individuals should only differ in terms of their
ability to have voted in the 1988 Plebiscite. In fact, both eligible and ineligible individuals were
exposed to the electoral fervor surrounding the possible return to democracy, with the only differ-
ence being the older group's ability to vote. Of course, this empirical strategy allows us to identify
the impacts of Plebiscite eligibility on long-term voting behavior only for individuals who were

    23 We omit the week of August 30th , 1970 from our estimation some individuals born in that week were eligible to
register in time for the 1988 plebiscite whereas others were not. We also estimate assigning the week of August 30th ,
1970 as part of the treatment group and our results do not substantively differ.


                                                         11
marginally eligible/ineligible and the results need not hold across the broader population. We
nonetheless show strong suggestive evidence that our estimated effects likely apply more gener-
ally to the population.
     While our main focus is on the impact of eligibility for the 1988 plebiscite, we also consider
eligibility thresholds for other upstream Presidential elections, including the 1989, 1993, 1999,
2005 and 2009 elections. This provides a credible internal benchmark to determine whether the
impacts of plebiscite eligibility are significant. We do so by re-estimating equation (1) for each
election separately. Thus, for any pair of these elections {k, j} with j  k we estimate:

                 j   k   k                                                                j,k
                Yi = 0 + 1 Be f oreik + µik (Cuto f f ) + Be f oreik × µik (Cuto f f ) +  i              (2)

where Be f oreik is a dummy variable which equals 1 if person i turned 18 prior to the eligibility cut-
off for election k. Expression (2) produces the main results presented in section 5 across elections
( j and k). In addition, to formally test for whether the effects of the plebiscite are statistically dif-
ferent from other upstream elections, we also consider a differences-in-discontinuity design. Let
Eik be a dummy variable which equals one if person i turned 18 around the eligibility cut-off for
                                    j
upstream election k such that k=0 Eik = 1 for any election j. Thus, if we define the 1988 plebiscite
as the baseline (k = 0) election, we can write:

            j
           Yi   = 0   0         0    0                       0    0
                  0 + 1 Be f orei + µi (Cuto f f ) + Be f orei × µi (Cuto f f )
                      j
                +     Eik ×    k
                               0   k
                                 + 1 Be f oreik + µik (Cuto f f ) + Be f oreik × µik (Cuto f f ) + i ,   (3)
                     k =1

from where we can test whether eligibility to vote in the 1988 plebiscite has a differential effect on
 j                                                                                           k - 0
Yi relative to eligibility in other upstream elections (we examine the coefficient on  1,k = 1   1
for any election k prior to j). To secure the comparability of the parameters of interest, we esti-
mate equation (4) using as outcomes voter turnout in the three upstream elections with automatic
registration and voluntary voting, that is the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections. To construct the set of
right-hand side variables, we use election eligibility for 1988 (baseline), 1989, 1993, 1999, 2005 and
2009.


The specification of µik (·). For any election k, the optimal bandwidth selection procedure varies by
the functional form of µik (·). In our context, we consider linear, quadratic, cubic, quartic and non-
parametric specifications. Thus, we jointly select bandwidths and functional forms. To this end,
we implement two approaches: five-fold cross-validation and the Akaike information criterion
(AIC) procedure.
     For the cross-validation approach, we randomly split our sample for a given bandwidth into
five equally-sized components. In a hold-out sample we estimate the parameters of our model and
in the four other samples, we project our model and compute mean-squared error. We then av-
erage the mean-squared errors across the four samples and report them in the first panel of Table


                                                       12
3. We present cross-validation results for 13, 26 and 52 week bandwidths.24 We see no difference
in mean-squared error to three digits across all functional form choices. This holds for all band-
widths. In the second panel, we present the results from the AIC procedure, which also captures
the bias-variance trade-off in models with different functional forms. The results largely follow
those of the cross-fold validation, indicating no significant differences in the AIC across polyno-
mials. Thus, since both the cross-validation results and the AIC results do not display significant
differences in terms of model fit across bandwidths and functional form specifications, we follow
Gelman and Imbens (2019) and choose a linear functional form as our main specification.25
    To select a bandwidth, in principle, one could examine the optimal CCT bandwidth (Calonico
et al., 2014) across upstream and downstream elections as well as for each specification. However,
in our case this strategy yields a large number of different bandwidths, which are not comparable
across elections and outcome variables. We therefore select a 26-week bandwidth for compara-
bility with the existing literature in the United States, giving us a full year of coverage for each
upstream election. Moreover, since we cluster our standard errors at the week-of-birth level, the
number of clusters is over 50 when using the 26-week bandwidth Donald and Lang (2007) even
when we present estimates for a single upstream election.26,27




   24 The most prominent papers in this literature use different bandwidths, from six weeks in Meredith (2009) to

one year in Coppock and Green (2016). The 26-week bandwidth is selected somewhat arbitrarily, though to present
comparable estimates, we need some level of discretion given the large set of possible specifications. In the Appendix
we show our results are robust to different bandwidths ranging between two-weeks and one-year.
   25 Gelman and Imbens (2019) note that higher order models are more subject to small-sample over-fitting; given

the possibility of over-fitting based upon cohort-specific random shocks which would be common across the random
samples combined with the small differences in fit across specifications, we opt to follow their recommendation.
   26 We present the optimal bandwidth from the CCT algorithm for each of these combinations in Table A.1. The

optimal bandwidth yields 140 different values -- ranging from a 4 week bandwidth with a linear functional form for
the 1988 first stage to a 61 week bandwidth with a quartic functional form for the downstream effects of the Plebiscite
on 2017 turnout. It is worth noting that our bandwidth selection of 26 weeks is the closest to those reported as optimal
bandwidths for the linear functional forms presented in Table A.1.
   27 In Table A.2, we present evidence on covariate balance across marginally eligible and ineligible individuals by

estimating equation (2) with a linear polynomial and a 26 week bandwidth using different covariates as outcomes.
We do not find significant differences in any covariate across the Plebiscite cut-off. Nonetheless, in a few of the other
upstream elections, we find minor differences in educational attainment across the eligibility cut-off. These differences
are likely driven by Chile's school enrollment cut-off, which is on April 1. A 26-week bandwidth around elections
which take place in December capture some individuals in different school cohorts (McEwan and Shapiro, 2008). As a
result, we also present balance in educational attainment in Table A.2 using a 13-week bandwidth, where we do not find
differences across the cut-off in other upstream elections. Moreover, except for two coefficients for the 2005 upstream
election, though the standard errors rise with the restricted 13 week bandwidth, the coefficients for difference across
the threshold fall in size such that they would not be significantly distinguishable from zero even with the 26 week
standard errors. The fact that the treated and the control have different average first year of entry into school may affect
other papers in this literature, which generally use even larger bandwidths (Coppock and Green, 2016). Due to these
concerns, in Section 5, we show that our results are robust to a 13-week bandwidth and that the regression discontinuity
design for other upstream elections is not compromised due to small differences in educational attainment.


                                                            13
5     Main Effects
5.1     Effects on Voter Registration

We first present our benchmark estimates of plebiscite eligibility upon downstream registration
and downstream voting over a period of three decades. In Figure 1, we plot 1988 plebiscite regis-
tration rates by birth week. As mandated by law, the data confirm that no one who was born after
August, 1970 registered in time for the plebiscite. Thus, unsurprisingly, we have full compliance
for those who were ineligible to vote. We see that approximately 20% of the cohort who were born
in the last week of August registered in time for the plebiscite. Upwards of 40% of the cohort born
in the second to last week of August registered to vote, such that juts one week of additional time
to register dramatically increased registration rates. The rate of increase in registration rates per
additional week of time to register is significant for about two months -- about two-thirds of those
who turned 18 eight weeks prior to the cut-off had registered to vote. There is a smaller though
steady rate of increase in registration rates over the next 4 months. Those who had six months to
register signed up at a near 75% rate.
      It is not at all surprising that marginally eligible citizens registered at substantially higher
rates than those who were ineligible. What is slightly more surprising is that these registration
differences seem to be highly persistent over many decades. When we look at registration by
birth cohort two decades later, we see that these differences remain and are quite large. Figure
2 displays registration rates by cohort for those born up to 1000 weeks (almost 20 years) before
the last week of August, 1970 and up to 1500 weeks afterwards. Registration rates are roughly
constant at approximately 90% for cohorts born before 1970. There is a slight decline in registration
rates for those who turned 18 just before the plebiscite registration cutoff and a sharp 13 percentage
point drop right at the cutoff, to approximately 70%. Registration continues to decline for younger
cohorts with smaller yet observable discontinuities at eligibility cutoffs for other elections.
      Table 4 presents regression discontinuity estimates of the impact of marginal eligibility upon
registration for both the contemporaneous as well as for subsequent elections (see expression (2)).
We use our benchmark specification of a linear functional form and 26 week bandwidth. In Panel
A, we show that marginal eligibility for the plebiscite increased contemporaneous turnout by 56
percentage points in 1988. By the following Presidential election, held in 1989, 31% of marginally
ineligible Chileans had registered to vote, despite the early registration deadline. Nonetheless,
sizable differences in registration rates remained across the two groups, exceeding 30 percentage
points. Registration rates increased significantly for both groups in the next two decades, yet
marginal plebiscite eligibility led to registration rates which were 13 percentage points higher
than their marginally ineligible counterparts. Nonetheless, even marginal plebiscite ineligibles
had a 70% registration rate by the 2009 Presidential election.28

    28 Whilethe old electoral system mandated Chileans to vote, we do not observe whether the differences in registra-
tion rates do in fact correspond to differences in turnout. To this end, we take advantage of political opinion surveys
conducted by the Centro de Estudios Publicos (CEP). While the post-2005 surveys do not contain information on year
of birth, we combine five surveys conducted in the 2001-2005 period which retroactively asked Chileans whether they


                                                          14
    We note that these results are consistent with rational political behavior. Registration in Chile
before the 2012 electoral reform was costly not only due to the time it took to figure out how
to register and to then sign up, but also because it entailed a permanent future commitment to
voting enforced by the possibility of non-trivial fines. Since the 1988 plebiscite was particularly
salient, it is certainly possible that the costs of registration were the same for marginally eligible
and marginally ineligible cohorts but that the benefits of registration were substantially higher for
the marginally eligible given the importance of the plebiscite itself.
    In Panels B-F of Table 4, we present regression discontinuity estimates of the impact of marginal
eligibility of other Presidential elections. Whereas the 1989 Presidential election was held just 14
months after the 1988 plebiscite, marginal eligibles only registered at a rate of 14.5 percentage
points despite the fact that, in contrast to the plebiscite, the registration deadline was announced
months ahead of time. This 74% decline in the impact of marginal eligibility on contemporaneous
registration suggests that the electoral fervor surrounding the return to democracy had quickly
                                                                    alez and Prem, 2018).29 The
died down, potentially due to the absence of mass mobilization (Gonz´
substantially smaller effects of marginal eligibility on registration persisted for all subsequent elec-
tions in the pre-reform era. Only the 1993 effect is larger (20.3 percentage points) than the 1989
effect. The effects for all other years were are below 10 percentage points and the effect for the
1999 election is even below 5%.
    The last column of Table 4 examines whether marginal eligibility for upstream elections led
to differences in registration rates in 2009. We find that marginal eligibility for the 1989 and 1999
elections both resulted in higher registration for marginal eligibles, yet the differences are small, in
the range of 2 percentage points. While the differences associated with 1993 election eligibility are
larger (5.4 percentage points) than the downstream 2009 registration effects of all other elections,
the effects are far smaller than for the 1988 plebiscite.
    Moreover, our results presented thus far are robust to different combinations of functional
forms and bandwidths used in the literature. Table A.3 confirms that the estimated effect of
plebiscite eligibility is associated with higher 2009 registration rates in the range of 9.7-14 per-
centage points. It also shows that the effects of upstream election eligibility on 2009 registration
rates are largely robust to different choices of bandwidths and functional form. In addition, Figure
A.1 shows graphical robust evidence of the effects of upstream election eligibility on contempora-

had voted in the 2001 Congressional elections. Among Chileans who had registered to vote, we do not find differences
in stated 2001 turnout rates between those born in 1967-1969 (90.4%) and those in 1971-1973 (89.4%) -- these results
are available upon request. While survey responses do not constitute causal evidence of turnout effects, plebiscite eli-
gibility may have induced individuals to over-report their political participation. These differences are consistent with
the turnout results presented in Section 5.2. As a result, adjusting our registration estimates by the turnout rate for
the corresponding election (presented in Table 1) may provide a reasonable estimate of turnout effects under the old
electoral system.
    29 An alternative explanation for the decline in the initial eligibility effect is that 1988 plebiscite marginal eligibles

were those who had just turned 18. On the other hand, marginal eligibles for subsequent elections captured those who
would turn 18 just before the election. If most potential voters pay attention to voter registration only upon turning
18, closing registration early while allowing voting-eligible 17 year olds to register may reduce the impact of marginal
eligibility. we find that the first stage results are robust to longer bandwidths -- which include marginal eligibles who
had turned 18 by the registration deadline -- suggesting the results are robust to such concerns.


                                                             15
neous registration rates, which correspond to those presented in Table 4.
      Finally, Figure 3 presents graphical evidence on long-term registration differences across the
various upstream elections, confirming that that plebiscite eligibility leads to significantly larger
long-run registration effects than in any subsequent election30 . While the results presented so far
indicate that age-18 election eligibility is associated with significant differences in long-run regis-
tration rates, these differences may not correspond to turnout effects, particularly after mandatory
voting was removed and automatic registration put into place. We consider this issue in the next
sub-section.


5.2     Effects on Voter Turnout

We turn to the individual-level voter turnout data to examine the impacts of plebiscite eligibility
on turnout for the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections. Since Chile's 2009 electoral reform led to au-
tomatic registration for all age-eligible Chileans, the estimated impacts of plebiscite eligibility on
downstream registration rates disappeared following the reform.
      We note that the bulk of literature on downstream voting effects has focused on the United
States, where electoral participation requires individuals to register to vote. As a result, upstream
election eligibility may lead to higher downstream turnout rates partly through differences in
registration rates across the eligibility cut-off.31 In fact, the existing literature does not identify
whether downstream voting effects are driven by a one-time registration effect or a long-run in-
creased preference for casting a ballot (Coppock and Green, 2016). Our estimates are the first in
the literature not to be plagued by this issue due to the implementation of universal registration
following Chile's electoral reform. As a result, our analysis of plebiscite eligibility on post-reform
electoral participation thus captures a 'pure' turnout effect.
      Figure 4 displays raw voter turnout rates for the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections by birth
week cohorts from 1950 through 1990. Between 1989 and 2009, registration of young cohorts
experience a large secular decline; 70% of Chileans born in 1950 turned out for the 2013 election,
doubling the participation of their counterparts born 40 years later.As with the registration time
series, there is one discontinuity which shows up clearly over the entire 40-year period across both
elections, which corresponds to the eligibility threshold for the 1988 plebiscite.32
      Our difference-in-discontinuity (equation (4)) estimates of marginal upstream election eligi-
bility upon voter turnout in the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections are presented in Table 5. Its first
row shows the estimated impact of plebiscite eligibility, which suggests statistically significant

   30 Note that the six figures presented in Figure 3 all have substantially different y-axis scales. The scale for the 1988

plebiscite is by far the largest as the effects are by the largest.
   31 Those eligible for the upstream election may act upon their initial excitement by registering to vote just after

turning 18. Meanwhile, those who are marginally ineligible are substantially older when they first vote and may thus
have less enthusiasm for voting than their marginally older counterparts. The fixed costs of registering to vote may not
be worthwhile for the marginally younger voter and thus a permanent turnout gap may emerge due to differences in
registration rates -- fully consistent with rational behavior.
   32 While the magnitude of the jump in turnout rates at the eligibility cutoff declines from the 2013 to the 2017 election,

the difference across the cutoff remains significant.


                                                             16
impacts across all three elections. We find that eligibility to participate in the plebiscite increased
voter turnout in the first round of the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections by 3 and 1.8 percent-
age points, respectively. Relative to baseline turnout rates in both elections -- 49.6% and 47.2%,
respectively -- the estimated impacts of Plebiscite eligibility correspond to an increased turnout
rate of 6% and 4% in the 2013 and 2017 elections.
    We also find a significant effect on a lower-stakes municipal election held in 2016, such that
upstream eligibility resulted in increased turnout by 2.1 percentage points, or 6%, relative to base-
line participation rates. The estimated effects are highly persistent through 2017, reaching close to
thirty years since the plebiscite. The original event has therefore had an impact over a time period
corresponding to around half of an adult's political life.33
    The results in Table 5 are further confirmed by the graphical evidence presented in the first
panel of Figures 5-7, which again show a linear decline in turnout for cohorts closer to the eligibil-
ity cutoff. This decline can be explained by the results shown in Figure 1, as cohorts born closer to
the cutoff were substantially less likely to register in time than those born even a few weeks earlier.
Meanwhile, turnout rates are largely flat across the cutoff for marginally-ineligible Chileans.
    Our Appendix presents evidence on the robustness of our baseline estimates to bandwidth and
functional form assumptions.34 In particular, we estimate equation (2) and present 12 different es-
timates for each upstream/downstream election pair, as we combine three bandwidths (26-week,
52-week and CCT) with four polynomials (linear, quadratic, cubic and quartic). The estimated
impacts of plebiscite eligibility are significant across all bandwidths in the linear and quadratic
polynomials for all downstream elections. See Tables A.4, A.5 and A.6 for the 2013, 2016 and 2017
elections, respectively.35
    Table 5 analyzes the comparative effects of eligibility for other upstream elections (relative to
the plebiscite) on downstream turnout rates. For the 2013 election, we find that Plebiscite eligibil-
ity had a significantly larger impact than any other upstream election. In fact, only the marginal
eligibility for the 1993 Presidential election had a positive effect on 2013 turnout, in the range of
1.3 percentage points.36 We find similar results for the 2016 and 2017 elections, as the differential
   33 Figure A.2 shows estimates of plebiscite eligibility on 2017 election turnout using placebo cut-offs within a six-year

window of the plebiscite registration date. We find that only the actual cutoff is associated with higher downstream
turnout effects.
   34 We also relax the assumption we impose about the correlation in the error terms. For most of our analysis, we

cluster at the week-of-birth level. This presumes no correlation in the propensity to turn out or register for those born
in different weeks. Since this assumption may not hold, we make alternative assumptions on the distribution of the
error term to test whether the assumption is consequential. In particular, we try clustering by month. This leaves us
with a number of clusters that is too small to claim asymptotic validity of the errors. We address this issue by using
the wild cluster bootstrap and separately estimating using Newey-West standard errors with one, two, four and eight
lags. Overall, significance levels of our estimates change only trivially for all the estimates presented in Section 5. These
results are available upon request.
   35 For instance, for the 2016 election, we find that the cubic and quartic 26-week bandwdith specifications are not

positive and significant (Table A.5), similar to the cubic 26-week bandwidth for 2017 shown in Table A.6. Nonetheless,
the insignificant coefficients correspond to bandwidths which are not close to the corresponding optimal CCT band-
widths shown in Table A.1 for high-order polynomials. For the cubic and quartic specifications for the 2016 election the
optimal CCT bandwidths are 40 and 55 weeks, respectively. For the 2017 election, the optimal CCT cubic bandwidth is
45 weeks.
   36 Table A.7 in the appendix displays estimates of equation (2) for each upstream election using a linear polynomial



                                                             17
downstream voting impacts of other election are all statistically distinguishable from the plebiscite
effect with well above a 99% level of confidence. While 1993 election eligibility increased turnout
in the 2013 election, the effect faded for the two subsequent elections. Moreover, we find that
2005 election eligibility may have had negative impacts on 2017 turnout.37 We confirm these re-
sults by presenting graphical evidence in the remaining panels of Figures 5-7. These graphs show
a positive effect of 1993 eligibility on 2013 turnout, which fades by 2016, along with insignificant
impacts for other upstream elections. All in all, the results presented so far indicate that the sizable
downstream voting effects of the 1988 election seem to be unique to the plebiscite.
      While we do not observe turnout for the pre-reform elections, CEP survey data indicates that
turnout rates are not different for registered individuals across the plebiscite cut-off. In Figure A.3,
we thus show the dynamic impact of plebiscite eligibility on turnout over time by graphing the
pre-reform registration effects for the pre-2010 period and the turnout impacts following 2013.38
The downstream effect by the 1989 election is close 30 percentage points, falling almost in half
by 1993, and declining steadily through 2009. Assuming equal 2009 turnout rates across the cut-
off, this result implies that downstream turnout effects fell from around 11 percentage points to 3
percentage points between the 2009 and 2013 presidential elections with the removal of mandatory
voting and the introduction of automatic registration. The reform both made it easier for non-
registrants to vote and allowed prior registrants not to vote. Both of these changes likely narrowed
the turnout differences between marginal eligibles and marginal ineligibles. Though the effect size
has declined since the reform, it remains positive and statistically significant even 29 years after
the plebiscite. Moreover, Chile's electoral reform implies that we can rule out that the persistent
voting effect is due to the fixed cost of voter registration. We can thus conclude, and hereby
differentiate ourselves from the prior literature, that plebiscite eligibility led to a significant long-
term shift in the preference to vote.


5.3     Persistence and initial mobilization as mechanisms

Two alternative channels could explain our estimated impact of plebiscite eligibility on down-
stream electoral turnout: a high degree of persistence in the initial effect, or a large initial political
mobilization for the plebiscite. A large initial mobilization will lead to larger downstream effects
because the size of the treated group is larger. A higher degree of persistence will lead to larger
downstream effects because the effects last longer. In this sub-section, we disentangle these two
channels by directly estimating the degree of persistence in voting in the initial election upon

with two different bandwidths. To address concerns of covariate imbalance in educational attainment for other up-
stream elections, columns (1)-(3) additionally present estimates of equation (2) using a 13-week bandwidth. Results
for a 26-week bandwidth are reported in columns (4)-(6). We do not find significant differences across specifications,
underlying the robustness of our results.
   37 While this result may seem surprising at first, we note that Coppock and Green (2016) have also documented that

participation in certain upstream elections in the United States has negative consequences on downstream turnout. For
example, participating in an election where ex-post the executive disappointed voters could make those who voted less
likely to participate in the future relative to those who were not able to participate
   38 We adjust the pre-reform registration effects by election turnout rates equally on both sides of the cut-off.



                                                         18
downstream voting. We do this by implementing a simple two-stage procedure.
    We first estimate a linear regression of voting in downstream elections on voting in the relevant
upstream election, which is instrumented by birth date eligibility. For consistency with the results
presented in Table 5, we estimate this first stage using the differences-in-discontinuity design pre-
sented in equation (4). If we denote by Y ^k the voter turnout in upstream election k, instrumented
                                                            i
by age-based eligibility, our two stage regression becomes:

           k, FirstStage
        Yi                    = 0   0         0    0                       0    0
                                0 + 1 Be f orei + µi (Cuto f f ) + Be f orei × µi (Cuto f f )
                                   j
                              +    Eik ×    k
                                            0   k
                                              + 0 Be f oreik + µik (Cuto f f ) + Be f oreik × µik (Cuto f f ) +   i   (4)
                                  k =1
        j,SecondStage           k   k       k, FirstStage       j,k
      Yi                      = 0 + 1 Yi                    + i                                                       (5)

             j, FirstStage
where Yi                     denotes having turned out to vote in the post-reform downstream election j (>
k). As explained above, our empirical analysis considers three post-reform downstream elections:
2013, 2016 and 2017.
    Table 6 presents our results. We recover the effect of upstream participation on downstream
turnout by dividing the reduced form estimate displayed in Table 5 by the first stage -- equal to 56
percentage points for the plebiscite --, as shown in Table 4. As a result, we find that having voted
in the plebiscite is associated with a higher turnout rate of 5.5 percentage points in the 2013 pres-
idential election, or 11% relative to baseline participation rates. The persistence estimate declines
to 3.8 percentage points for the 2016 election, which still represents 11% of baseline participation,
due to low turnout in municipal elections. On the other hand, the estimated impact falls to 3.3
percentage points by Chile's last presidential election, yet the turnout effects remain statistically
significant almost 30 years after the plebiscite.39
    We also present the persistence effects of other upstream elections to consider whether the
plebiscite effects are particularly large. We find that voting in the plebiscite had larger effects on
2013 turnout than having voted in any other election, except for the 1993 election. For the 2017
presidential election, the persistence effects of the plebiscite are not distinguishable from those for
the 1989 and 1999 elections. Similarly, the 2016 effects are only statistically larger than those in the
1999 and 2009 upstream elections.40
    39 Similar to the results presented in Section 5.2, we present various robustness checks to bandwidth and functional

form assumptions in Tables A.8, A.9 and A.10 for the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections, respectively. As in Tables A.4-
A.6, we find that the effects of plebiscite participation on downstream turnout are significant across all bandwidths
in the linear and quadratic polynomials. However, we find four insignificant coefficients in the cubic and quartic 26-
week bandwidth specifications for the 2016 election and the 26-week/cubic and CCT-bandwidth/quartic specifications
for the 2017 election. In Figure A.4, we show the robustness of the estimated effects of plebiscite participation on
downstream turnout to bandwidths ranging from two weeks to one year.
    40 Table A.11 presents the results for each upstream election. Columns (1)-(3) correspond to the findings using a

13-week bandwidth and (4)-(6) a 26-week bandwidth, which confirm that our results are robust to the bandwidth
selection. We first note that instrument weakness is not a concern as first stage F-statistics never dip below 150 for
any combination of downstream and upstream election. The results show that voting in the 1999, 2005 and 2009 may
have depressed turnout in downstream elections. This result could arise in an upstream election with a disappointing
outcome for young voters, which subsequently discourages future participation. For example, since previous work


                                                                      19
      While the persistence effects for the plebiscite are larger than those of other upstream elections
for at least one of the three downstream elections, these differences are not as large as those shown
in Table 5, which showed the Plebiscite had a far larger downstream impact than any other elec-
tion. In fact, the plebiscite persistence estimates are not necessarily larger than those found in the
United States, as Coppock and Green (2016) find a wide range of positive persistence effects. As a
result, we conclude that the large impacts of plebiscite eligibility on downstream participation are
not because of an unusually high degree of persistence but rather because of an unusually large
initial mobilization to vote.


6     Heterogeneous Effects and Complier Characteristics
How did plebiscite eligibility affect downstream electoral outcomes across different groups? De-
spite the fact that we do not observe turnout outcomes by educational attainment, we can char-
acterize differential registration effects by education, a first in the literature. We also analyze
heterogeneous effects by gender and by partisanship. Since the downstream plebiscite estimates
presented in Section 5 vary by bandwidth, we also check for heterogeneity in complier character-
istics across bandwidths. We use this heterogeneity in effect sizes and in complier characteristics
to interpret the variation in effect sizes by bandwidth.


6.1     Gender, Partisanship and Education

Gender. Women in Latin American countries are more likely than men to both register and turn
out to vote (Espinal and Zhao, 2015). However, this fact need not translate into women being
more or less reactive to the long-run effects of plebiscite participation. Hirmas (1993) argues that
Pinochet's opposition decided to target women in their franja slot based upon focus groups and
research by consulting firms. As a result, the effect of plebiscite participation for marginally-
eligible women may have been larger. We thus examine the heterogeneous effects of plebiscite
eligibility on registration and downstream electoral turnout by gender, a first in the literature.
      We estimate equation (2) separately by gender and present the results in Table 7. The first two
columns show that plebiscite eligibility increased concurrent female registration by 53 percentage
points though the corresponding effect for men was larger, reaching 59 percentage points. We also
estimate equation (2) by pooling the sample and we test for statistical difference in the size of the
coefficients. We find that plebiscite eligibility initially mobilized men significantly more than it
did women.
      We also find differences in downstream turnout effects by gender. Plebiscite eligibility in-
creased 2013 election turnout for 3.7 percentage points for men, or 8% of baseline participation.
Meanwhile, the corresponding effect for women reached 1.9 percentage points, or 3.4% of base-
line electoral turnout. These differences persisted through the 2017 Presidential election, when

(Titiunik, 2009) has found a negative party incumbency effect in Brazil, experiencing a party in power may move voters
away from supporting that party or even away from politics more broadly.


                                                         20
the turnout effect for men accounted for 5.4% of baseline turnout rates. The Appendix presents
graphical evidence confirming these results (see Figure A.5). Table A.12 reports heterogeneous
effects of upstream eligibility on downstream turnout for other elections and we fail to find larger
effects for men than for women. All in all, these results indicate that the persistence effect for men
was substantial and specific to the plebiscite. Dividing by the first stage, plebiscite participation
raised male turnout in the 2013 election by 14% of baseline participation rates.

Partisanship: Effects by Salvador Allende's 1970 Support. Since we do not directly observe
voters' partisan affiliation, we rely on pre-plebiscite measures of political affiliation in order to
analyze how downstream effects vary by partisanship. We thus consider heterogeneous effects by
Allende vote share at the comuna level in the last pre-dictatorship election, held in 1970. Allende's
support was highly heterogeneous across the country, as he received less than 15% of the vote
in comunas such as Providencia and over 65% of electoral support in Coronel and Lota. Similar
to Gonz´
       alez and Prem (2018), we estimate heterogeneity in initial registration by prior Allende
vote-share to see whether the plebiscite differentially mobilized the left and also in downstream
persistence, to analyze whether the long-term effects were larger for left-leaning groups.41
    We estimate a heterogeneous regression discontinuity design, interacting each term in equa-
tion (2) with Allendeic , which corresponds to Salvador Allende's voting share in the 1970 election
in person i's comuna (c) of residence at the time of registration. We also control for various co-
muna-level characteristics measured in the 1992 census, including comuna-level unemployment
rate, literacy rate, and various measures of household well-being. We present our results in Ta-
ble 8. The first column shows that eligible Chileans living in high-Allende support comunas had
lower registration rates for the plebiscite vis-a-vis their counterparts in less left-leaning localities,
fitting in with the existing literature across different countries. On the other hand, in the last three
columns, we show that plebiscite eligibles who lived in higher left-leaning comunas had higher
downstream turnout rates -- with the caveat that the standard errors are quite wide and the effect
is only statistically significant for the 2017 election. The coefficient for the 2017 election indicates
that an increase in the Allende share from 0% to 100% is associated with a 8.7 percentage point
higher impact of the plebiscite on downstream turnout. The analogous estimates for the 2013 and
2016 elections are similar, ranging from five to eight percentage points. These results are sugges-
tive, especially since we do not observe comuna of residence at the time of the plebiscite; yet they
suggest that participating in the plebiscite may have had larger long-term effects for left-leaning
individuals.42

    41 One important caveat of this approach is that we do not observe individual's comuna of residence throughout their

lifetime, but rather their residence at the time of voter registration. As a result, our analysis of heterogeneous effects
across geographic areas relies on the assumption that individuals did not move their comuna of registration. In the
presence of random migration, this would lead to attenuation of our estimated effects.
    42 We have separately examined the role that media played by intermediating the effect of the plebiscite, particularly

in light of the importance of the "No" campaign on television. We do this first by regressing individual turnout on
our treatment dummy interacted with the television share and then also by regressing on the the dummy interacted
with all three of (a.) the television share, (b.) the 1970 Allende share, and (c.) their interaction. We did not find larger
downstream effects for individuals residing in comunas with higher TV penetration (individually) nor interacted with


                                                            21
Educational Attainment. An extensive literature has documented higher turnout rates among
highly educated citizens, both in developed countries (Milligan et al., 2004; Dee, 2004; Sondheimer
and Green, 2010; Marshall, 2019; Kaplan and Spenkuch, 2019) and in Latin America (Haime, 2017).
However, to the best of our knowledge, the existing literature has not yet examined how up-
stream election eligibility affects participation differentially by education. While we do not ob-
serve turnout effects by education, we examine heterogeneous registration effects by education,
providing an important contribution to the literature .
      We estimate equation (2) using a linear polynomial with a 26-week bandwidth separately for
high school dropouts, high school graduates and those who have gone beyond high school. We
present the results in Table 9.43 The first panel shows the estimated effects for the plebiscite. We
find larger first-stage effects for higher educated individuals, as eligibility induces 48 percent of
those with at least some post-secondary education to register, relative to 30.6 percent of high school
dropouts. On the other hand, by 2009, we find similar registration effects in absolute levels be-
tween eligibles and ineligibles for the three educational groups. In fact, since high school dropouts
have far lower baseline 2009 registration rates, we find that plebiscite eligibility resulted in down-
stream registration rates which were 16.7% higher than those for their ineligible counterparts --
higher than the corresponding effect (11.2%) for those in the highest-education group.
      In the remaining panels, we examine whether registration effects vary by upstream election.
We find multiple substantial differences. First, we note that initial mobililzation (first stage) ef-
fects of post-1988 elections are smaller in magnitude uniformly for all educational groups than
for the plebiscite, confirming the results presented in Table 4. Second, we find far larger initial
mobililization effects for the beyond-high-school groups vis-a-vis high school dropouts in each
election. Third, we find that the mobillization gap across educational groups is by far the smallest
for the plebiscite: while the ratio of the first-stage coefficient for these two groups equals 1.6 in the
plebiscite, it exceeds 3 in all other upstream elections. Fourth, different from the plebiscite where
we still see 9.9 percentage point higher registration rates in 2009, we find that initial eligibility
for high school dropouts yields small differences in 2009 registration rates among eligibles rela-
tive to ineligibles for all other elections. The largest downstream effect, for the 1999 presidential
election, only reaches 2.2 percentage points, or one-fourth of the estimated plebiscite effect. These
results thus indicate that plebiscite eligibility induced a sizably larger share of less educated indi-
viduals to initially register to vote and initial eligibility was associated with higher downstream
registration rates for this group only for the plebiscite.


6.2     Complier Characteristics

We have shown that the local average treatment effects vary within elections when we consider
different bandwidths (Tables A.8-A.10). In what follows, we examine whether differences in the

Allende baseline support. However, the standard errors are quite large. These results are available upon request.
   43 As discussed in Section 3, we do not observe educational attainment for all individuals in our sample. As a result,

the estimated combined sample sizes for the three educational attainment groups are smaller than in Table A.7.


                                                           22
types of compliers may account for the variation in the estimated effects.
    We first examine complier characteristics across upstream elections and bandwidths following
the approach presented in Angrist and Pischke (2008), where compliers are the eligible individuals
who registered to vote in the corresponding election.44
    Table 10 presents our results for the 26-week bandwidth and three characteristics of interest:
education, gender, and the comuna-level variables discussed above. As in Deshpande (2016), we
include three columns for each upstream election, covering average characteristics for the full
sample (26-weeks on both sides of the cut-off), average characteristics only for compliers, and the
average characteristics for the ratio between the two. We first note that the share of compliers is
far larger for the plebiscite than for other elections, as shown in Table 4. Furthermore, as discussed
in Section 6.1, we find significant differences in terms of compliers' educational attainment across
upstream elections. In the plebiscite, the complier ratio for high school dropouts equals 0.89, and
the corresponding ratio for all other elections does not surpass 0.82.45 For the other characteristics,
the differences are not as stark. We note that the plebiscite as well as the 1989 and 1993 elections
had a higher male complier ratio, which reversed in subsequent upstream elections. We do not
find significant differences in complier characteristics across comuna-level variables, though com-
pliers in the 1999, 2005 and 2009 elections are more likely to come from lower Allende-supported
comunas with lower unemployment rates.
    Since the estimated average effects vary across different bandwidths, we also examine vari-
ation in complier characteristics across these bandwidths. We consider 13- and 52-week band-
widths and present the results in Table A.13. For the plebiscite, the male complier ratio decreases
with longer bandwidths, indicating that IV estimates with larger bandwidths include a larger
share of women in the complier group. This, however, is not the case for other upstream elections.
On the education side, we find that the complier ratio for high school dropouts is lower (0.857) for
the 13-week bandwidth and significantly higher (0.933) for the 52-week bandwidth. These pat-
terns hold across other elections as well, yet the absolute complier ratios for high school dropouts
are far lower than for the plebiscite, independent of the selected bandwidth. All in all, these re-
sults indicate that lower educated citizens are far more likely to register to vote when they have
additional time to do so, but also are more likely to register for more consequential elections.
    Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2010) present a strategy for recovering the source of differences
in LATE estimates across samples by separately estimating the local average treatment effect for
each complier group/cell and re-weighting the samples to make the LATE estimates comparable.
However, this approach is not feasible in our context, as we cannot estimate downstream voting
impacts by education groups. Nonetheless, we approximate their analysis by presenting graphical
evidence on both treatment on the treated effects and complier characteristics using twelve differ-
   44 Since Chileans who had not turned 18 by the date of the election could not register to vote, there are no always-

takers or defiers in our context.
   45 The ratio is far lower for the 1989, 1999, 2005 and 2009 elections. The complier ratio for high school dropouts in

the 1993 election is somewhat closer to that for the plebiscite. Since this election had a larger first-stage effect (20.3%)
relative to other elections, it may also, as with the plebiscite, have induced a relatively higher fraction of less educated
voters to register.


                                                            23
ent bandwidths, ranging from one- to twelve-months, in Figure 8. We find that the estimated
instrumental variable estimates for the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections covary positively with
the high school dropout and the female complier ratios, which may indicate larger downstream
effects of early-life political participation for less educated voters.
      The results shown in this section, along with those presented in Figure A.1 show a sizable
share of Chileans over 18 were induced to register to vote due to age-based eligibility, and that
these individuals were relatively more likely to be less educated vis-a-vis compliers in comparison
with other subsequent elections. As a result, the plebiscite permanently shifted the composition of
the Chilean electorate under the old electoral system. In the next section, we examine the potential
long-run partisanship consequences of the 1988 referendum.


6.3     Partisanship Effects

In this sub-section, we examine whether the Plebiscite had an impact on subsequent electoral out-
                                           on Presidents after the reinstatement of democracy.46
comes, given the twenty years of Concertaci´
We note that the analysis presented here is suggestive, as we do not observe individual-level par-
tisan turnout/support.
      In order to compute a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the impact of the plebiscite upon the
Concertaci´
          on vote share, we rely on four pieces of information. First, we recover the number of
Plebiscite eligibles by educational attainment group.47 We then multiply this number by the esti-
mated downstream election registration effect by education group presented in Table 9. We fur-
ther adjust this number by the average turnout rate for each presidential election, which ranged
between 86.7% and 94.5%, as shown in Table 1. Lastly, we impute the partisanship effect by taking
advantage of pre-election polls conducted by CEP in 1989, 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 -- these polls
                                                            on by educational attainment.48
include measures of heterogeneous support for the Concertaci´
      We present our results in Table 11. We find significant gains for the Concertaci´
                                                                                      on in the 1989
and 1993 elections, reaching close to 1.5 percentage points, yet these effects decline over time as
the share of plebiscite eligibles shrink as a fraction of the electorate. These estimates of the left
wing vote share impacts are likely lower bounds. First, we make a conservative assumption by
only considering eligible individuals as 'treated' if they were born between 1950 and 1970. More
importantly, we do not observe partisanship and therefore cannot directly estimate the differential
   46 As noted above, Concertaci´on was the political organization that formed in order to defeat the plebiscite on contin-
ued Pinochet rule back in 1988.
   47 We construct this number as follows. From the merged administrative data, we directly observe the number of

individuals who turned 18 prior to the eligibility cut-off by attainment group. We note that attainment data is missing
for 10% of the sample, and to adjust for this issue, we assume that attainment is missing at random, and multiply the
raw number of eligibles by 1.11. Since the registration data was collected in 2009, we restrict our analysis to eligible
individuals born in 1950-1970 to avoid including older citizens who had died by 2009, which provides a conservative
estimate of partisanship effects.
   48 These surveys were conducted 1-2 months prior to each election and include 1,000-1,500 respondents each. Since

the CEP surveys do not include a consistent measure of educational attainment, we rely on their socioeconomic status
indicator which classifies respondents by three categories. The 2005 survey also includes educational attainment, and
we find a high correlation in these measures. We thus impute average Concertaci´     on support by education using the
stated vote preference by SES in the CEP surveys.


                                                            24
turnout impacts upon those who would vote left versus right (the maximum differential voting
rates for the left across our three educational groups and all elections is 0.08). Thus, since ed-
ucation is an imperfect signal of partisanship, using education should attenuate our estimates.
Nonetheless, we find moderate partisan impacts two decades after the 1988 plebiscite.
    Our estimates provide a potential partial explanation of one party dominance in newly demo-
cratic (including post-colonial) states (Magaloni, 2006; Magaloni and Kricheli, 2010). Prior litera-
ture has focused on loyalty in support of the party that establishes democracy such as the ANC
in South Africa, the labor party in Israel, Frelimo in Mozambique, or the Congress Party in India.
However, we suggest an additional mechanism which may be quantitatively important: fighting
and/or voting for democracy may not only make voters loyal to a party which wins democratic
rights but may also bolster turnout and for decades to come.


7    Conclusion
In this paper, we present evidence that early in life electoral participation can be consequential
even across multiple decades. However, there is strong heterogeneity by type of election. We find
no persistent downstream effects of electoral participation for most elections in Chile. However,
we find that voting for the restoration of democracy in the 1988 plebiscite which ended 17 years of
military rule in Chile boosted turnout three decades later in the 2017 Chilean presidential election
by 3.3 percentage points. We show that the long-lasting impacts of the plebiscite differ from those
from other elections not due to differential persistence of voting for democracy but due to the
mass mobilization at the time.
    Different from estimates in the United States, ours reflect a pure effect of voting on future voter
turnout since Chile abandoned voluntary registration as a precondition for voting after the 2009
presidential elections. We find small differences in the effects gender but larger differential effects
by education, with larger effects for less educated individuals. Finally, we provide suggestive
evidence that the effects of electoral participation in the plebiscite shifted the electorate to the left
politically by bolstering future turnout and particularly for the left. Bolstered turnout for the party
that wins democracy can help explain one party dominance in newly democratized countries.




                                                   25
References
                            ¨
Alesina, A. and N. Fuchs-Schundeln (2007). Goodbye lenin (or not?): The effect of communism on
  people's preferences. American Economic Review 97(4), 1507­1528.

Angrist, J. and I. Fernandez-Val (2010). Extrapolate-ing: External validity and overidentification
  in the late framework. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion.
  Princeton University Press.

Arceneaux, K. and D. W. Nickerson (2009). Who is mobilized to vote? a re-analysis of 11 field
  experiments. American Journal of Political Science 53(1), 1­16.

Bautista, M. A., F. Gonz´
                        alez, L. R. Mart´          ~
                                        inez, P. Munoz, and M. Prem (2019). The geography of
  dictatorship and support for democracy. mimeograph.

Boas, T. C. (2015). Voting for Democracy: Campaign Effects in Chile's Democratic Transition. Latin
  American Politics and Society 57(2), 67­90.

Boeninger, E. (1997). Democracia en Chile: Lecciones para la Gobernabilidad. Andr´
                                                                                 es Bello.

Calonico, S., M. D. Cattaneo, and R. Titiunik (2014). Robust Nonparametric Confidence Intervals
  for Regression-Discontinuity Designs. Econometrica 82(6), 2295­2326.

                                                                               ´ electoral en
Contreras, G. and P. Navia (2013). Diferencias Generacionales en la Participacion
  Chile, 1988-2010. Revista de ciencia pol´
                                          itica (Santiago) 33(2), 419­441.

Coppock, A. and D. P. Green (2016). Is Voting Habit Forming? new Evidence from Experiments
  and Regression Discontinuities. American Journal of Political Science 60(4), 1044­1062.

Corvalan, A. and P. Cox (2018). The impact of procedural information costs on voting: Evidence
  from a natural experiment in chile. Political Behavior 40(1), 3­19.

De Kadt, D. (2017). Voting then, voting now: The long-term consequences of participation in south
  africas first democratic election. The Journal of Politics 79(2), 670­687.

Dee, T. S. (2004). Are there civic returns to education? Journal of Public Economics 88(9-10), 1697­
  1720.

Deshpande, M. (2016). Does welfare inhibit success? the long-term effects of removing low-
  income youth from the disability rolls. American Economic Review 106(11), 3300­3330.

Donald, S. G. and K. Lang (2007). Inference with Difference-in-Differences and Other Panel Data.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2), 221­233.



                                                   26
Espinal, R. and S. Zhao (2015). Gender Gaps in Civic and Political Participation in latin america.
  Latin American Politics and Society 57(1), 123­138.

                                                               ´ (2017). At a Crossroads : Higher
Ferreyra, M., C. Avitabile, J. Botero, F. Haimovich, and S. Urzua
  Education in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.

Fuentes, C. (2013). El fraude: Cr´
                                 onica sobre el Plebiscito de la Constituci´
                                                                           on de 1980. Hueders.

Fujiwara, T., K. Meng, and T. Vogl (2016). Habit Formation in Voting: Evidence from Rainy Elec-
  tions. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(4), 160­88.

Gelman, A. and G. Imbens (2019). Why high-order polynomials should not be used in regression
  discontinuity designs. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37(3), 447­456.

Gerber, A. S. and D. P. Green (2000). The effects of canvassing, telephone calls, and direct mail on
  voter turnout: A field experiment. American Political Science Review 94(3), 653­663.

Gerber, A. S., D. P. Green, and C. W. Larimer (2008). Social pressure and voter turnout: Evidence
  from a large-scale field experiment. American Political Science Review 102(1), 33­48.

Gerber, A. S., D. P. Green, and R. Shachar (2003). Voting may be habit-forming: evidence from a
  randomized field experiment. American Journal of Political Science 47(3), 540­550.

Gonz´
    alez, F. and M. Prem (2018). Can television bring down a dictator? Evidence from Chiles no
  campaign. Journal of Comparative Economics 46(1), 349­361.

Green, D. P. and A. S. Gerber (2019). Get out the vote: How to increase voter turnout. Brookings
  Institution Press.

Haime, A. (2017). ¿Qu´                       ´ electoral en am´
                     e explica la participacion               erica latina?: Un estudio sobre
  el efecto de la actitud de los ciudadanos hacia el proceso electoral. Revista de ciencia pol´
                                                                                              itica
  (Santiago) 37(1), 69­93.

Hirmas, M. E. (1993). The Chilean Case: Television in the 1988 Plebiscite. Television, Politics, and
  the Transition to Democracy in Latin America, 82­96.

Holbein, J. and M. Rangel (2019). Does voting have upstream and downstream consequences?
  evidence from compulsory voting in Brazil. The Journal of Politics (forthcoming).

Imbens, G. W. and T. Lemieux (2008). Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Practice.
  Journal of Econometrics 142(2), 615­635.

Kaplan, E. and S. Mukand (2014). The persistence of political partisanship: Evidence from 9/11.
  mimeograph.

Kaplan, E. and J. Spenkuch (2019). Education, voter participation and partisan orientation. mimeo.


                                                   27
Laudenbach, C., U. Malmendier, and A. Niessen-Ruenzi (2019). Emotional tagging and belief
  formation: The long-lasting effects of experiencing communism. In AEA Papers and Proceedings,
  Volume 109, pp. 567­71.

Loveman, B. (1995). The transition to civilian government in chile, 1990­1994. The Struggle for
  Democracy in Chile, 305­337.

Magaloni, B. (2006). Voting for autocracy: Hegemonic party survival and its demise in Mexico, Volume
  296. Cambridge University Press.

Magaloni, B. and R. Kricheli (2010). Political order and one-party rule. Annual Review of Political
  Science 13, 123­143.

Marshall, J. (2019). The Anti-Democrat Diploma: How High School Education Decreases Support
  for the Democratic Party. American Journal of Political Science 63(1), 67­83.

McEwan, P. J. and J. S. Shapiro (2008). The Benefits of Delayed Primary School Enrollment Dis-
  continuity Estimates Using exact Birth Dates. Journal of Human Resources 43(1), 1­29.

Meredith, M. (2009). Persistence in Political Participation. Quarterly Journal of Political Science 4(3),
  187­209.

Milligan, K., E. Moretti, and P. Oreopoulos (2004). Does Education Improve Citizenship? Evidence
  from the United States and the United Kingdom. Journal of Public Economics 88(9-10), 1667­1695.

Mullainathan, S. and E. Washington (2009). Sticking with your vote: Cognitive dissonance and
  political attitudes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1), 86­111.

Nagy, S. and F. I. Leiva (2005). Democracy in Chile:Tthe Legacy of September 11, 1973. ISBS.

                             ´ Electoral en chile, 1988-2001. Revista de Ciencia Pol´
Navia, P. (2004). Participacion                                                     itica (Santi-
  ago) 24(1), 81­103.

Nyhan, B., C. Skovron, and R. Titiunik (2017). Differential Registration Bias in Voter File Data: A
  Sensitivity Analysis Approach. American Journal of Political Science 61(3), 744­760.

Prior, M. (2010). You've either got it or you don't? The stability of political interest over the life
  cycle. The Journal of Politics 72(3), 747­766.

Sears, D. O. and C. L. Funk (1999). Evidence of the long-term persistence of adults' political
  predispositions. The Journal of Politics 61(1), 1­28.

Sears, D. O. and N. A. Valentino (1997). Politics matters: Political events as catalysts for preadult
  socialization. American Political Science Review 91(1), 45­65.

Sondheimer, R. M. and D. P. Green (2010). Using experiments to estimate the effects of education
  on voter turnout. American Journal of Political Science 54(1), 174­189.

                                                   28
Titiunik, R. (2009). Incumbency Advantage in Brazil: Evidence from Municipal Mayor Elections.
  mimeo.

Varas, A. (1982). The Crisis of Legitimacy of Military Rule in the 1980s. The Struggle for Democracy
  in Chile 1990, 73­97.

Welp, Y. (2010). El Referendo en Am´                 ~ Institucionales y Equilibrios de Poder.
                                   erica Latina. Disenos
  Nueva Sociedad 228, 26­42.




                                                29
Tables and Figures

                          Table 1: Aggregate Voter Turnout for Presidential Elections

                      Eligible     Registered     Votes Cast      Share Registered       Share Voting      Turnout Rate
            1988     8,062,000      7,436,000     7,251,000            0.922                0.899             0.975
            1989     8,243,000      7,558,000     7,159,000            0.917                0.868             0.947
            1993     8,951,000      8,085,000     7,377,000            0.903                0.824             0.912
            1999     9,945,000      8,084,000     7,272,000            0.813                0.731             0.900
            2005    10,800,000      8,221,000     7,207,000            0.761                0.667             0.877
            2009    12,226,000      8,285,000     7,186,000            0.678                0.588             0.867
            2013    13,188,000     13,388,000     6,634,000            1.000                0.496             0.496
            2017    14,080,000     14,080,000     6,646,000            1.000                0.472             0.472

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Table 1 presents summary statistics of voter registration and turnout for the 1988 Plebiscite and for all Presidential elections
since 1989.




                                                                 30
                                               Table 2: Descriptive Statistics

                            Full Sample             Before Plebiscite      After Plebiscite     6 Months Before        6 Months After
                                  (1)                      (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)
  Individual-Level Characteristics
  Male                          0.487                      0.472                 0.503                 0.494                 0.496
                                 (0.5)                    (0.499)                (0.5)                 (0.5)                 (0.5)
  HS Dropout                    0.521                      0.538                  0.51                 0.339                 0.343
                                 (0.5)                    (0.499)                (0.5)                (0.474)               (0.475)
  HS Graduate                   0.373                      0.372                 0.373                 0.512                 0.503
                               (0.484)                    (0.483)               (0.484)                (0.5)                 (0.5)
  > HS Graduate                 0.106                       0.09                 0.117                 0.149                 0.154
                               (0.308)                    (0.286)               (0.321)               (0.356)               (0.361)
  Comuna-Level Characteristics
  Allende Share                 0.372                       0.37                 0.374                 0.372                 0.372
                               (0.102)                    (0.103)               (0.101)               (0.103)               (0.102)
  TV Ownership Share            0.846                      0.846                 0.846                 0.846                 0.847
                               (0.102)                    (0.103)               (0.101)               (0.100)               (0.100)
  Electricity in Home           0.908                      0.904                 0.912                 0.902                 0.905
                               (0.137)                    (0.141)               (0.133)                (0.14)               (0.139)
  Water in Home                 0.754                       0.75                 0.759                 0.745                 0.749
                               (0.193)                    (0.197)               (0.189)               (0.197)               (0.194)
  Toilet in Home                0.701                      0.695                 0.706                 0.689                 0.693
                               (0.235)                    (0.239)                (0.23)               (0.238)               (0.236)
  Literacy Rate                 0.904                      0.903                 0.905                 0.902                 0.903
                               (0.042)                    (0.043)               (0.041)               (0.043)               (0.042)
  Unemployment Rate             0.087                      0.087                 0.087                 0.088                 0.088
                               (0.026)                    (0.026)               (0.025)               (0.026)               (0.026)
  Registration Outcomes
  Registered for Plebiscite     0.406                      0.809                   0                   0.669                   0
                               (0.491)                    (0.393)                 (0)                 (0.471)                 (0)
  Registered by 2009            0.598                      0.895                 0.298                 0.864                 0.692
                                (0.49)                    (0.307)               (0.457)               (0.343)               (0.462)
  Turnout Outcomes
  Voted in 2013 Election        0.495                      0.617                 0.373                 0.554                 0.504
                                 (0.5)                    (0.486)               (0.484)               (0.497)                 (0.5)
  Voted in 2016 Election        0.352                      0.452                 0.265                 0.398                 0.369
                               (0.478)                    (0.498)               (0.442)               (0.489)               (0.483)
  Voted in 2017 Election        0.472                      0.559                   0.4                 0.515                 0.483
                               (0.499)                    (0.496)                (0.49)                 (0.5)                 (0.5)
  Sample Size (Turnout)      13393246                    6724234               6669012                114521                130684
  Sample Size (Education)    11370669                    4797356               6034206                 87595                 97518

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Seguro de Cesantia, Ficha de Proteccion Social, 1992 and 2002
Chilean Census.
Note: Table 2 presents summary statistics for the sample considered in the paper. The first column shows summary statistics for the
full sample. The second and third columns present descriptive statistics for Chileans born before and after the Plebiscite, respectively.
The last two columns present information for individuals who turned 18 six months before and after the Plebiscite, respectively. In
each column, we include individuals' gender, comuna-level characteristics matched to their 2013 comuna of residence and educational
attainment from the FPS/SC merged dataset. In the last two rows, we include the sample size for the turnout data as well as the sample
size for whom we observe educational attainment.




                                                                    31
                 Table 3: Model Selection: Five Fold Cross-Validation and AIC Procedure


                                                  Panel A. Five Fold Cross-Validation

          Outcome Variable              First Stage               2013 Turnout              2016 Turnout               2017 Turnout
          Bandwidth                 13      17      26          13     17     26          13     17     26           13     17     26
                                    (1)     (2)     (3)        (4)     (5)    (6)        (7)     (8)    (9)         (10)   (11)   (12)
          Linear                   0.338 0.332 0.324          0.499 0.499 0.499         0.485 0.486 0.486          0.500 0.500 0.500
          Quadratic                0.338 0.332 0.323          0.499 0.499 0.499         0.485 0.486 0.486          0.500 0.500 0.500
          Cubic                    0.338 0.332 0.323          0.499 0.499 0.499         0.485 0.486 0.486          0.500 0.500 0.500
          Quartic                  0.338 0.332 0.323          0.499 0.499 0.499         0.485 0.486 0.486          0.500 0.500 0.500
          Non-Parametric           0.339 0.333 0.324          0.499 0.499 0.499         0.485 0.486 0.486          0.500 0.500 0.500


                                                          Panel B. AIC Procedure

   Outcome Variable           First Stage           2009 Registration           2013 Turnout             2016 Turnout              2017 Turnout
   Bandwidth           13         26      52      13       26        52     13       26      52      13       26       52      13       26       52
                       (1)        (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)     (7)      (8)     (9)    (10)     (11)     (12)    (13)     (14)     (15)
   Linear             85285    142938 252254    138550 259069 494905      184133 354521 703661     176202 340330 676500      183653 354081 705314
   Quadratic          84956    142155 250541    138527 258988 494713      184132 354516 703604     176195 340332 676493      183656 354083 705270
   Cubic              84916    141942 250059    138527 258971 494665      184132 354515 703590     176198 340329 676491      183658 354082 705264
   Quartic            84920    141896 249603    138529 258972 494642      184135 354518 703592     176201 340325 676488      183661 354085 705265


Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: The first panel of Table 3 presents the root mean square error (RMSE) from a five-fold cross-validation procedure applied to
different functional form assumptions and bandwidths for the first stage and the downstream elections. The second panel presents
the Akaike information criterion (AIC) across polynomial/bandwidth combinations for the first stage, 2009 registration rates and
downstream election turnout rates.




                                                                          32
                Table 4: Downstream Registration Effects of Upstream Election Eligibility

                                                                     Downstream Election
                         1988 Plebiscite        1989 Election     1993 Election 1999 Election        2005 Election     2009 Election
    Upstream Election           (1)                  (2)               (3)           (4)                  (5)               (6)
    Panel A. 1988 Plebiscite
    Before                    0.560                 0.318             0.157           0.143                0.13             0.124
                            (0.020)***            (0.016)***        (0.010)***      (0.009)***          (0.008)***        (0.008)***
    Control Mean                                     0.31             0.626           0.654               0.679             0.692
    Observations                                                             250388
    Panel B. 1989 Election
    Before                                          0.145             0.024            0.02               0.018             0.017
                                                  (0.002)***        (0.004)***      (0.004)***          (0.004)***        (0.004)***
    Control Mean                                                      0.577           0.614               0.645             0.661
    Observations                                                             261786
    Panel C. 1993 Election
    Before                                                            0.203             0.082              0.06             0.054
                                                                    (0.007)***        (0.006)***        (0.006)***        (0.006)***
    Control Mean                                                                        0.289             0.375             0.416
    Observations                                                             248871
    Panel D. 1999 Election
    Before                                                                              0.045             0.024             0.019
                                                                                      (0.003)***        (0.002)***        (0.003)***
    Control Mean                                                                                          0.235             0.298
    Observations                                                             274566
    Panel E. 2005 Election
    Before                                                                                                0.088             0.033
                                                                                                        (0.002)***        (0.003)***
    Control Mean                                                                                                            0.165
    Observations                                                             287364
    Panel F. 2009 Election
    Before                                                                                                                  0.068
                                                                                                                          (0.002)***
    Control Mean
    Observations                                                             296631

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table
4 presents estimates of equation (2) using a linear functional form with a 26 week bandwidth across each election cut-off. The results
refer to the estimated impacts of upstream election eligibility (1988 Plebiscite, 1989 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 Presidential elections) on
differential registration rates across various downstream elections. The values along the diagonal correspond to the first-stage results.
The 'Control Mean' row corresponds to the share of marginally ineligible individuals who had registered to vote in the downstream
election denoted in each column.




                                                                   33
     Table 5: Estimated Effects of Upstream Election Eligibility on 2013, 2016 and 2017 Turnout

                                                       2013 Election          2016 Election         2017 Election
                   Before                                0.0300***              0.0206***             0.0180***
                                                          (0.0048)               (0.0036)              (0.0036)

                   Before × 1989 Election                 -0.0303***            -0.0157***            -0.0151***
                                                           (0.0057)              (0.0047)              (0.0052)

                   Before × 1993 Election                 -0.0165***            -0.0147***            -0.0214***
                                                           (0.0062)              (0.0056)              (0.0056)

                   Before × 1999 Election                 -0.0379***            -0.0252***            -0.0197***
                                                           (0.0056)              (0.0051)              (0.0050)

                   Before × 2005 Election                 -0.0373***            -0.0212***            -0.0281***
                                                           (0.0066)              (0.0050)              (0.0050)

                   Before × 2009 Election                 -0.0350***            -0.0281***            -0.0238***
                                                           (0.0067)              (0.0055)              (0.0055)
                   Observations                            1587822               1583460               1583419



Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table 5 presents estimates of equation (4) using a linear functional form with a 26 week bandwidth across each election cut-off. The
results refer to the estimated differential impacts of upstream election eligibility (1988 Plebiscite compared to the 1989 1993, 1999, 2005
and 2009 Presidential elections) on turnout in the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections.




                                                                   34
  Table 6: Estimated Effects of Upstream Election Participation on 2013, 2016 and 2017 Turnout

                                                      2013 Election         2016 Election         2017 Election
                   Before                               0.0551***             0.0379***             0.0331***
                                                         (0.0075)              (0.0062)              (0.0061)

                   Before × 1989 Election                -0.0568**              -0.0033               -0.0130
                                                          (0.0222)              (0.0219)              (0.0262)

                   Before × 1993 Election                  0.0119               -0.0083               -0.0498**
                                                          (0.0201)              (0.0217)               (0.0221)

                   Before × 1999 Election                -0.2309***             -0.1399*              -0.0702
                                                          (0.0674)              (0.0793)              (0.0777)

                   Before × 2005 Election                -0.1381***             -0.0437              -0.1484***
                                                          (0.0534)              (0.0390)              (0.0397)

                   Before × 2009 Election                 -0.1286*              -0.1468**             -0.1184*
                                                          (0.0700)               (0.0617)             (0.0607)
                   Observations                           1587822                1583460              1583419



Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table 6 presents estimates of a fuzzy differences-in-discontinuity using a linear functional form with a 26 week bandwidth across each
election cut-off. The results refer to the estimated differential impacts of upstream election participation (1988 Plebiscite compared to
the 1989 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 Presidential elections) on turnout in the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections.




                                                                  35
                      Table 7: Heterogeneous Effects of Plebiscite Eligibility by Gender

                       1988 Plebiscite        2009 Registration          2013 Turnout          2016 Turnout            2017 Turnout
                    Female        Male       Female       Male        Female      Male      Female     Male        Female       Male
                       (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)           (9)        (10)
 Before              0.531        0.59        0.111       0.129        0.019      0.037      0.008     0.027        0.010       0.024
                   (0.022)*** (0.019)***    (0.009)*** (0.009)***    (0.007)** (0.007)***   (0.006) (0.005)***     (0.006)* (0.006)***
 Control Mean           0           0         0.688       0.698        0.552      0.455      0.405     0.334        0.525       0.441
 Observations       126343      124045       126343      124045       126343     124045     125952    123321       126056      123209

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Table 7 presents evidence of heterogeneous effects of Plebiscite eligibility on concurrent Plebiscite registration, 2009 registration and
downstream 2013, 2016 and 2017 election participation in a linear, 26-week bandwidth specification.




                                                                    36
      Table 8: Heterogeneous Effects of Plebiscite Eligibility by Partisanship: Allende Support

             Outcome Variable           First Stage   2009 Registration   2013 Turnout    2016 Turnout     2017 Turnout
                                            (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)
             Before                      0.588***         0.086***           -0.004          -0.004            -0.017
                                          (0.015)          (0.016)           (0.019)         (0.021)          (0.019)
             Before × Allende Share      -0.094**          0.079*             0.075           0.049           0.087*
                                          (0.038)          (0.042)           (0.048)         (0.052)          (0.050)
             Observations                 216086           216086            216086          215069           214766

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL) and 1992 Chilean Census.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth and comuna level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01. Table 8 presents evidence of heterogeneous effects of Plebiscite eligibility on concurrent Plebiscite registration, 2009
registration and downstream 2013, 2016 and 2017 election participation in a linear, 26-week bandwidth specification by 1970 Allende
vote share. We cluster standard errors at the week-comuna level. We control for 1992 Census comuna characteristics including
unemployment rate, literacy rate and the share of household with electricity, water and toliet in the home.




                                                                 37
    Table 9: Heterogeneous Effects of Upstream Election Eligibility by Educational Attainment

                                       Initial Registration                                     2009 Registration
                      HS Dropouts       HS Graduates > HS Graduates            HS Dropouts      HS Graduates > HS Graduates
                            (1)                (2)          (3)                    (4)               (5)          (6)
     Panel A. 1988 Plebiscite
     Before               0.306              0.387              0.482              0.099            0.103              0.087
                        (0.042)***         (0.044)***         (0.030)***         (0.021)***       (0.016)***         (0.007)***
     Control Mean            0                 0                  0                0.601            0.688              0.774
     Observations         63187              93905              28021              63187            93905              28021
     Panel B. 1989 Election
     Before               0.053              0.085              0.169              -0.011            0.012             0.039
                        (0.003)***         (0.003)***         (0.005)***         (0.004)***        (0.006)**         (0.008)***
     Control Mean            0                 0                  0                 0.58              0.66             0.723
     Observations         63286              98873              31549              63286             98873             31549
     Panel C. 1993 Election
     Before               0.085              0.135              0.200              0.020            0.045              0.071
                        (0.017)***         (0.012)***         (0.011)***          (0.014)         (0.008)***         (0.009)***
     Control Mean            0                 0                  0                0.323            0.378              0.505
     Observations         54416              99126              36959              54416            99126              36959
     Panel D. 1999 Election
     Before               0.008              0.009              0.059              0.022            0.017               0.012
                        (0.003)***         (0.004)**          (0.008)***         (0.010)**        (0.003)***           (0.008)
     Control Mean            0                 0                  0                0.185            0.236               0.388
     Observations         47421             121034              48213              47421           121034               48213
     Panel E. 2005 Election
     Before               0.014              0.035              0.116              0.005            0.011              0.060
                        (0.002)***         (0.003)***         (0.005)***          (0.003)*        (0.004)***         (0.009)***
     Control Mean            0                 0                  0                0.066            0.103              0.215
     Observations         28074             132316              57646              28074           132316              57646
     Panel F. 2009 Election
     Before               0.010              0.047              0.063              0.010            0.047              0.063
                        (0.003)***         (0.004)***         (0.008)***         (0.003)***       (0.004)***         (0.008)***
     Control Mean            0                 0                   0                 0                0                  0
     Observations         35805             174064               7373              35805           174064               7373

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Seguro de Cesantia, Ficha de Proteccion Social, 1992 and 2002
Chilean Census.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the month-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table
9 presents evidence of heterogeneous effects of upstream election eligibility on concurrent registration (first three columns) and 2009
registration in a linear, 6-month bandwidth specification (last three columns).




                                                                  38
                                                                      Table 10: Complier Characteristics by Upstream Election
               Upstream Election            1988 Plebiscite                    1989 Election                1993 Election                1999 Election                 2005 Election                 2009 Election
                                     Sample Compliers         Ratio   Sample     Compliers Ratio   Sample     Compliers Ratio   Sample     Compliers Ratio    Sample     Compliers Ratio    Sample     Compliers Ratio
                                       (1)           (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)     (6)     (7)          (8)     (9)     (10)        (11)     (12)     (13)        (14)     (15)     (16)        (17)     (18)
               Panel A. Individual Characteristics
               HS Dropouts            0.341        0.304      0.891    0.327       0.206   0.631   0.286        0.234   0.818   0.219        0.111    0.507   0.129        0.054    0.416   0.165        0.051    0.312
               HS Graduates           0.507         0.53      1.045     0.51       0.511     1      0.52        0.523   1.006   0.559        0.436     0.78   0.607        0.443     0.73   0.801        0.891    1.112
               > HS Graduates         0.151        0.166      1.097    0.163       0.283   1.739   0.194        0.243   1.252   0.223        0.454    2.038   0.264        0.503    1.904   0.034        0.057    1.687
               Male                   0.495        0.499      1.007    0.496        0.57   1.149     0.5        0.549   1.098   0.501        0.484    0.967   0.506        0.463    0.915   0.507        0.455    0.898
               Panel B. Comuna Characteristics
               Allende Vote           0.366        0.365      0.997    0.366       0.357   0.975   0.365         0.36   0.984   0.367        0.339    0.924   0.369         0.35    0.948   0.371        0.345     0.93
               % Electricity          0.903        0.909      1.006    0.907       0.923   1.018   0.908        0.887   0.976   0.915        0.912    0.996   0.916        0.914    0.998   0.911        0.918    1.008
               % Water in Home        0.747        0.751      1.005    0.75        0.778   1.037   0.754        0.724   0.961   0.766        0.78     1.018   0.763        0.773    1.013   0.755         0.78    1.034
               % TV Ownership         0.867        0.871      1.005    0.87        0.885   1.017   0.872        0.855   0.98    0.877        0.88     1.004   0.878        0.88     1.003   0.873        0.883    1.011
               % Toilet in Home       0.691        0.697      1.009    0.696       0.729   1.048    0.7         0.661   0.944   0.714        0.725    1.015   0.712        0.721    1.013   0.701        0.729    1.039
               Literacy Rate          0.902        0.904      1.001    0.903        0.91   1.008   0.904        0.898   0.993   0.906        0.911    1.005   0.906        0.909    1.003   0.903         0.91    1.008
               Unemployment Rate      0.088        0.088      0.999    0.087       0.084    0.96   0.087        0.088   1.015   0.086         0.08    0.928   0.087        0.083    0.956   0.088        0.082    0.932
               Share Compliers                                0.666                        0.16                         0.287                         0.076                          0.12                         0.102
               Panel C. Sample Size
               Sample Size (Educ.)   185113                           193708                       190501                       216668                        218036                        217242
               Sample Size           236347                           247191                       234435                       258832                        271090                        279495
               Ratio                  0.783                            0.784                        0.813                        0.837                         0.804                         0.777


     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).




39
     Note: Table 10 presents complier characteristics by each upstream election using a 26-week bandwidth. Complier characteristics are calculated using the methodology in Angrist and
     Pischke (2008). The complier ratio equals the characteristics of compliers divided by those of the full sample across the 26-week cut-off.
                                     Table 11: Vote Gain from the 1988 Plebiscite


           Year of Election                                             1989       1993        1999        2005        2009
           Round of Election                                             1st        1st         1st         1st         1st

           Number of eligibles                 HS Dropouts                                  1,625,800
           by education group                  HS Graduates                                 1,588,000
                                               > HS Grads                                    381,000

           Turnout Rate                                                 0.947      0.912       0.900      0.877       0.867

           Size of treatment effect            HS Dropouts              0.207      0.099       0.099      0.100       0.099
                                               HS Graduates             0.232      0.109       0.106      0.107       0.103
                                               > HS Grads               0.247      0.105       0.099      0.094       0.087

           Concertacion vote share             HS Dropouts              0.592      0.678       0.526      0.529       0.588
                                               HS Graduates             0.560      0.652       0.496      0.520       0.561
                                               > HS Grads               0.503      0.616       0.445      0.488       0.517

           Total effect of the plebiscite on                            1.41%     1.47%       0.04%       0.19%       0.63%
           the left wing vote share

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL) for turnout effects, Seguro de Cesantia and Ficha de Proteccion
Social for number of eligibles by educational attainment. Centro de Estudios Publicps, CEP: pre-electoral surveys conducted in 1989,
1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 for partisanship effects.
Note: The number of eligibles are calculated from the number of eligible individuals born between 1950-1970 from the merged ad-
ministrative data multiplied by the ratio of non-missing educational attainment. The turnout rate follows from Table 1. The size of
the treatment effect follows from Table 9 and from results available upon request for the 1993, 1999 and 2005 elections. Lastly, the
Concertacion vote share follows from CEP data from surveys conducted 1-2 months prior to each Presidential election (1989-2009) and
shows stated the share of Concertacion voters by educational attainment -- imputed from the socioeconomic status variable.




                                                                   40
                   Figure 1: The Effect of Plebiscite Eligibility on Plebiscite Participation




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Note: Figure 1 shows graphical evidence of Plebiscite
registration rates by week of birth within a year of registration closing for the Plebiscite. Week 0 corresponds to the August 30th week.




                                                                  41
              Figure 2: Long-Term Differences in 2009 Registration Rates by Birth Cohort




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Note: Figure 2 shows graphical evidence of the share of
individuals who had voluntarily registered to vote by the 2009 by week of birth cohort. Week 0 corresponds to the August 30th , 1970
birth cohort.




                                                                42
  Figure 3: Differences in 2009 Registration Rates Across Eligibility Cutoff in Various Elections

                      (a) 1988 Plebiscite                                    (b) 1989 Election




                       (c) 1993 Election                                     (d) 1999 Election




                       (e) 2005 Election                                      (f) 2009 Election




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Figure 3 shows graphical evidence of differences in 2009 voluntary registration rates in a linear specification
across the eligibility cut-off (26-week bandwidth) in the 1988 Plebiscite and the 1989, 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 Presi-
dential elections.




                                                          43
     Figure 4: Long-Term Differences in 2013 and 2017 Election Turnout Rates by Birth Cohort




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Note: Figure 4 shows graphical evidence of the share of
individuals who had turned out to vote for the 2013 and 2017 Presidential elections by week of birth cohort. Week 0 corresponds to
the August 30th , 1970 birth cohort.




                                                               44
Figure 5: Differences in 2013 Election Turnout Rates Across Eligibility Cutoff in Various Elections

                      (a) 1988 Plebiscite                                    (b) 1989 Election




                       (c) 1993 Election                                     (d) 1999 Election




                       (e) 2005 Election                                      (f) 2009 Election




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Figure 5 shows graphical evidence of differences in 2013 Presidential election turnout rates in a linear specifi-
cation across the eligibility cut-off (26-week bandwidth) in the 1988 Plebiscite and the 1989, 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009
Presidential elections.




                                                          45
Figure 6: Differences in 2016 Election Turnout Rates Across Eligibility Cutoff in Various Elections

                      (a) 1988 Plebiscite                                    (b) 1989 Election




                       (c) 1993 Election                                     (d) 1999 Election




                       (e) 2005 Election                                      (f) 2009 Election




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Figure 6 shows graphical evidence of differences in 2016 Presidential election turnout rates in a linear specifi-
cation across the eligibility cut-off (26-week bandwidth) in the 1988 Plebiscite and the 1989, 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009
Presidential elections.




                                                          46
Figure 7: Differences in 2017 Election Turnout Rates Across Eligibility Cutoff in Various Elections

                      (a) 1988 Plebiscite                                    (b) 1989 Election




                       (c) 1993 Election                                     (d) 1999 Election




                       (e) 2005 Election                                      (f) 2009 Election




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Figure 7 shows graphical evidence of differences in 2017 Presidential election turnout rates in a linear specifi-
cation across the eligibility cut-off (26-week bandwidth) in the 1988 Plebiscite and the 1989, 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009
Presidential elections.




                                                          47
      Figure 8: Treatment on the Treated Effects and Complier Characteristics by Bandwidths

                                                   (a) 2013 Presidential Election




                             .08




                                                                                                            1
                             .07




                                                                                                                         .95
                                                                                                            Complier Ratio
                     TOT Estimate
                      .05    .06




                                                                                                             .9
                             .04




                                                                                                            .85
                             .03




                                       1   2   3   4       5    6      7     8    9     10     11     12
                                                          Bandwidth (in months)

                                                       TOT Estimate      HSD Ratio
                                                       Female Ratio


                                                   (b) 2017 Presidential Election
                           .05




                                                                                                           1
                                 .04




                                                                                                                        .95
                                                                                                           Complier Ratio
                    TOT Estimate
                        .03




                                                                                                            .9
                           .02




                                                                                                           .85
                           .01




                                       1   2   3   4      5    6      7     8     9     10     11     12
                                                         Bandwidth (in months)

                                                       TOT Estimate      HSD Ratio
                                                       Female Ratio




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Note: Figure 8 shows graphical evidence of the estimated
treatment on the treated effect of plebiscite participation on 2013 and 2017 Presidential election turnout for twelve different band-
widths. It also includes the complier ratio for high school dropouts and females across these bandwidths presented in Tables 10 and
A.13.




                                                                   48
Appendix
A      Appendix Tables and Figures

                            Table A.1: Optimal Bandwidth Selection: CCT Algorithm

                           First Stage 2009 Registration             2013 Turnout       2016 Turnout        2017 Turnout
                                 (1)           (2)                        (3)                (4)                 (5)
              1988 Plebiscite
              Linear           3.784          9.937                        14.28             23.748             16.539
              Quadratic         9.56         23.296                       29.006             29.271             31.515
              Cubic           18.033         36.041                       42.592             40.297             45.123
              Quartic         30.355         52.081                       59.046             55.346             61.288
              1989 Presidential Election
              Linear           8.277         11.585                       18.865             22.055             15.687
              Quadratic       13.308         20.632                       24.818             27.273             27.329
              Cubic            21.78         32.715                       40.338             38.069             42.653
              Quartic         23.629         37.083                       39.275             43.79              38.39
              1993 Presidential Election
              Linear           8.498         10.525                       14.411             22.747             16.576
              Quadratic        12.87         21.061                       26.089             26.851             24.876
              Cubic           30.563         32.778                       45.328             41.244             45.249
              Quartic         45.376         52.251                       48.454             48.614             49.004
              1999 Presidential Election
              Linear           9.965         28.262                       20.584             33.084             31.929
              Quadratic       17.217         31.732                       26.654              30.95             28.467
              Cubic           24.253         54.649                       43.668             49.086             36.34
              Quartic         22.495         43.549                       48.07              55.556             47.93
              2005 Presidential Election
              Linear          16.092          22.14                       33.194             29.196             21.763
              Quadratic       22.844         35.248                       34.006             35.017             29.057
              Cubic           24.842         39.835                       41.989             37.178             47.067
              Quartic         32.975         56.525                       53.563             51.926             47.822
              2009 Presidential Election
              Linear           9.561          9.561                       35.774             28.305             23.404
              Quadratic       19.132         19.132                       23.934             31.985             31.481
              Cubic           21.204         21.204                       37.351             35.831             33.134
              Quartic         32.459         32.459                       55.425             55.807             42.208
              Differences-in-Discontinuity: Equation (4)
              Linear           12.43          12.86                       20.576             23.875             14.947
              Quadratic       17.632         19.033                       23.017              24.73             26.151
              Cubic           32.155          33.52                       43.787             38.344             39.074
              Quartic         53.004         40.029                       42.115             38.338             41.349

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Table A.1 presents the optimal CCT bandwidth (Calonico et al., 2014) for different specifications of equation (2), including
five outcome variables (first stage participation, 2009 registration, 2013, 2016 and 2017 turnout) as well as six upstream elections (1988
Plebiscite and 1989, 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 Presidential elections). Moreover, we consider four different polynomials when selecting
the optimal bandwidth. The last panel shows the optimal bandwidth for the differences-in-discontinuity regression (equation (4)).




                                                                   49
                                                      Table A.2: Covariate Balance

                                1988 Plebiscite       1989 Election         1993 Election       1999 Election          2005 Election         2009 Election
                                Level    Diff.      Level      Diff.      Level      Diff.     Level     Diff.       Level      Diff.       Level     Diff.
                                 (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)         (9)       (10)         (11)     (12)

                                                       A. Individual-Level Characteristics
 Male                            0.493    -0.003     0.496     -0.002    0.501     0.003         0.5        0         0.508        0         0.505     0.002
                                (0.003)   (0.006)   (0.003)    (0.005)  (0.004)   (0.005)      (0.002)   (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.003)   (0.004)
 Educational Attainment*
                                                                 26-Week Bandwidth
                  HS Dropout     0.358    -0.006     0.327       0.014     0.282     0.017      0.222      0.004      0.126       0.006      0.154     0.008
                                (0.003)   (0.007)   (0.004)    (0.005)** (0.006) (0.008)**     (0.001)   (0.002)**   (0.001)   (0.002)***   (0.005)   (0.007)
                  HS Graduate    0.495     0.009      0.51      -0.005     0.521    -0.015      0.559     -0.003      0.602       0.001      0.813     0.000
                                (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.001)     (0.004)   (0.003) (0.004)***   (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.005)   (0.006)
             > HS Graduate       0.147    -0.003     0.163      -0.009     0.197    -0.002      0.219        0        0.272       -0.007     0.033    -0.009
                                (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)*** (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.002)    (0.004)*    (0.001)   (0.006)
                                                                 13-Week Bandwidth
                  HS Dropout     0.357     0.003     0.332       0.004     0.288     0.004      0.223     0.002       0.128      0.008       0.161    -0.003
                                (0.003)   (0.007)   (0.003)     (0.006)   (0.003)   (0.006)    (0.003)   (0.005)     (0.002)   (0.004)*     (0.002)   (0.005)
                  HS Graduate    0.498     0.001     0.508      -0.001     0.519    -0.004      0.561    -0.010       0.601      0.004       0.806     0.004
                                (0.003)   (0.007)   (0.004)     (0.007)   (0.004)   (0.007)    (0.003)   (0.006)     (0.003)    (0.006)     (0.003)   (0.005)
             > HS Graduate       0.145    -0.004      0.16      -0.002     0.193       0        0.216     0.008       0.271      -0.012      0.033    -0.001
                                (0.002)   (0.005)   (0.003)     (0.005)   (0.003)   (0.005)    (0.003)   (0.005)     (0.003)   (0.006)*     (0.001)   (0.002)

                                                        B. Comuna-Level Characteristics
 Electricity in Home               0.9    -0.001     0.907    -0.003    0.912     -0.005        0.919     -0.005      0.918     -0.004       0.912   -0.005
                                (0.004) (0.005)     (0.003)   (0.005) (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.003) (0.005)       (0.003)   (0.005)      (0.003) (0.005)
 Water in Home                   0.744    -0.002     0.751    -0.002    0.759     -0.007         0.77     -0.007      0.765     -0.005       0.756   -0.005
                                (0.006) (0.008)     (0.006)   (0.008) (0.006)     (0.008)      (0.006) (0.008)       (0.006)   (0.008)      (0.006) (0.008)
 Toilet in Home                  0.687    -0.002     0.696    -0.003    0.707     -0.009         0.72     -0.009      0.714     -0.006       0.702   -0.006
                                (0.007) (0.01)      (0.007)    (0.01) (0.007)      (0.01)      (0.007)     (0.01)    (0.007)    (0.01)      (0.007) (0.010)
 Literacy Rate                   0.901       0       0.903    -0.001    0.905     -0.002        0.907     -0.002      0.906     -0.001       0.903   -0.001
                                (0.001) (0.002)     (0.001)   (0.002) (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.001) (0.002)       (0.001)   (0.002)      (0.001) (0.002)
 Unemployment Rate               0.088       0       0.088        0     0.087         0         0.086         0       0.087        0         0.088      0
                                (0.001) (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001) (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001) (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)      (0.001) (0.001)
 TV Ownership Rate               0.844     0.001     0.847        0      0.85     -0.002        0.852     -0.002      0.848     -0.004       0.842   -0.003
                                (0.007) (0.011)     (0.007)   (0.011) (0.007)     (0.011)      (0.007) (0.011)       (0.007)   (0.011)      (0.007) (0.011)
 Allende Share                    0.37     0.001     0.372    -0.001    0.372     -0.002        0.373     -0.001      0.375     -0.002       0.374   -0.002
                                (0.006) (0.01)      (0.006)   (0.009) (0.006)      (0.01)      (0.006)     (0.01)    (0.006)   (0.009)      (0.006) (0.009)
 Sample Size                          250388              253165              248871                  274566               287364                296631
 (*): Sample Size (Education)         185113              195039              191341                  216989               218353                218433


Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Table A.2 presents estimates of equation (2) in a linear functional form with a 26-week bandwidth. For education variables,
we also use a 13-week bandwidth to avoid to ensure that individuals are in the same academic year. We use relevant covariates as
outcome variables. Level and Diff. refer to 0 and 1 in equation (2), respectively. For individual-level covariates, we cluster standard
errors at the week level. For education-level covariates, we cluster standard errors at the month level. For comuna-level covariates,
we cluster standard errors at the comuna-week level.




                                                                           50
                                                              Table A.3: Robustness Checks: First-Stage and 2009 Registration Results


                                                                                                       Panel A. First-Stage Registration Rates

               Upstream Election               1988 Plebiscite                        1989 Election                             1993 Election                             1999 Election                             2005 Election                             2009 Election
               Bandwidth                 26           52       Optimal      26             52       Optimal           26             52       Optimal           26             52       Optimal           26             52       Optimal           26             52       Optimal
                                         (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)             (7)            (8)        (9)            (10)           (11)       (12)            (13)           (14)       (15)            (16)           (17)       (18)
               Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
               Before                   0.56        0.612       0.433      0.145         0.118         0.147         0.203         0.229         0.235         0.045         0.051         0.055         0.088         0.105         0.083         0.068         0.088         0.068
                                     (0.02)*** (0.016)*** (0.011)***     (0.002)***    (0.005)***    (0.002)***    (0.007)***    (0.005)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.002)***    (0.002)***    (0.004)***    (0.003)***    (0.002)***    (0.004)***    (0.002)***
               Observations           245205       487056       40164     256697        510154         82775        243912        488826         75923        269271        528369        104890        281837        564578        176946        290900        582406        115225
               Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
               Before                  0.495         0.55       0.423      0.153         0.132         0.145         0.243         0.195         0.238         0.056          0.05         0.057         0.081         0.086         0.083         0.059         0.066         0.072
                                     (0.02)***    (0.02)*** (0.009)***   (0.003)***    (0.006)***    (0.002)***    (0.005)***    (0.009)***    (0.005)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.004)***    (0.002)***    (0.004)***    (0.004)***    (0.002)***    (0.004)***
               Observations           245205       487056       98433     256697        510154        133849        243912        488826        123682        269271        528369        178338        281837        564578        250228        290900        582406        214525
               Panel (c). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
               Before                   0.45        0.509       0.419      0.146         0.168         0.144         0.248         0.219         0.259         0.066         0.042         0.062         0.094          0.08         0.093         0.076         0.056         0.075
                                    (0.016)*** (0.022)*** (0.009)***     (0.003)***    (0.006)***    (0.002)***    (0.008)***    (0.008)***    (0.01)***     (0.006)***    (0.005)***    (0.006)***    (0.003)***    (0.004)***    (0.003)***    (0.005)***    (0.003)***    (0.006)***
               Observations           245205       487056      174239     256697        510154        219299        243912        488826        288875        269271        528369        248674        281837        564578        271090        290900        582406        235960
               Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
               Before                  0.422         0.46       0.428      0.142         0.165         0.145          0.22         0.264         0.263         0.043         0.069         0.043         0.093         0.082         0.097         0.069         0.064         0.079
                                    (0.012)*** (0.015)*** (0.012)***     (0.003)***    (0.009)***    (0.003)***    (0.005)***    (0.011)***    (0.012)***    (0.003)***    (0.006)***    (0.004)***    (0.004)***    (0.005)***    (0.004)***    (0.005)***    (0.004)***    (0.007)***
               Observations           245205       487056      279951     256697        510154        237610        243912        488826        418777        269271        528369        228557        281837        564578        355036        290900        582406        355378




51
                                                                                                             Panel B. 2009 Registration Rates

                Upstream Election              1988 Plebiscite                         1989 Election                             1993 Election                             1999 Election                             2005 Election                             2009 Election
                Bandwidth                26          52        Optimal       26             52       Optimal           26             52       Optimal            26            52       Optimal            26            52       Optimal            26            52       Optimal
                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)             (7)            (8)        (9)             (10)          (11)       (12)             (13)          (14)       (15)             (16)          (17)       (18)
                Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
                Before                  0.124       0.14        0.108       0.017           0           0.025         0.054         0.063         0.076         0.019         0.016         0.018         0.033          0.04         0.032         0.068         0.088         0.068
                                     (0.008)*** (0.007)*** (0.007)***     (0.004)***     (0.003)      (0.006)***    (0.006)***    (0.004)***    (0.006)***    (0.003)***    (0.002)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.002)***    (0.004)***    (0.002)***
                Control Mean            0.692      0.684        0.691       0.661         0.665         0.652         0.416         0.415         0.413         0.298         0.293         0.298         0.165         0.164         0.165
                Observations           245205     487056        98433      256697        510154        123649        243912        488826        104262        269271        528369        289901        281837        564578        239804        290900        582406        115225
                Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
                Before                  0.115      0.127        0.109       0.028         0.015         0.027         0.082         0.049         0.084          0.02          0.02         0.023          0.03         0.031         0.029         0.059         0.066         0.072
                                     (0.007)*** (0.008)*** (0.007)***     (0.005)***    (0.005)***    (0.006)***    (0.006)***    (0.007)***    (0.007)***    (0.004)***    (0.003)***    (0.003)***    (0.005)***    (0.003)***    (0.004)***    (0.004)***    (0.002)***    (0.004)***
                Control Mean            0.692      0.684        0.694       0.661         0.665         0.655         0.416         0.415         0.415         0.298         0.293         0.298         0.165         0.164         0.165
                Observations           245205     487056       218698      256697        510154        210339        243912        488826        197564        269271        528369        319943        281837        564578        376015        290900        582406        214525
                Panel (c). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
                Before                  0.097      0.112        0.107       0.033          0.03         0.027         0.085         0.069         0.093          0.03         0.017         0.017         0.038          0.03         0.029         0.076         0.056         0.074
                                     (0.006)*** (0.008)*** (0.006)***     (0.005)***    (0.006)***    (0.006)***    (0.009)***    (0.007)***    (0.008)***    (0.005)***    (0.004)***    (0.004)***    (0.006)***    (0.004)***    (0.005)***    (0.005)***    (0.003)***    (0.006)***
                Control Mean            0.692      0.684        0.695       0.661         0.665          0.66         0.416         0.415         0.415         0.298         0.293         0.297         0.165         0.164         0.165
                Observations           245205     487056       333887      256697        510154        321578        243912        488826        306775        269271        528369        528369        281837        564578        431061        290900        582406        235960
                Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
                Before                  0.099      0.099        0.099       0.044         0.041         0.029         0.066         0.093         0.093         0.023         0.028          0.03         0.036         0.031         0.031         0.069         0.063         0.079
                                     (0.007)*** (0.007)*** (0.007)***     (0.005)***    (0.005)***    (0.006)***    (0.01)***     (0.008)***    (0.008)***    (0.007)***    (0.005)***    (0.005)***    (0.009)***    (0.006)***    (0.006)***    (0.005)***    (0.004)***    (0.007)***
                Control Mean            0.692      0.684        0.692       0.661         0.665          0.66         0.416         0.415         0.415         0.298         0.293         0.297         0.165         0.164         0.164
                Observations           245205     487056       487056      256697        510154        359259        243912        488826        488826        269271        528369        448408        281837        564578        564578        290900        582406        355378


     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table A.3 presents estimates of equation (2) for first-stage
     registration and registration by the 2009 election.
                            Table A.4: Robustness Checks. Regression Discontinuity Estimates: Upstream Elections on 2013 Turnout
      Upstream Election            1988 Plebiscite                       1989 Election                        1993 Election                           1999 Election                        2005 Election                     2009 Election
      Bandwidth              26          52        Optimal      26            52       Optimal      26             52       Optimal         26             52       Optimal        26          52       Optimal      26          52      Optimal
                             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)        (9)          (10)           (11)       (12)         (13)        (14)       (15)       (16)        (17)       (18)
      Panel A. 2013
      Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
      Before                   0.03      0.038     0.026         0          -0.008      0.003      0.014         0.011        0.022        -0.008        -0.006       -0.009     -0.007       -0.009     -0.006    -0.005      -0.006      -0.007
                           (0.005)*** (0.004)*** (0.006)***   (0.003)     (0.002)***   (0.004)   (0.004)***    (0.003)***   (0.004)***   (0.003)***    (0.002)***   (0.003)***   (0.005)    (0.003)***   (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.003)**   (0.004)*
      Control Mean            0.504       0.5      0.503       0.489         0.486      0.488       0.41         0.408        0.411         0.364         0.358        0.364      0.344       0.343       0.344     0.315       0.312      0.314
      Observations           245205     487056    136524      256697       510154      191578     243912        488826       133171       269271        528369       218527      281837      564578      355036    290900      582406     398822
      Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
      Before                  0.025      0.034     0.021       0.004       -0.004       0.004      0.025         0.009        0.025       -0.006         -0.013      -0.006      -0.008      -0.006      -0.008     0.001      -0.006      0.004
                           (0.006)*** (0.005)*** (0.006)***   (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.005)   (0.004)***     (0.005)*    (0.004)***    (0.004)      (0.004)***    (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.007)   (0.008)     (0.005)    (0.008)
      Control Mean            0.504       0.5      0.505       0.489        0.486       0.489       0.41         0.408         0.41        0.364          0.358       0.363       0.344       0.343       0.344     0.315       0.312      0.315
      Observations           245205     487056    271177      256697       510154      247191     243912        488826       243912       269271        528369       279692      281837      564578      365408    290900      582406     268437
      Panel (c). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
      Before                  0.016      0.021      0.02       -0.009       0.008       0.004      0.024         0.027        0.029          0          -0.002        -0.002     -0.006       -0.007      -0.01     0.008         0        0.008
                            (0.007)** (0.005)*** (0.006)***   (0.005)*     (0.005)     (0.006)   (0.006)***    (0.005)***   (0.005)***    (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.012)     (0.008)     (0.009)   (0.009)     (0.007)    (0.008)
      Control Mean            0.504       0.5      0.503        0.489       0.486       0.487       0.41         0.408        0.408        0.364         0.358         0.359      0.344       0.343       0.343     0.315       0.312      0.314
      Observations           245205     487056    399620      256697       510154      389115     243912        488826       418777       269271        528369       448408      281837      564578      453275    290900      582406     409389
      Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
      Before                  0.026      0.017     0.016      -0.005        0.004       -0.008      0.02         0.027        0.031       -0.005        -0.004       -0.002         0        -0.011      -0.012     0.008       0.005      0.004
                            (0.01)***  (0.007)** (0.006)***   (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.007)***    (0.004)***   (0.005)***    (0.006)       (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.015)     (0.011)      (0.01)   (0.013)     (0.008)    (0.008)
      Control Mean            0.504       0.5      0.498       0.489        0.486       0.486       0.41         0.408        0.408        0.364         0.358        0.358       0.344       0.343       0.343     0.315       0.312      0.312
      Observations           245205     487056    557003      256697       510154      379020     243912        488826       447969       269271        528369       487850      281837      564578      586456    290900      582406     618523




52
     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
     Note: Table A.4 presents estimates of equation (2) for each upstream election on 2013 electoral turnout. The column 'Optimal' refers to the estimated optimal CCT bandwidth for the
     corresponding polynomial presented in Table A.1.
                            Table A.5: Robustness Checks. Regression Discontinuity Estimates: Upstream Elections on 2016 Turnout
       Upstream Election              1988 Plebiscite                      1989 Election                         1993 Election                        1999 Election                      2005 Election                    2009 Election
       Bandwidth                 26         52        Optimal     26            52      Optimal        26             52       Optimal        26          52      Optimal        26          52      Optimal     26            52      Optimal
                                 (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)           (5)       (6)          (7)            (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)        (13)        (14)       (15)     (16)          (17)      (18)
       Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
       Before                  0.021      0.021         0.02     0.005        -0.003      0.006       0.006         0.005        0.008      -0.005      -0.004      -0.007      -0.001     -0.002       0       -0.007       -0.005     -0.009
                            (0.004)*** (0.003)*** (0.004)***    (0.003)*     (0.002)    (0.003)**    (0.004)       (0.003)*    (0.004)**    (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.003)**   (0.003)     (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.004)*     (0.003)*   (0.004)**
       Control Mean            0.369      0.368         0.37     0.359        0.358       0.359       0.319         0.314         0.32       0.271       0.266       0.268      0.234       0.233     0.234     0.221         0.219      0.221
       Observations           244113     484999       226512    255715       508273      218470      243323        487590       215129      268891      527539      339024     281466      563803    312696    289952       580553      311374
       Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
       Before                   0.02      0.025        0.018     0.004        0.003      0.005        0.016         0.003        0.015      -0.007      -0.009      -0.003      0.001       0.002     0.001     -0.007       -0.01     -0.005
                            (0.005)*** (0.004)*** (0.005)***    (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.006)***     (0.005)     (0.006)**    (0.005)    (0.004)**   (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.007)     (0.005)**   (0.006)
       Control Mean            0.369      0.368         0.37     0.359        0.358      0.359        0.319         0.314        0.319       0.271       0.266      0.268       0.234       0.233     0.233     0.221        0.219      0.22
       Observations           244113     484999       270003    255715       508273     265198       243323        487590       252387      268891      527539     319458      281466      563803    375461    289952       580553     354208
       Panel (c). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
       Before                  0.007      0.016        0.012    -0.001        0.008      0.004       0.012          0.018        0.016       -0.004      -0.003     -0.002      -0.004     -0.002    -0.001     0.003        -0.007     -0.002
                              (0.005)   (0.005)*** (0.004)***   (0.006)     (0.004)**   (0.005)     (0.007)*      (0.006)***   (0.006)***   (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.007)      (0.006)    (0.007)
       Control Mean            0.369      0.368         0.37     0.359        0.358      0.359       0.319          0.314        0.316       0.271       0.266      0.267       0.234       0.233     0.234     0.221         0.219     0.221
       Observations           244113     484999       369248    255715       508273     367664      243323         487590       379912      268891      527539     398265      281466      563803    396834    289952       580553     397517
       Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
       Before                  -0.017     0.011        0.011     0.006        0.007      -0.003       0.024          0.014       0.013       0.006       -0.005     -0.004      -0.005      0.002     0.002    -0.001        -0.003     -0.003
                             (0.008)** (0.005)** (0.004)***     (0.008)      (0.005)    (0.006)     (0.007)***     (0.006)**   (0.006)**    (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.01)      (0.008)    (0.007)
       Control Mean            0.369      0.368        0.368     0.359        0.358      0.358        0.319          0.314       0.315       0.271       0.266      0.266       0.234       0.233     0.233     0.221         0.219     0.219
       Observations           244113     484999       514893    255715       508273     427697       243323         487590      457737      268891      527539     567688      281466      563803    563803    289952       580553     662677




53
     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table A.5 presents estimates of equation (2) for each
     upstream election on 2016 electoral turnout. The column 'Optimal' refers to the estimated optimal CCT bandwidth for the corresponding polynomial presented in Table A.1.
                            Table A.6: Robustness Checks. Regression Discontinuity Estimates: Upstream Elections on 2017 Turnout
      Upstream Election              1988 Plebiscite                        1989 Election                          1993 Election                       1999 Election                       2005 Election                           2009 Election
      Bandwidth                 26         52        Optimal      26             52       Optimal         26            52       Optimal       26          52      Optimal       26              52      Optimal         26              52      Optimal
                               (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)           (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)       (12)       (13)            (14)      (15)          (16)            (17)      (18)
      Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
      Before                  0.018      0.027        0.016      0.003        -0.004        0.008      -0.003         -0.006      0.007      -0.002      -0.005     -0.005       -0.01         -0.013       -0.01       -0.006          -0.01     -0.007
                           (0.004)*** (0.003)*** (0.004)***     (0.004)       (0.003)     (0.004)**    (0.004)       (0.003)**   (0.005)     (0.003)    (0.003)*   (0.003)*   (0.003)***     (0.002)***   (0.004)**    (0.004)       (0.003)***   (0.005)
      Control Mean            0.483      0.482        0.483      0.476         0.474        0.473       0.441          0.435      0.443       0.398       0.393     0.396       0.386          0.383        0.386       0.376          0.372       0.376
      Observations           244110     486272       163608     255900        508650       163030      243443         487852     160480      268775     527447     329029      281427         563723       239489      289764         580243      256631
      Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
      Before                  0.016      0.022        0.013      0.013        -0.002        0.014        0.014        -0.006      0.013      -0.005      -0.004     -0.003     -0.009          -0.013     -0.007        -0.009         -0.01      -0.002
                           (0.005)*** (0.004)*** (0.005)***    (0.005)***     (0.004)     (0.005)***   (0.006)**      (0.005)    (0.007)*    (0.005)     (0.004)   (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.004)***   (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.005)**    (0.006)
      Control Mean            0.483      0.482        0.485      0.476         0.474        0.476        0.441         0.435      0.441       0.398       0.393     0.397       0.386          0.383       0.385        0.376          0.372       0.375
      Observations           244110     486272       296205     255900        508650       265397       243443        487852     233981      268775      527447    289371      281427         563723      312640       289764         580243      343107
      Panel (c). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
      Before                  0.004      0.009        0.009      0.002         0.015        0.021       0.009          0.013       0.014      -0.008     -0.003     -0.004      -0.004         -0.007      -0.004       -0.01         -0.004       -0.008
                             (0.006)    (0.005)*     (0.006)    (0.007)      (0.005)***   (0.006)***   (0.008)       (0.006)**   (0.006)**   (0.006)     (0.005)   (0.005)     (0.008)        (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.007)        (0.007)     (0.008)
      Control Mean            0.483      0.482        0.484      0.476         0.474        0.474       0.441          0.435       0.436      0.398       0.393     0.395        0.386         0.383        0.383       0.376          0.372       0.376
      Observations           244110     486272       417328     255900        508650       418091      243443         487852      417920     268775      527447    368113      281427         563723      508030       289764         580243      364724
      Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
      Before                  0.013       0.01        0.005      0.008         0.017        0.003        0.01         0.013        0.018      0.002      -0.004     -0.001      0.001         -0.004      -0.004        -0.021        -0.008       -0.012
                            (0.007)*    (0.006)*     (0.006)    (0.013)      (0.006)***    (0.008)     (0.007)       (0.007)*    (0.008)**   (0.007)     (0.005)   (0.006)     (0.012)        (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.007)***      (0.007)     (0.007)*
      Control Mean            0.483      0.482        0.481      0.476         0.474        0.474       0.441         0.435        0.435      0.398       0.393     0.393       0.386          0.383       0.383        0.376          0.372       0.374
      Observations           244110     486272       576709     255900        508650       367980      243443        487852       457980     268775      527447    486985      281427         563723      518990       289764         580243      465555




54
     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table A.6 presents estimates of equation (2) for each
     upstream election on 2017 electoral turnout. The column 'Optimal' refers to the estimated optimal CCT bandwidth for the corresponding polynomial presented in Table A.1.
 Table A.7: Estimated Regression Discontinuity Effects of Upstream Election Eligibility on 2013,
                                    2016 and 2017 Turnout

                                                       13-Week Bandwidth                      26-Week Bandwidth
                                                  2013       2016      2017              2013       2016      2017
                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)               (4)        (5)       (6)
                     Panel A. 1988 Plebiscite
                     Before                       0.026        0.020        0.014        0.030        0.021        0.018
                                                (0.006)***   (0.005)***   (0.004)***   (0.005)***   (0.004)***   (0.004)***
                     Control Mean                 0.503        0.368        0.484        0.504        0.369        0.483
                     Observations                132363       131739       131740       250388       249273       249265

                     Panel B. 1989 Election
                     Before                      -0.003        0.001        0.004        0.000        0.005        0.003
                                                 (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)
                     Control Mean                 0.487        0.356        0.472        0.489        0.359        0.476
                     Observations                138938       138445       138569       261786       260791       260984

                     Panel C. 1993 Election
                     Before                       0.020       0.009         0.007        0.014        0.006       -0.003
                                                (0.004)***   (0.005)*      (0.006)     (0.004)***    (0.004)      (0.004)
                     Control Mean                  0.41        0.32          0.44         0.41        0.319        0.441
                     Observations                128641      128336        128406       248871       248262       248386

                     Panel D. 1999 Election
                     Before                      -0.006       -0.009       -0.008       -0.008       -0.005       -0.002
                                                 (0.004)     (0.005)*     (0.004)*     (0.003)**     (0.004)      (0.003)
                     Control Mean                 0.364        0.27        0.398         0.364        0.271        0.398
                     Observations                142265      142107       142010        274566       274187       274071

                     Panel E. 2005 Election
                     Before                      -0.005        0.000       -0.007        -0.007       -0.001       -0.010
                                                 (0.008)      (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.003)***
                     Control Mean                 0.345        0.235        0.386        0.344        0.234        0.386
                     Observations                150043       149869       149843       287364       286995       286954

                     Panel F. 2009 Election
                     Before                       0.000       -0.005       -0.009        -0.005      -0.007        -0.006
                                                 (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.004)*      (0.004)
                     Control Mean                 0.314        0.222        0.374        0.315       0.221         0.376
                     Observations                155248       154694       154575       296631      295661        295466




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Table A.7 presents estimates of equation (2) using a linear functional form with a 13-week (columns (1)-(3)) and 26-week (columns (4)-
(6)) bandwidth across each election cut-off. The results refer to the estimated impacts of upstream election eligibility (1988 Plebiscite,
1989 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 Presidential elections) on turnout in the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections.




                                                                    55
                       Table A.8: Robustness Checks. Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Estimates: Upstream Elections on 2013 Turnout
      Upstream Election               1988 Plebiscite                     1989 Election                        1993 Election                           1999 Election                        2005 Election                     2009 Election
      Bandwidth                 26          52        Optimal     26          52       Optimal       26             52       Optimal         26             52       Optimal        26          52       Optimal      26          52      Optimal
                                (1)         (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)            (8)        (9)          (10)           (11)       (12)         (13)        (14)       (15)       (16)        (17)       (18)
      Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
      Before                  0.054        0.061        0.05    -0.002       -0.071      0.018      0.067         0.049        0.095        -0.175        -0.117       -0.189      -0.083      -0.085     -0.068    -0.073      -0.071      -0.09
                           (0.007)*** (0.006)*** (0.01)***      (0.021)    (0.022)***   (0.023)   (0.019)***    (0.013)***   (0.018)***   (0.066)***     (0.046)**   (0.073)***   (0.053)    (0.029)***   (0.042)   (0.069)    (0.037)*   (0.051)*
      Control Mean            0.504         0.5        0.503     0.489        0.486      0.488       0.41         0.408        0.411         0.364         0.358        0.364      0.344       0.343       0.344     0.315       0.312     0.314
      Observations           245205       487056      136524    256697      510154      191578     243912        488826       133171       269271         528369      218527      281837      564578      355036    290900     582406     398822
      Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
      Before                   0.05        0.062       0.042     0.027      -0.027       0.025      0.105          0.046       0.105       -0.106         -0.271      -0.104       -0.103     -0.065      -0.098     0.023      -0.088      0.06
                           (0.011)*** (0.008)*** (0.011)***     (0.032)     (0.026)     (0.034)   (0.017)***     (0.023)**   (0.017)***    (0.068)      (0.078)***    (0.068)     (0.105)     (0.059)     (0.087)   (0.129)     (0.078)   (0.123)
      Control Mean            0.504         0.5        0.505     0.489       0.486       0.489       0.41          0.408        0.41        0.364          0.358       0.363       0.344       0.343       0.344     0.315       0.312     0.315
      Observations           245205       487056      271177    256697      510154      247191     243912         488826      243912       269271        528369       279692      281837      564578      365408    290900      582406    268437
      Panel (c). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
      Before                  0.035        0.042       0.041     -0.059      0.047       0.027      0.096          0.122       0.122       -0.001        -0.048        -0.045      -0.065      -0.089      -0.129    0.107      -0.008     0.128
                            (0.014)**    (0.01)*** (0.012)***   (0.036)     (0.029)     (0.034)   (0.023)***     (0.02)***   (0.02)***     (0.056)       (0.087)      (0.069)     (0.131)     (0.097)     (0.112)   (0.122)     (0.126)   (0.123)
      Control Mean            0.504         0.5        0.503     0.489       0.486       0.487       0.41          0.408       0.408        0.364         0.358         0.359      0.344       0.343        0.343    0.315       0.312     0.314
      Observations           245205       487056      399620    256697      510154      389115     243912         488826      418777       269271        528369       448408      281837      564578      453275    290900      582406    409389
      Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
      Before                  0.061        0.037       0.033    -0.038       0.026       -0.061     0.091         0.103        0.118       -0.122        -0.061       -0.028       -0.001      -0.14      -0.143     0.115       0.082     0.066
                           (0.021)*** (0.014)*** (0.013)**       (0.05)     (0.038)     (0.043)   (0.033)***    (0.018)***   (0.02)***      (0.13)       (0.059)      (0.063)     (0.159)     (0.132)     (0.129)    (0.18)     (0.131)   (0.136)
      Control Mean            0.504         0.5        0.498     0.489       0.486       0.486       0.41         0.408        0.408        0.364         0.358        0.358       0.344       0.343       0.343     0.315       0.312     0.312
      Observations           245205       487056      557003    256697      510154      379020     243912        488826       447969       269271        528369       487850      281837      564578      586456    290900      582406    618523




56
     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table A.8 presents fuzzy regression discontinuity estimates
     for each upstream election on 2013 electoral turnout. The column 'Optimal' refers to the estimated optimal CCT bandwidth for the corresponding polynomial presented in Table A.1.
                       Table A.9: Robustness Checks. Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Estimates: Upstream Elections on 2016 Turnout
       Upstream Election               1988 Plebiscite                       1989 Election                       1993 Election                        1999 Election                      2005 Election                    2009 Election
       Bandwidth                 26          52        Optimal       26          52      Optimal       26             52       Optimal        26          52      Optimal        26          52      Optimal     26            52      Optimal
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)            (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)        (13)        (14)       (15)     (16)          (17)      (18)
       Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
       Before                  0.037       0.035         0.036      0.034      -0.023     0.041       0.029         0.024        0.038      -0.101      -0.088      -0.149      -0.006      -0.017    0.004     -0.109       -0.058     -0.123
                            (0.006)*** (0.005)*** (0.007)***       (0.021)     (0.021)   (0.023)*    (0.021)       (0.014)*     (0.02)*     (0.079)     (0.05)*    (0.068)**   (0.038)     (0.023)   (0.034)   (0.061)*     (0.032)*   (0.057)**
       Control Mean            0.369       0.368          0.37      0.359       0.358     0.359       0.319         0.314        0.32        0.271       0.266       0.268      0.234       0.233     0.234     0.221         0.219      0.221
       Observations           244113      484999        226512     255715      508273    218470      243323        487590       215129      268891      527539      339024     281466      563803    312696    289952       580553      311374
       Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
       Before                  0.041       0.046         0.036      0.025       0.019     0.032       0.067         0.015        0.063       -0.13      -0.173      -0.062      0.013       0.025     0.015     -0.126       -0.15     -0.079
                             (0.01)*** (0.007)*** (0.009)***       (0.027)     (0.026)   (0.027)    (0.025)***     (0.024)     (0.024)***   (0.089)    (0.077)**   (0.095)     (0.052)     (0.042)   (0.052)   (0.115)     (0.068)**   (0.098)
       Control Mean            0.369       0.368          0.37      0.359       0.358     0.359       0.319         0.314        0.319       0.271       0.266      0.268       0.234       0.233     0.233     0.221        0.219      0.22
       Observations           244113      484999        270003     255715      508273    265198      243323        487590       252387      268891      527539     319458      281466      563803    375461    289952       580553     354208
       Panel (v). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
       Before                  0.015       0.031         0.026      -0.007     0.047      0.025      0.048           0.08        0.066      -0.053       -0.083     -0.041      -0.04       -0.028   -0.007     0.042        -0.121     -0.035
                              (0.012)    (0.009)*** (0.009)***     (0.041)    (0.026)*   (0.029)    (0.027)*      (0.025)***   (0.023)***    (0.08)     (0.119)    (0.091)     (0.054)     (0.051)   (0.052)   (0.097)      (0.112)    (0.114)
       Control Mean            0.369       0.368          0.37      0.359      0.358      0.359      0.319          0.314        0.316       0.271       0.266      0.267       0.234       0.233     0.234     0.221         0.219     0.221
       Observations           244113      484999        369248     255715     508273     367664     243323         487590       379912      268891      527539     398265      281466      563803    396834    289952       580553     397517
       Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
       Before                  -0.039      0.025         0.023      0.042        0.04     -0.019      0.108          0.054       0.051        0.14      -0.078       -0.07      -0.057      0.024     0.024     -0.021      -0.048      -0.049
                             (0.018)**    (0.01)**     (0.009)**   (0.058)      (0.03)   (0.043)    (0.033)***     (0.024)**   (0.024)**    (0.135)      (0.08)     (0.09)     (0.073)      (0.06)    (0.06)   (0.138)       (0.12)    (0.118)
       Control Mean            0.369       0.368         0.368      0.359       0.358     0.358       0.319          0.314       0.315       0.271       0.266      0.266       0.234       0.233     0.233     0.221        0.219      0.219
       Observations           244113      484999        514893     255715      508273    427697      243323         487590      457737      268891      527539     567688      281466      563803    563803    289952       580553     662677




57
     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table A.9 presents fuzzy regression discontinuity estimates
     for each upstream election on 2016 electoral turnout. The column 'Optimal' refers to the estimated optimal CCT bandwidth for the corresponding polynomial presented in Table A.1.
                      Table A.10: Robustness Checks. Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Estimates: Upstream Elections on 2017 Turnout
      Upstream Election              1988 Plebiscite                         1989 Election                          1993 Election                       1999 Election                        2005 Election                           2009 Election
      Bandwidth                 26          52       Optimal       26             52       Optimal         26            52       Optimal       26          52      Optimal        26              52      Optimal         26              52      Optimal
                                (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)           (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)       (12)        (13)            (14)      (15)          (16)            (17)      (18)
      Panel (a). Functional Form: Linear Polynomial
      Before                  0.032       0.044         0.03       0.02        -0.035       0.051       -0.017         -0.028      0.032      -0.037      -0.109      -0.118      -0.115         -0.125       -0.12      -0.085           -0.11     -0.112
                           (0.006)*** (0.005)*** (0.007)***      (0.025)       (0.025)     (0.028)*     (0.021)       (0.014)**   (0.022)     (0.077)    (0.055)**   (0.071)*   (0.039)***     (0.024)***   (0.048)**     (0.06)       (0.036)***   (0.069)
      Control Mean            0.483       0.482        0.483      0.476         0.474       0.473        0.441          0.435      0.443       0.398       0.393      0.396        0.386         0.383        0.386       0.376          0.372       0.376
      Observations           244110     486272       163608      255900        508650      163030       243443         487852     160480      268775      527447     329029      281427         563723       239489      289764         580243      256631
      Panel (b). Functional Form: Quadratic Polynomial
      Before                  0.032       0.039        0.025      0.089        -0.019        0.09          0.06        -0.032       0.055     -0.097      -0.074      -0.048     -0.117          -0.154      -0.09        -0.148        -0.149      -0.028
                           (0.009)*** (0.006)***     (0.01)**   (0.031)***     (0.032)     (0.03)***    (0.026)**      (0.025)    (0.027)**   (0.087)     (0.077)    (0.086)     (0.074)       (0.047)***   (0.071)      (0.116)       (0.071)**    (0.108)
      Control Mean            0.483       0.482        0.485      0.476         0.474        0.476        0.441         0.435       0.441      0.398       0.393      0.397       0.386          0.383       0.385        0.376          0.372       0.375
      Observations           244110     486272       296205      255900        508650       265397       243443        487852      233981     268775      527447     289371      281427         563723      312640       289764         580243      343107
      Panel (c). Functional Form: Cubic Polynomial
      Before                  0.008       0.017        0.018      0.012         0.089         0.12       0.036           0.06        0.06      -0.114      -0.063     -0.059      -0.042         -0.089      -0.057       -0.132         -0.07       -0.126
                             (0.014)    (0.009)*     (0.011)*    (0.049)      (0.028)***   (0.031)***   (0.033)       (0.027)**   (0.027)**   (0.083)     (0.109)    (0.085)     (0.089)        (0.071)     (0.082)      (0.084)        (0.116)     (0.117)
      Control Mean            0.483       0.482        0.484      0.476         0.474        0.474       0.441          0.435       0.436      0.398       0.393      0.395        0.386         0.383        0.383       0.376          0.372       0.376
      Observations           244110     486272       417328      255900        508650       418091      243443         487852      417920     268775      527447     368113      281427         563723      508030       289764         580243      364724
      Panel (d). Functional Form: Quartic Polynomial
      Before                   0.03       0.021         0.01      0.056         0.106        0.024       0.044          0.05        0.067      0.036      -0.062      -0.022       0.01         -0.048      -0.048        -0.302        -0.128       -0.172
                            (0.016)*     (0.014)      (0.013)    (0.089)      (0.037)***     (0.06)     (0.033)       (0.029)*    (0.032)**   (0.154)     (0.077)    (0.087)     (0.123)        (0.091)     (0.088)     (0.097)***      (0.112)     (0.102)*
      Control Mean            0.483       0.482        0.481      0.476         0.474        0.474       0.441         0.435        0.435      0.398       0.393      0.393       0.386          0.383       0.383        0.376          0.372       0.374
      Observations           244110     486272       576709      255900        508650       367980      243443        487852       457980     268775      527447     486985      281427         563723      518990       289764         580243      465555




58
     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table A.10 presents fuzzy regression discontinuity estimates
     for each upstream election on 2017 electoral turnout. The column 'Optimal' refers to the estimated optimal CCT bandwidth for the corresponding polynomial presented in Table A.1.
  Table A.11: Estimated Regression Discontinuity Effects of Upstream Election Participation on
                                 2013, 2016 and 2017 Turnout
                                                                 13-Week Bandwidth                      26-Week Bandwidth
                                                            2013       2016      2017              2013       2016      2017
                                                             (1)        (2)       (3)               (4)        (5)       (6)
                               Panel A. 1988 Plebiscite
                               Before                        0.05         0.04        0.027        0.054        0.037        0.032
                                                          (0.010)***   (0.009)***   (0.008)***   (0.007)***   (0.006)***   (0.006)***
                               Control Mean                 0.503        0.368        0.484        0.504        0.369        0.483
                               First Stage                   0.51         0.51        0.509         0.56         0.56        0.559
                               First Stage F-Stat            528          535          529          752          757          756
                               Observations                132363       131739       131740       250388       249273       249265

                               Panel B. 1989 Election
                               Before                       -0.018       0.004        0.029        -0.002       0.034        0.02
                                                           (0.029)      (0.025)       (0.03)      (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.025)
                               Control Mean                 0.487        0.356        0.472        0.489        0.359        0.476
                               First Stage                  0.149        0.149        0.149        0.145        0.145        0.145
                               First Stage F-Stat            4504        4721          4446         4507        4489         4347
                               Observations                138938       138445       138569       261786       260791       260984

                               Panel C. 1993 Election
                               Before                       0.087       0.039         0.032        0.067        0.029       -0.017
                                                          (0.018)***   (0.023)*      (0.024)     (0.019)***    (0.021)      (0.021)
                               Control Mean                  0.41        0.32          0.44         0.41        0.319        0.441
                               First Stage                  0.232       0.233         0.232        0.203        0.204        0.203
                               First Stage F-Stat            7584        7308         7827          797          794          802
                               Observations                128641      128336        128406       248871       248262       248386

                               Panel D. 1999 Election
                               Before                      -0.111       -0.165       -0.142        -0.175       -0.101       -0.037
                                                            (0.07)     (0.089)*     (0.080)*     (0.066)***    (0.079)      (0.077)
                               Control Mean                 0.364        0.27        0.398         0.364        0.271        0.398
                               First Stage                  0.056       0.056        0.056         0.045        0.045        0.045
                               First Stage F-Stat            657         653          667           264          268          268
                               Observations                142265      142107       142010        274566       274187       274071

                               Panel E. 2005 Election
                               Before                       -0.059       -0.005       -0.079       -0.083       -0.006       -0.115
                                                           (0.084)      (0.042)      (0.062)      (0.053)      (0.038)     (0.039)***
                               Control Mean                 0.345        0.235        0.386        0.344        0.234        0.386
                               First Stage                  0.089        0.089        0.089        0.088        0.088        0.088
                               First Stage F-Stat            2623         2630         2573         1714         1714         1687
                               Observations                150043       149869       149843       287364       286995       286954

                               Panel F. 2009 Election
                               Before                       0.006        -0.07       -0.128        -0.073      -0.109       -0.085
                                                           (0.099)      (0.085)      (0.088)      (0.069)     (0.061)*       (0.06)
                               Control Mean                 0.314        0.222        0.374        0.315       0.221         0.376
                               First Stage                  0.069        0.069        0.069        0.068       0.069         0.069
                               First Stage F-Stat            575          568          577          759         753           756
                               Observations                155248       154694       154575       296631      295661        295466




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Table A.11 presents estimates of an instrumented regression discontinuity design, where the first stage is given by equation (2) using a
linear functional form with 13 (columns (1)-(3)) and 26 (columns (4)-(6)) week bandwidth across each election cut-off. The results refer
to the estimated impacts of upstream election participation (1988 Plebiscite, 1989 1993, 1999, 2005 and 2009 Presidential elections) on
turnout in the 2013, 2016 and 2017 elections.




                                                                              59
             Table A.12: Heterogeneous Effects of Upstream Election Eligibility by Gender

                   Upstream Election         2009 Registration              2013 Turnout            2016 Turnout          2017 Turnout
                   Female      Male         Female       Male             Female     Male        Female     Male         Female    Male
                      (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)               (5)       (6)          (7)       (8)           (9)      (10)
  Panel A. 1989 Election
  Before             0.121     0.169         0.017        0.017           -0.006      0.004       0.005      0.005          0         0.005
                  (0.004)*** (0.002)***    (0.004)***   (0.007)**         (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.005)
  Control Mean         0          0          0.653        0.669            0.537       0.44       0.391      0.327        0.519       0.432
  Observations      129223    127474        129223       127474           129223     127474      128877     126838       129124      126776
  Panel B. 1993 Election
  Before             0.182     0.223           0.05       0.057         0.015          0.013      0.005      0.008        -0.009      0.003
                  (0.008)*** (0.007)***      (0.008)    (0.007)***    (0.005)***     (0.005)**   (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.006)
  Control Mean         0          0           0.419       0.412         0.456          0.364      0.353      0.285        0.485       0.396
  Observations      122002    121910         122002      121910        122002         121910     121819     121504       121965      121478
  Panel C. 1999 Election
  Before             0.049     0.040         0.011        0.028        -0.011         -0.004     -0.002      -0.007       0.002      -0.005
                  (0.003)*** (0.003)***    (0.005)***   (0.005)***    (0.005)**      (0.005)     (0.006)    (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.004)
  Control Mean         0          0          0.286        0.309         0.405         0.322       0.302      0.239        0.437       0.358
  Observations      134462    134809        134462       134809        134462        134809      134416     134475       134498      134277
  Panel D. 2005 Election
  Before             0.097     0.079         0.035        0.030            -0.012     -0.003     -0.003      0.002        -0.013     -0.007
                  (0.003)*** (0.002)***    (0.004)***   (0.004)***        (0.007)*   (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.005)***   (0.005)
  Control Mean         0          0          0.171        0.158             0.379      0.31       0.265      0.204        0.423       0.35
  Observations      139339    142498        139339       142498           139339     142498      139304     142162       139394      142033
  Panel E. 2009 Election
  Before             0.077      0.06         0.077        0.060           -0.005      -0.005     -0.006      -0.008       -0.003     -0.008
                  (0.003)*** (0.002)***    (0.003)***   (0.002)***        (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.004)***    (0.006)     (0.006)
  Control Mean         0          0            0            0              0.348      0.282       0.251      0.193        0.415       0.338
  Observations      143421    147479        143421       147479           143421     147479      143369     146583       143411      146353

Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the week-of-birth level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Table
A.12 presents evidence of heterogeneous effects of upstream eligibility on concurrent upstream election registration, 2009 registration
and downstream election participation in a linear, 26-week bandwidth specification.




                                                                     60
                                                     Table A.13: Complier Characteristics by Upstream Election and Bandwidth


                                                                                                        Panel A. 13-Week Bandwidth

                       Upstream Election            1988 Plebiscite                      1989 Election                    1993 Election                    1999 Election                    2005 Election                    2009 Election
                                             Sample Compliers          Ratio    Sample     Compliers Ratio       Sample     Compliers Ratio       Sample     Compliers Ratio       Sample     Compliers Ratio       Sample     Compliers Ratio
                                               (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)     (6)         (7)          (8)     (9)         (10)        (11)     (12)        (13)        (14)     (15)        (16)        (17)     (18)
                       Panel A. Individual Characteristics
                       HS Dropouts            0.348        0.299       0.857    0.328        0.208      0.633    0.285        0.219       0.77     0.22        0.102      0.465    0.129        0.047      0.364    0.158        0.048      0.301
                       HS Graduates           0.503        0.529        1.05     0.51        0.503      0.986    0.518         0.52      1.003    0.558        0.398      0.713    0.605         0.42      0.694    0.809        0.902      1.114
                       > HS Graduates         0.148        0.173       1.164    0.162        0.289      1.787    0.197        0.261      1.325    0.222         0.5       2.249    0.266        0.533      2.002    0.032        0.051      1.571
                       Male                   0.495        0.508       1.028    0.494        0.571      1.155    0.501        0.552      1.102      0.5        0.468      0.936    0.507        0.458      0.902    0.507        0.453      0.893
                       Panel B. Comuna Characteristics
                       Allende Vote           0.365        0.364       0.997    0.366        0.356      0.972    0.366        0.358      0.979    0.367        0.333      0.907    0.369        0.348      0.943    0.371        0.343      0.925
                       % Electricity          0.901        0.908       1.008    0.907        0.924      1.019    0.909        0.887      0.976    0.916        0.914      0.998    0.916        0.916         1      0.91        0.919      1.009
                       % Water in home        0.745        0.751       1.008    0.751         0.78      1.039    0.755        0.727      0.964    0.766        0.789       1.03    0.763        0.776      1.018    0.754        0.783      1.039
                       % TV Ownership         0.865        0.871       1.006    0.87         0.886      1.018    0.872        0.855      0.98     0.877        0.884      1.008    0.877        0.881      1.005    0.872        0.884      1.013
                       % Toilet in Home       0.688        0.697       1.013    0.696        0.731       1.05    0.701        0.664      0.947    0.714        0.736       1.03    0.711        0.725       1.02     0.7         0.733      1.047
                       Literacy Rate          0.902        0.903       1.002    0.903         0.91      1.008    0.904        0.899      0.994    0.906        0.913      1.008    0.905        0.909      1.004    0.903        0.911      1.009
                       Unemployment Rate      0.088        0.088       0.998    0.087        0.084      0.958    0.087        0.088      1.009    0.086        0.078      0.906    0.087        0.082      0.947    0.088        0.081      0.924
                       Share Compliers                                 0.615                            0.155                            0.249                            0.061                            0.101                            0.082
                       Panel C. Sample Size)
                       Sample Size (Educ.)    97047                             100269                            96103                           109552                           111611                           111121
                       Sample Size           117823                             123649                           113963                           126333                           133208                           138047
                       Ratio                  0.824                              0.811                            0.843                            0.867                            0.838                            0.805




61
                                                                                                        Panel B. 52-Week Bandwidth

                        Upstream Election            1988 Plebiscite                      1989 Election                    1993 Election                    1999 Election                    2005 Election                    2009 Election
                                              Sample Compliers          Ratio   Sample      Compliers Ratio      Sample      Compliers Ratio      Sample      Compliers Ratio      Sample      Compliers Ratio      Sample      Compliers Ratio
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)           (5)     (6)        (7)           (8)     (9)        (10)         (11)     (12)       (13)         (14)     (15)       (16)         (17)     (18)
                        Panel A. Individual Characteristics
                                              Sample Compliers          Ratio   Sample      Compliers   Ratio    Sample      Compliers   Ratio    Sample      Compliers   Ratio    Sample      Compliers   Ratio    Sample      Compliers   Ratio
                        HS Dropouts            0.341        0.318       0.933    0.326        0.221     0.679     0.284        0.235     0.827     0.218        0.126     0.577     0.129        0.058     0.452     0.192        0.046     0.242
                        HS Graduates           0.507        0.524       1.035    0.511        0.523     1.023     0.521        0.536     1.029     0.558        0.466     0.834     0.613        0.446     0.728     0.768        0.853      1.11
                        > HS Graduates         0.152        0.158       1.035    0.163        0.256     1.567     0.195        0.229     1.174     0.223        0.408     1.828     0.257        0.495     1.925     0.04         0.101     2.511
                        Male                   0.496        0.494       0.996    0.497        0.557     1.122      0.5         0.542     1.083     0.502        0.503     1.002     0.506        0.466     0.923     0.507        0.462     0.911
                        Panel B. Comuna Characteristics
                        Allende Vote           0.366        0.365       0.998    0.366         0.36      0.983    0.366        0.363      0.993    0.367        0.345      0.939    0.369        0.351      0.951    0.371        0.347      0.936
                        % Electricity          0.903        0.906       1.003    0.906        0.919      1.015    0.909        0.892      0.982    0.915         0.91      0.994    0.916        0.915      0.999    0.911        0.919       1.01
                        % Water in home        0.747        0.748       1.001     0.75        0.771      1.029    0.754        0.728      0.965    0.766        0.774      1.011    0.763        0.774      1.015    0.755        0.781      1.034
                        % TV Ownership         0.867        0.869       1.002    0.869        0.881      1.014    0.872        0.859      0.985    0.877        0.877      1.001    0.877         0.88      1.003    0.873        0.884      1.013
                        % Toilet in Home       0.691        0.693       1.003    0.695        0.721      1.037     0.7         0.666      0.951    0.714        0.719      1.007    0.711        0.722      1.015    0.702         0.73       1.04
                        Literacy Rate          0.902        0.903         1      0.903        0.908      1.006    0.904        0.899      0.994    0.906        0.909      1.003    0.905        0.909      1.004    0.903         0.91      1.008
                        Unemployment Rate      0.088        0.088         1      0.088        0.085      0.973    0.087        0.088      1.018    0.086        0.082      0.948    0.087        0.083      0.957    0.088        0.082      0.939
                        Share Compliers                                 0.718                            0.215                            0.354                            0.099                            0.132                            0.114
                        Panel C. Sample Size)
                        Sample Size (Educ.)   366706                             386733                           382522                           424834                           437883                           436478
                        Sample Size           477129                             499957                           478760                           518629                           553317                           570793
                        Ratio                  0.769                              0.774                            0.799                            0.819                            0.791                            0.765


     Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL.
     Note: Table A.13 presents complier characteristics by each upstream election and two different bandwidths.
 Figure A.1: Differences in First-Stage Registration Across Eligibility Cutoff in Various Elections

                       (a) 1989 Election                                       (b) 1993 Election




                       (c) 1999 Election                                       (d) 2005 Election




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Figure A.1 shows graphical evidence of differences in first-stage election registration rates across the eligibility
cut-off (26-week bandwidth) in the 1989, 1993, 1999 and 2005 Presidential elections.




                                                           62
         Figure A.2: Effect of Plebiscite Eligibility on 2017 Election Turnout: Placebo Cutoffs




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Note: Figure A.2 shows the estimated effect of Plebiscite
eligibility (equation (2) using placebo cutoffs within a three-year window on either side of the cutoff.




                                                                63
                        Figure A.3: The Effect of Plebiscite Eligibility on Voter Turnout




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL). Note: Figure A.3 shows graphical evidence of Plebiscite
registration rates on differential turnout rates by downstream year. The pre-2009 values correspond to differences in registration
rates across the eligibility cut-off deflated by the corresponding election turnout rate -- non-election years are deflated by the average
turnout rate in the two closest Presidential elections. The post-2009 values correspond directly to the turnout effects presented in Table
5.




                                                                   64
 Figure A.4: Effects of Plebiscite Participation on Downstream Electoral Turnout: Robustness to
                                        Bandwidth Selection

                      Effect of Plebiscite Participation on 2013 Election Turnout                                                                                                        Effect of Plebiscite Participation on 2016 Election Turnout
       .09




                                                                                                                                                                        .06
       .08




                                                                                                                                                                        .05
       .07




                                                                                                                                                                        .04
       .06




                                                                                                                                                                        .03
       .05




                                                                                                                                                                        .02
       .04




             2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52                  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                 Bandwidth (in weeks)                                                                                                                                              Bandwidth (in weeks)



                                                                                                        Effect of Plebiscite Participation on 2017 Election Turnout
                                                                                       .06
                                                                                       .05
                                                                                       .04
                                                                                       .03
                                                                                       .02




                                                                                              2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                                                  Bandwidth (in weeks)




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Figure A.4 shows the estimated impacts of Plebiscite participation on turnout in the 2013, 2017 Presidential and
2016 municipal elections across the eligibility cut-off in bandwidths ranging from two weeks to one year. The results
follow from a linear first-stage specification presented in equation (2) and the instrumental variables specification in
Section 5.3.




                                                                                                                                                                65
        Figure A.5: Downstream Election Turnout Effects of Plebiscite Eligibility by Gender

             (a) 2013 Election Turnout: Females                     (b) 2013 Election Turnout: Males




             (c) 2016 Election Turnout: Females                     (d) 2016 Election Turnout: Males




             (e) 2017 Election Turnout: Females                     (f) 2017 Election Turnout: Males




Source: Chile's Electoral Commission (Servicio Electoral de Chile, SERVEL).
Note: Figure A.5 shows graphical evidence of differences in 2013, 2017 Presidential and 2016 municipal election turnout
rates across the eligibility cut-off (26-week bandwidth) in the 1988 Plebiscite by gender.




                                                          66
