                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     NETWORKING FRICTIONS IN VENTURE CAPITAL, AND THE GENDER GAP
                        IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                      Sabrina T. Howell
                                       Ramana Nanda

                                     Working Paper 26449
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26449


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We thank Louis Maiden for exceptional research assistance. We are extremely grateful to Jodi
Gernon for her feedback and support, and to Catherine Cronin, Nick Janini, Julia Kemp,
Samantha Snyder and Coral Sullivan for their help with providing us data. We also thank Tom
Eisenmann, Michael Ewens, Rem Koning, Rick Townsend and the seminar participants at the
Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship Scholars Conference for helpful comments. Howell
thanks the Kauffman Foundation and especially Sameeksha Desai for generous support. Nanda
acknowledges support from the Division of Research and Faculty Development at Harvard
Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sabrina T. Howell and Ramana Nanda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Networking Frictions in Venture Capital, and the Gender Gap in Entrepreneurship
Sabrina T. Howell and Ramana Nanda
NBER Working Paper No. 26449
November 2019
JEL No. D83,D85,G24,J16,L26

                                         ABSTRACT

Exploiting random variation in the number of venture capitalist (VC) judges assigned to panels at
Harvard Business School's New Venture Competition (NVC) between 2000 and 2015, we find
that exposure to more VC judges increases male participants' chances of founding a VC-backed
startup after HBS much more than this exposure increases female participants' chances. A survey
suggests this is in part because male participants more often proactively reach out to VC judges
after the NVC. Our results suggest that networking frictions are an important reason men benefit
more than women from exposure to VCs. Such frictions can help explain part of the gender gap
in entrepreneurship, and also have implications for how to design networking opportunities to
facilitate financing of the best (rather than just the best networked) ideas.


Sabrina T. Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu
1     Introduction

Venture capital (VC) is a crucial financing source for new ideas and technologies (Kaplan
& Lerner 2010, Gornall & Strebulaev 2015). Yet a relatively small number of VC firms
and their investing partners account for a disproportionate share of the capital that VCs
deploy. Frictions in the process through which these gatekeepers select and advance new
ideas can have consequential effects on the types of ideas that are commercialized in the
economy (Kerr, Nanda & Rhodes-Kropf 2014).
    One concern related to the role of VCs as gatekeepers is the gender disparity in
VC-backed entrepreneurship. While women's career trajectories differ from men's across
a number of fields (Bertrand, Goldin & Katz 2010, Goldin, Kerr, Olivetti & Barth
2017), the gender gap is especially severe in VC-backed entrepreneurship. Levine &
Rubinstein (2017) find that women comprise only 28 percent of the incorporated
self-employed. Gompers & Wang (2017) show that only 10-15 percent of VC-backed
startup founders are women.      A growing literature, including Becker-Blease & Sohl
(2007), Scott & Shu (2017), Gornall & Strebulaev (2018), and Ewens & Townsend
(2019) has documented the gap and aimed to characterize frictions that might lead to it.
In particular, this work suggests that the gap originates early in the startup lifecycle, at
or near the moment of founding. From an economic perspective, the gap is particularly
worrying if it reflects systematic gender-related frictions causing high-quality
entrepreneurs or ideas to go unfunded.
    In this paper, we examine a particular channel that might be important for the gender
gap in VC-backed entrepreneurship: networking-frictions. It is widely known that face-
to-face connections and trusted referrals are important, if not primary, deal sourcing
methods for many top VC investors. This reliance on personal networks may be the
result of extreme information asymmetry between founders and VC investors (e.g. Stuart
& Sorenson 2005, Hochberg, Ljungqvist & Lu 2007, Kerr & Mandorff 2015). However,


                                             2
heavy reliance on trusted referrals may also privilege those who are more connected to
investors (Cohen, Frazzini & Malloy 2008). Since over 90 percent of VC investors are
men (Gompers & Wang 2017), homophily in networking could disproportionately impact
women if entrepreneurs do not get a chance to interact as much with VCs of their own
gender without an introduction.
   In light of the established facts that women founders receive less VC investment and
personal connections are central to the VC deal sourcing process, it is possible that
exposing early stage female entrepreneurs to more networking opportunities with VCs
could help reduce the gender gap. That is, exposure to more VCs could help compensate
for any baseline advantages that men have in meeting VCs.            However, rigorously
studying network-related information frictions is challenging.       Social networks are
endogenous, making it hard to separate the role of networking frictions from unobserved
variables, such as whether an entrepreneur's business model is a good fit with VC.
   We address this empirical challenge by employing exogenous variation in exposure to
VC networks at Harvard Business School's (HBS) New Venture Competition (NVC).
The NVC is Harvard's flagship new venture competition and a key gateway to
VC-backed entrepreneurship after HBS. Many successful founders, including those of
`unicorn' startups, have been participants in the NVC. Gompers & Wang (2017) note
that among business schools, HBS accounts for the largest number of graduates that
receive VC funding; the next-largest in terms of VC backed entrepreneurs is Stanford
GSB, which has half as many alumni who are VC-backed entrepreneurs. HBS therefore
provides an important and interesting setting to study determinants of the gender gap
in high-growth entrepreneurship.
   In the first round of the NVC, each team is assigned to one of about 15 panels, each
composed of about six judges. Having delivered a pitch to the judges and answered their
questions, the participants are in a position to reach out to judges after the competition,
leveraging the connection to ultimately raise VC financing for their ventures.        The

                                            3
competition does not, however, explicitly encourage such follow-up.
   Our research design exploits random variation in the number of VC judges across
panels, which arises from the way in which judges are allocated to panels in the NVC.
Our core empirical specification estimates the differential effect of having an additional
VC judge on the panel for a male participant's subsequent chances of VC-backed
entrepreneurship   relative   to   a   female    participant's   chances   of   VC-backed
entrepreneurship. Isolating the interaction between a participant's gender and exposure
to a larger number of VCs on a panel enables us to distinguish effects stemming from
random differences in exposure to VCs from channels related to fixed differences
between men and women in their demand for VC financing, or the degree to which
businesses founded by women are a good fit with VC financing.
   If lack of exposure to VCs among female participants were an important friction, we
would expect to find that on the margin, exposure to an additional VC on a panel would
be more valuable to female participants.        However, we find the reverse.    The raw
relationship shown in Figure 1 indicates that exposure to more VCs substantially benefit
male participants, while this relationship is at most only marginally positive for women.
Regression estimates find that relative to the effect among women, each additional VC
judge on a panel increases the likelihood of men starting a VC-backed company after
HBS by 25 percent. Placebo tests show that the result is not present among participants
starting ventures with no VC financing or participants joining VC-backed startups as
employees. Finally, judges on the panel in the same sector as the participant or with
backgrounds besides VC, such as corporate executives, lawyers or academics, have no
differential effect by gender on VC-backed entrepreneurship (nor do they have an
independent effect).
   The results are robust to controlling for a number of individual characteristics such
as venture sector, college major, stated interest in entrepreneurship when entering HBS,
and entrepreneurship experience prior to attending HBS. Such covariates are known to

                                            4
be correlated with VC-backed entrepreneurship but are typically unobserved. While our
estimation strategy does not require such person-level controls, they are useful for
precision and establishing the robustness of our research design. Our main estimates
also include a variety of competition controls, such as the number of ventures on the
panel, the score the venture received, and whether the venture won. Finally, the results
are robust to including panel fixed effects.
       Why might exposure to VCs compound the gender gap rather than reduce it? To shed
light on the mechanism, we rely on survey evidence from NVC participants. The survey
responses reveal that male participants are nearly twice as likely as women to proactively
reach out to VC investors after the NVC. Conditional on reaching out, however, men and
women report no difference in the rate at which VCs respond to their outreach or any
difference in the degree to which VCs proactively reach out to them.1 Each individual
outreach to an investor by an entrepreneur obviously has a small chance of being ultimately
valuable in terms of raising VC, but a fixed difference in the likelihood of outreach between
men and women compounds across the number of VCs on a panel, making the difference
in the benefit larger for panels with more VCs than those with fewer.2 Consistent with
this, qualitative responses in the survey also suggest that because follow-up with judges at
the NVC was not explicitly encouraged, women were more likely to have some reservation
about leveraging the connection to discuss fundraising.
       We do not find obvious evidence of explicit bias by male VCs against female
participants in our sample.          In addition to VCs responding to outreach equally by
participant gender, we show that the private scores of VC judges are in fact slightly
   1
     These survey results are consistent with Gornall & Strebulaev (2018), who run a large-scale field
experiment to document that VCs do not seem to be biased in responding to female entrepreneurs.
   2
     As a simple example, suppose that men are twice as likely to reach out to all investors on their panel,
and each initiation leads to a 1 percentage point chance of VC-backed entrepreneurship post HBS. On a
panel with 2 VCs the difference would be 2 percentage points, but in a panel with 5 VCs the difference
would be 5 percentage points. Assuming an identical 10 percent baseline entry rate, this would imply
that going from a panel with 2 VCs to a panel with 5 VCs increased the relative probability of VC-backed
entrepreneurship for men by 30 percent.



                                                     5
lower for male-led ventures than for women-led ventures. Also, while there are too few
female VC judges to establish precise effects by judge gender, we do not find evidence
that female VC judges are differentially beneficial for woman participants. However, less
observable discrimination may be at play and the lack of outreach by women could
reflect expectations of bias or harassment.
       While our analysis is based on a sample that is quite particular, we believe the results
have broader significance. If networking frictions matter in this already highly ambitious
and well-connected sample of potential entrepreneurs, it seems likely that they will matter
more generally in VC and thereby perhaps contribute to the overall gender gap in VC-
backed entrepreneurship. In particular, they suggest that structural solutions that focus
only on providing female entrepreneurs more exposure to VCs may not always be sufficient
to eliminate such networking frictions.
       Our results are related to evidence about the gender gap in science, invention, and
entrepreneurship.3      There is a small but growing literature looking more closely at
frictions that might lead to systematic gaps in VC funding for new ventures,
independent of the quality of ideas. This prior work has focused more on the role of
preferences or discrimination on the part of investors in driving some of the gender gap
in entrepreneurship. Two recent papers are especially related. First, Ewens & Townsend
(2019) use data on startups that seek funding on AngelList to find evidence that angel
investors to prefer to invest in founders of their own gender.                 Second, Gornall &
Strebulaev (2018) experimentally send pitch emails from startup founders to angel and
VC investors. They find no evidence of discrimination at this contact stage. While both
these papers focus on entrepreneurs seeking funding, our approach sheds light on the
stage before explicit fundraising, where most of the gap between women and men in
high-growth entrepreneurship seems to originate.             For example, Ewens & Townsend
   3
    This includes Brooks et al. (2014), Reuben, Sapienza & Zingales (2014), Hengel (2017), Bell et al.
(2018), and Cook, Diamond, Hall, List & Oyer (2018).



                                                  6
(2019) note that just 16 percent of founders seeking financing on AngelList are women.
    It is worth emphasizing that there are many potential reasons why women might not
seek or receive VC proportionately to their share of the population, and these reasons are
not mutually exclusive. For example, women may more often perceive family obligations
to be incompatible with leading a high-growth startup . Alternatively, women may be
more likely to found ventures in industries in which VCs tend not to invest. Women may
also face discrimination in ways that we do not observe. Some of these explanations have
been explored in a broader context in Bertrand et al. (2010), Bertrand (2013), Castillo
et al. (2013), Pew (2013), Pew (2015), Bertrand, Kamenica & Pan (2015), Fang & Huang
(2017), and Goldin et al. (2017). Women have also been shown to be more risk averse
than men (e.g. Barber & Odean 2001, Niederle & Vesterlund 2007, Sapienza, Zingales
& Maestripieri 2009). Our goal is not to address these potentially profound, population-
wide explanations. Instead, we focus on evaluating a specific friction conditional on an
individual demonstrating serious interest in high-growth entrepreneurship.
    One advantage of this focus is that it has immediate implications for new venture
competitions and accelerators, which can potentially design networking between
entrepreneurs and investors to facilitate the financing of the best (rather than just the
best networked) ideas. In particular, our results point to benefits from encouraging and
potentially formalizing networking opportunities between individuals, rather than
assuming that people will contact each other independently.



2    Data

Before moving to the analysis, we describe the HBS NVC and the data from it that
we employ in our analysis (Section 2.1). We discuss the HBS administrative and career
history data. Section 2.4 explains the survey design in Sections 2.2 and 2.3.



                                            7
2.1       HBS NVC data

The NVC is a startup "pitch" competition in which founders present their business ideas
to expert judges. A team must have at least one current HBS student to participate. The
NVC promotes itself as an opportunity for students to "put entrepreneurship principles
into practice," to receive feedback on their ideas, and to get exposure to key stakeholders
in the entrepreneurial ecosystem. There is also a cash prize for the ultimate winner and
runners up in the competition. This type of business plan competition is now a standard
component of many undergraduate and MBA programs, and is also a common stepping
stone in an early stage startup's life, particularly for first-time founders and student
entrepreneurs (Howell 2019).
       The NVC started in 1997 with a business track. It added a social enterprise track in
2001 and an alumni track in 2010.                 The core dataset for our analysis consists of
comprehensive team and judging information for the business track between 2000 and
2015 (except for 2003, for which no data are available).4 The competition has three
rounds, but our analysis focuses on the first round, in which teams and judges are
assigned to parallel sessions that run roughly simultaneously in separate rooms.5 Judges
formally score the pitches of participating ventures, and these scores determine which
ventures proceed to the next round of judging. Each team's pitch and question period
lasts only about 15 minutes, but there are opportunities for follow-up by a proactive
student or judge.        This follow-up could occur at the cocktail hour after the pitch
   4
     We do not consider participants in the social enterprise track for this analysis because of the potential
mismatch between the goals and business models of such ventures and the objectives of for-profit venture
capital investors. The alumni tracks are run by local alumni chapters, making the data inconsistent and
hard to gather.
   5
     The value of the cash prize and the number of runner up teams getting a prize has changed over
time, but the structure of the judging ­ which forms the basis of our empirical strategy ­ has not changed
during the period we study. Specifically, in 1997, the winning team at the business plan competition was
awarded $10,000 and 3 runner-up teams were each awarded $5,000. In 2009, the winning team's award
was changed to $25,000 and 2 runner teams shared $10,000 each. In 2013, the winning team received
$50,000 and one runner up team was awarded $25,000. The cash prize for the winning team was raised to
$75,000 in 2017, but this change was outside of our sample period. Also, the competition was re-branded
from the HBS "Business Plan Competition" to the HBS "New Venture Competition" in 2013.


                                                      8
sessions, or privately if the student or judge requests contact information directly or
from HBS NVC administrators.
      Several elements make the NVC's first round an attractive setting to explore the
role of gender in early stage, high-growth entrepreneurship. First, participants not only
demonstrate a revealed preference for joining the labor force (by virtue of attending
business school), but also demonstrate an interest in pursuing high-growth entrepreneurial
activity. Startups founded by HBS alumni have gone on to raise substantial amounts
of venture capital. For example, one analysis of Pitchbook data found that "1,069 HBS
MBAs have founded 961 companies that have raised $22.4 billion in VC [..] Entrepreneurs
from HBS have founded 13 unicorns -- nearly double its closest competitor, Stanford." 6
Among U.S. business schools that focus on entrepreneurship, HBS has among the largest
student bodies and thus offers a substantial sample for study, even when the sample is
restricted to NVC participants.7
      Second, as we elaborate below, our research design assesses how random variation
in the number of VC judges across panels impacts VC-backed entrepreneurship after
HBS. This enables us to overcome the challenge that exposure to VCs is typically non-
random and unobserved, making it hard to effectively study networking frictions in VC-
backed entrepreneurship. Beyond the research design, we observe individual and venture
characteristics that, while not needed for identification, provide reassurance about the
mechanism we document in our analysis. For example, we observe a venture description
that allows us to categorize ventures by sector. Of particular note is our access to the
scores that judges assign to team. These data are private, so participants never observe
their own or other teams' scores. Judges score independently and observe only their own
  6
     Examples of these "unicorns" include health insurance company Oscar, fashion rental company
Rent the Runway, and video game producer Zynga. (See https://www.businessbecause.com/news/mba-
entrepreneurs/4183/harvard-startups-rake-in-venture-capital.)
   7
     In 2017, U.S. News ranked HBS the third best MBA program for entrepreneurship, and
it has more than double the annual enrollment of any other program in the top five (See
https://www.usnews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-business-schools/entrepreneurship-rankings).



                                               9
scores, and never a venture's overall rank. The private scores enable us to control for a
measure of venture quality when conducting our analysis.
      To participate in the NVC, a founding team must have at least one member who is a
current HBS MBA student. About 70 percent of participants are HBS students; other
participants are mostly students elsewhere at Harvard, and a minority are students at
other universities or recent graduates.          We restrict our sample to the 964 unique
participants who are HBS students at the time of the competition, because these are the
students for which we have a rich set of covariates that are typically unobserved, as well
as comprehensive outcome data post-graduation. As Table 1 Panel A shows, 32 percent
of the participants are female, which is only slightly smaller than their share of the
overall HBS population.8 The participants are members of 647 teams, each of which has
2.5 members on average. Table 1 Panel B shows that average team sizes for female and
male participants are quite similar. Across all years in our data, there are 573 unique
judges, of which 243 are VCs. Some judges participate in multiple years. Each panel has
on average six judges, as shown in Table 1 Panel E. Just over half of judges on a panel
are VCs on average, though this can and does vary substantially due to the way in
which the allocation of judges is done.


2.2      HBS administrative data

Working with the staff at the HBS MBA program and alumni office, we were able to
create an anonymized but individual level dataset that includes information on student
backgrounds and interests while they were at HBS. Specifically, we matched each of the
964 students in our sample to administrative data from HBS on the candidate's gender,
an indicator for being a U.S. citizen, and indicators for having an undergraduate degree
  8
    The 36 percent of HBS graduates who are women is slightly less than the 43 percent in 2006 across
all MBA programs, but higher than the 26 percent of Chicago Booth MBAs between 1990 and 2006 that
were women (Bertrand et al. 2010).




                                                 10
in computer science, engineering, and economics, business or management. Additional
controls include attending an undergraduate university that was in the Ivy League or was
MIT, Stanford or Caltech, having founded or co-founded a company prior to HBS, having
worked at a VC-backed startup prior to HBS and having worked at a VC firm prior to
HBS. We also include indicators for the student having self-identified as having a personal
or professional interest in entrepreneurship, or being involved in entrepreneurship or VC
clubs at HBS.
   As we explain below, our empirical design exploits random variation in the number of
VCs across panels. Nevertheless, the rich set of individual characteristics are valuable as
they help us further control for any differences in interests, skills and experience related
to VC-backed entrepreneurship that may be correlated with the participant's gender,
factors that are typically unobserved in most studies examining the gender gap in
entrepreneurship. This allows us to verify the validity of our identification assumption,
as our estimates remain quite stable with the inclusion of these additional covariates.


2.3    Career histories

Working with the staff at the HBS alumni office, we created an anonymized but individual-
level panel dataset of career histories for each NVC participant. Our data include the
names of the organizations at which they worked, their titles at each organization, and
the years associated with each position. We use the titles to define whether an individual
was a founder or co-founder of a business, and we determine if the startup received VC
by looking for a match to the firm's name and location in two databases of VC portfolio
companies: CB Insights and VentureXpert. By combining these pieces of information,
we are able to create three sets of indicator variables: (1) VC-backed entrepreneurs,
if they were a co-founder of a firm that matched to the database of companies with VC
investment; (2) Non-VC backed entrepreneurs, if they were a co-founder of a firm that did


                                            11
not match to this database; and (3) Employed at VC-backed firm, if they were employed
at but not a co-founder of a firm that did match to this database.
      Table 3 shows entrepreneurship outcomes after HBS. As can be seen from these
descriptive statistics, the probability that an NVC participant starts a VC-backed firm,
at 12 percent, is large. In the overall U.S. population, about 0.3 percent of people start
a new business in any given year.9 And among all new U.S. firms, just 0.11 percent are
VC-backed (Puri & Zarutskie 2012).            Moreover, while there is a difference in the
probability of male participants becoming VC-backed entrepreneurs relative to female
participants in our data, it is small relative to the differences documented in the broader
population of U.S. startups (e.g., Gompers & Wang 2017).
      These differences between our sample and the broader population are to be expected.
First, participants in the HBS NVC are much more likely to become VC-backed
entrepreneurs than the population of potential entrepreneurs. Businesses founded by
elite business school graduates are much more likely to be amenable to and attract VC
financing than the average business started in the broader population. Second, relative
to the average female entrepreneur, the sample of female participants at HBS in general,
and those participating in the NVC in particular, appear to have several differentiating
characteristics. They are much more likely to participate in the labor force following
graduation, start new ventures in industries that tend to receive VC, and are likely less
subject to the standard frictions facing typical entrepreneurs. Participation in the NVC
reveals an interest in high-growth entrepreneurship, which places these women in a very
selected category relative to the average woman or even the average female entrepreneur.
These factors are likely to narrow the gap between the post-HBS VC-backed
entrepreneurship rates across male and female participants relative to the broader
population. Of course, they also mean that our results may be less externally valid.
However, we believe that the elite and entrepreneurial nature of women in our sample
  9
      See https://indicators.kauffman.org/.


                                               12
should act against finding an effect of exposure to networking opportunities. That is,
this group of women seems especially well positioned to network effectively with VCs.
   Panel B of Table 3 shows that conditional on raising VC, the companies that women
in our sample build are not lower quality than those that men build. Furthermore, NVC
judges score women higher than men (Table 1 Panel E). This could reflect selection into
the NVC; for example, it may be that because of additional challenges to high-growth
entrepreneurship that women face, only extremely high-quality women select into the
NVC. This is consistent with the above point, which is that selection into the NVC
should favor individuals who proactively network.


2.4    Survey data

As part of an effort to help the administrators of the NVC consider ways to facilitate more
interaction between participants and investors, we obtained access to survey data on the
networking experiences of NVC participants. The survey asked all NVC participants who
were HBS alumni four Yes/No questions:

  1. "After the NVC did you reach out to any judges on your panel who were VC or
      angel investors?"

  2. "If yes, did any respond?"

  3. "After the NVC did any judges on your panel who were VC or angel investors reach
      out to you?"

  4. "If yes, did any respond?"

The following open-ended question was also included: "Optional: Please let us know any
thoughts you have about the importance and ease of networking with startup investors
at the NVC."


                                            13
         As we outline below, we use the survey responses to provide suggestive evidence about
the mechanism behind our results.



3          Research design

Our empirical strategy focuses on the first round of the NVC, where teams and judges
are assigned to panels.           NVC administrators invite individuals with a range of
occupational backgrounds to judge, including investors, entrepreneurs, corporate
executives, and lawyers working with startups. To facilitate allocating judges to panels,
NVC administrators ask judges to fill out a self-assessment of their expertise across a
number of industry sectors. This assessment is absolute rather than relative, so that a
judge can claim to be an expert in more than one sector.                      A few days before the
competition, once the pool of entrepreneurs who will actually be presenting their
business plans as well as the list of judges who are available has been finalized, teams
are grouped broadly along sector lines and there is some effort made to assign them to
panels with judges who claimed to have expertise in their respective sectors.
Administrators aim to have between five and seven judges per panel as they rightly
anticipate some attrition of judges on the day of the competition. This size requirement
means that some judges who are assigned to a panel may not have expertise in the
sector comprising most of the ventures on the panel.10 Importantly for our analysis,
judge occupations are not used to allocate judges to panels and are not even explicitly
recorded by administrators.           The program design therefore yields variation in the
number of VCs across panels.
    10
    Consistent with a desire to match ventures to judges with related expertise, we observe that at the
sector level, there is a correlation between company and judge expertise. For example, in the startups
in the IT/Software/Web category have on average 2.97 judges with related expertise, while on average
non-IT startups have 2.25 judges with IT expertise on their panel, a difference that is highly significant.
Matching appears strongest in health care. The only sector without such a significant correlation is
Media/Education, though as Appendix Table A.1 shows, this is a small sample with just 66 participants
in this sector.


                                                    14
   For our identification strategy to be valid, it must be the case that the fluctuation
in the number of VCs across panels is random. In other words, matching on sector lines
should not lead to systematic variation in the number of VCs across panels. Moreover,
variation in the number of VCs across panels needs to be orthogonal to any characteristics
of ventures that might differ along gender lines. We next demonstrate that indeed this
is the case. One way in which matching along industry lines would lead to systematic
variation in the number of VCs is if there were systematic differences in self-assessed
sector expertise across occupations, which caused systematic differences in the number of
VCs on panels by sector. The bars in Appendix Figure A.1 demonstrate that company
sectors do not predict significant differences in the number of VCs. That is, VC judges are
distributed fairly equally across sectors. Summary statistics about the sector composition
of judges and participants are in Appendix Table A.1.
   Having shown that there is no systematic variation in the number of VCs across panels
by sector, we turn next to gender-specific statistics. Table 1 Panel E shows that there is
no difference in the number of ventures per panel across male and female participants, nor
is there systematic variation in the number of VCs or the number of sector experts that
men and women are exposed to. We further show in Appendix Figure A.1 that sectors
with relatively more male VC-backed entrepreneurs do not also have relatively more VCs
on the panel. Finally, Appendix Table A.2 shows by sector that men are not more likely
to have more VC judges in their own sector.
   Together with the fact that the NVC administrators do not pay explicit attention
to the occupation of judges, the results from these tests show that the program design
yields fluctuation in VCs across panels that is orthogonal to participant gender. This will
enable us to identify the effect of participant exposure to more relative to fewer VCs. It is
important to note that our variation is not based on the gold standard of explicit random
assignment, as in for example Gornall & Strebulaev (2018). Instead, our variation stems
from the NVC program design yielding random fluctuation in VCs across panels. This

                                             15
is conceptually similar to Lerner & Malmendier (2013), who exploit the program design
of HBS sections, which yields as good as random variation in the number students in a
section with prior entrepreneurial backgrounds.
   An important control variable that we observe is comprehensive judging data,
including each judge's numeric score of the ventures on their panel. These scores are not
observed by participants. Program administrators average them and then force-rank the
ventures within a panel, which determines which ventures will proceed to the next
round. Figure 2 uses a binscatter to show that score is correlated with subsequent
VC-backed entrepreneurship. The red line provides the linear fitted values, which is the
same as the coefficient on a regression of the y-values on the x-values. This indicates
that score is a useful control for the latent quality of the venture.
   Table 1 Panel E shows that female participants' teams have an average score of 3.39,
where one is the lowest possible score and five is the highest. Male participants' average
is a bit lower, at 3.22 (statistically different at the .05 level). Female participants have a
21 percent chance of proceeding to the semifinals, compared to a 19 percent chance for
male participants, though this difference is not statistically significant. Women also have
a higher chance of ultimately winning the competition in the final round. Their chance of
being a finalist or runner up is nine percent, compared to seven percent for men (though
again the difference is not significant). We do not use semifinals or finals data because
the number of participants is far fewer, there is only one panel in each of those rounds,
and there is inadequate variation in the number of VC judges. Our vector of competition
covariates consists of the venture score in the panel, an indicator for winning the round
(semifinals participation), an indicator for winning the competition (overall or runner-up),
the number of ventures on the panel, the number of male judges on the panel, and the
number of total judges on the panel.
   Because we have (a) random variation in the number of VCs on a panel, (b) scores
that are unknown to the participants, and (c) rich covariates on the individuals, we can

                                             16
estimate the differential benefit for a male entrepreneur of each extra VC investor on a
panel. Specifically, we estimate variants of Equation 1:


          V CEntrepreneuri = t +        1 M alei      · #V CsP anelj                          (1)

                              +   2 M alei   +   3 #V   CsP anelj + X0i + X0j + "ijt .


Here, t denotes the NVC year, i denotes the HBS student participant, and j denotes the
competition-specific panel on which the participant pitched. The outcome of interest is an
indicator for the participant becoming a VC-backed entrepreneur after HBS. Our primary
approach uses year fixed effects (t ), but we also show the results with panel fixed effects
(j ), which absorb the year. The coefficient of interest is        1   on the interaction between
the participant being male and the number of VCs on the panel. We cluster standard
errors at the panel level, and the results are also robust to clustering at the venture level.



4     Results

This section first presents the main results, both visually and from the regression model
in Equation 1 (Section 4.1). Robustness tests are discussed in Section 4.2.


4.1    Main results

Before showing regression evidence, we begin by presenting raw averages consistent with
our main result. Table 2 Panel B shows the share of participants who subsequently
become VC-backed entrepreneurs by gender and the panel's number of VC judges. For
women, the rate of VC-backed entrepreneurship exhibits no relationship to the number
of VC judges. However, for men, there is a strong association. Men have a nine percent
chance of becoming VC-backed entrepreneurs with two or fewer VCs on the panel, a 12
percent chance with three to four VCs, and an 18 percent chance with five or more VCs

                                                 17
on the panel. This relationship is demonstrated graphically in Figure 1 using binscatters,
in which each number of VCs on the panel is a bin. The dots indicate the average chance
that an individual in the bin founds a VC-backed startup (that is, it is the mean of all
observations in the bin). The left figure shows that venture backing is monotonically
increasing in the number of VCs on the panel among men. In striking contrast, the right
figure shows that there is a much weaker relationship for women, if any.
   We move to estimates of Equation 1 in Table 4. Our main specification in column 1
finds that each additional VC on the panel makes male participants 3.1 percentage points
more likely to become a VC-backed entrepreneur, relative to female participants. This
is large in economic magnitude; it is about 25 percent of the mean rate of 12 percent.
Moving across columns in Table 4, it is comforting that the effect without any controls is
close in magnitude to the effect with the rich person and competition controls (17 person-
level indicator variables and five panel-level competition controls). Table 4 column 2
omits person controls, and column 3 omits competition controls as well. We include panel
fixed effects (j ) in column 4. This yields a slightly higher coefficient of interest, at 4.4
percentage points. Columns 5-6 show that the results are robust to including sector and
sector by gender fixed effects.
   In column 7, we restrict VC backing to the first venture that the participant founded
after the competition date. In other words, if a participant first founded a venture without
VC investment after the NVC and then later founded a VC-backed venture, the dependent
variable in this specification is coded as zero. The coefficient of .026 is about 80 percent
of the main effect, consistent with the first venture post-HBS driving the results.
   The final column of Table 4 shows that we find similar results at the venture level.
Here, the dependent variable is the chance that the venture specifically, rather than the
individual, subsequently receives VC backing. We use a categorical independent variable
that takes one of three values depending on whether the team is all male, mixed, or all



                                             18
female (omitted).11      Note that many ventures have only one HBS team member
participating, so the sample size decreases by only about one third. The results indicate
that all-male teams benefit from more VCs on the panel. There is no economic or
statistical difference between mixed teams and all-female teams.
       We separately consider male and female VC judges. As noted in Section 2.1, there
are few female VCs, and thus little variation across panels. We therefore do not expect
to identify a robust different effect for women judges. Appendix Table A.3 column 1
shows that as expected, our effect is only significantly different from zero for male VCs.
The coefficient for female VCs is not significantly different from zero, but it is large in
magnitude. Therefore, we cannot rule out that the effect of exposure to VC judges benefits
men regardless of the gender of the judge. However, existing research, such as Ewens &
Townsend (2019), has found evidence of gender-based homophily in early stage investing.
       The results are largely driven by early-stage VCs. We manually researched whether
the VCs' firms primarily do early, late, or not specialized investing. Where available,
we relied on Crunchbase's categorization. Otherwise, we used Pitchbook deal types and
firm websites. We were able to assign a stage to 126 unique VC firms. Of these, 40
are early specialists, typically focusing on Series A rounds (not the seed or angel deals
that are more typically a startup's first outside financing). Of the remainder, 22 are late
specialists, and 64 do not specialize. In Appendix Table A.4, we interact "Male" with the
number of VCs of a particular stage. The coefficient on the interaction between "Male"
and the number of early stage VCs is 0.055, larger than our main estimate (column 1).
The other two coefficients are insignificant, but the one for "Late" is -.011 while the one
for "Not Specialized" is .023, suggesting possible monotonicity in early stage deal making.
The means for Early, Late, and Not Specialized are 0.48, 0.26, and 1.03, respectively.
While our results are not driven by the VCs themselves investing in the very early stage
  11
    There are 221 all female teams, 182 mixed teams, and 561 all male teams, so the average of this
variable is 1.35.



                                                19
participating ventures, it is not surprising that the VCs with the most relevant networks
are those that specialize in early stage deals.
   We explore whether the number of VCs on the panel leads to different startup outcomes
by gender conditional on the startup receiving VC funding in Appendix Table A.5. A
caveat to this analysis is that since we are conditioning on those who started VC-backed
ventures, the sample is quite small. Columns 1-3 consider the amount of VC financing
within two years of the competition. In column 3, we use an indicator for financing
above the 90th percentile. The coefficient suggests that an additional VC increases the
chances of very high funding for men relative to women by about 14 percentage points.
Columns 7-8 find no significant effects on real outcomes in the forms of acquisition or
employment. These results, while imprecisely measured, suggest that the networking
friction we observe acts on the extensive margin of becoming a VC-backed entrepreneur.
Conditional on raising VC, women appear to have established the necessary networks to
succeed.
   In sum, the results indicate that exposure to VCs in particular is more useful to
nascent male entrepreneurs than to their female counterparts.            Beyond VC judges'
expertise in evaluating startups, networking value is no doubt one reason why new
venture competitions (including HBS) try to include as many of them in their judge
pool as possible. We demonstrate that this networking value accrues disproportionately
to male founders.
   While our research design offers strong identification, the external validity of our results
depends on the nature of selection into HBS and into the NVC. We believe that our
findings may generalize to the broader population. As we noted in the introduction, our
goal is not to explain the relative importance of various channels that might lead to the
gender gap in entrepreneurship, but rather to shed light on the particular channel of
networking frictions. We believe the highly motivated, relatively well-networked women
in our sample likely face fewer of these frictions than women in the broader population.

                                             20
Therefore, the gender-based networking frictions we identify are likely present in high-
growth entrepreneurship more generally. That said, the selected sample of HBS NVC
participants is a potential limitation of our study.


4.2    Robustness tests

Placebo tests offer compelling evidence that our effect is not spurious. In Table 5 columns
1 and 2, we use the alternative outcome variables of non-VC backed entrepreneurship and
employment at a VC-backed company. In both cases, there is no effect of the interaction
M alei · #V CsP anelj . In the remainder of the table, we ask whether other types of judges
affect VC-backed entrepreneurship. All of the judges are highly successful individuals
with some connection to entrepreneurship (e.g., lawyers for startups, executives running
corporate venture programs), so it is possible that our effect reflects useful connections
based on other characteristics that may be correlated with being a VC. In column 3, we
interact M alei with the number of male judges on the panel in case gender homophily
is the source of our effect. While the coefficient is positive (2.1 percentage points), it is
imprecisely estimated and not statistically significant. To ensure that sector matching
does not drive the result, column 4 uses the number of judges on the panel who are in
the venture's sector. It finds a small and insignificant, albeit positive, effect. We consider
the number of all judges that are not VCs in column 5, and more specifically the number
of entrepreneurs and corporate executive judges in columns 6 and 7, respectively. In all
cases, the coefficient is small, negative, and insignificant.
   A different type of concern arises from the possibility that men have higher quality
ventures, and VCs more accurately assess quality. We can use the private scoring data to
speak to this concern. First, it is important to demonstrate that the scores contain useful
information, as Howell (2019) finds in a larger sample of competitions. Indeed, on average
scores are strongly correlated with VC-backed entrepreneurship, which is shown in Table


                                              21
6 column 1 (note that winning is included as a control). This relationship is robust to
including the M alei indicator in column 2. We then shift to predicting the score using
gender and the number of VCs. Column 3 shows that men score slightly lower than women
do on average, consistent with the summary statistics reported above. This correlation
persists when #V CsP anelj and the interaction M alei · #V CsP anelj are included as
controls. There is no significant effect of the interaction on scores. In unreported results,
we also find that VC scores are no different than other judge scores. In sum, our results do
not appear to be driven by VC judges perceiving women-led ventures to be lower quality.
   A related concern is that our main finding reflects some characteristic correlated with
gender. In Appendix Table A.6 Panel 1 we interact #V CsP anelj with a wide array
of relevant previous job experiences: previous VC-backed entrepreneurship (column 1),
previous non-VC-backed entrepreneurship (column 2), previous employment at a VC-
backed company (column 3), previous employment at a VC firm (column 4), previous
employment in management consulting (column 5), and previous employment in financial
services (column 6). In no case do we observe an effect of the interaction between the job
experience and the number of VCs on the panel. In Panel 2, we consider six additional
binary participant characteristics: undergraduate degree from an Ivy+ college (column 1),
HBS honors (column 2), computer science major (column 3), engineering major (column
4), econ/business major (column 5), and winning the NVC round (column 6). We again
find no effects, with one exception. The interaction is significant for participants whose
college major was economics/business. This major is uncorrelated with gender.
   In Appendix Table A.7 we split the sample by time period and number of ventures
on the panel to test whether a part of our sample is responsible for the effect (though
note we control for these factors in the main model). The results suggest a somewhat
stronger effect in the later period, though the two coefficients are not significantly different.
However, to the extent this difference may be substantive, it could indicate a higher value
of networking resources in early stage entrepreneurship in more recent years, when the

                                               22
explosion of entrepreneurial activity perhaps made it harder to screen ventures.
    Finally, we considered whether there are effects on other types of entrepreneurial
finance. We grouped non-VC investment into two categories: "Angel" and "Other Early."
The former includes angel and seed deals.       The latter includes grants, incubators,
accelerators, business plan competitions, and crowdfunding.       We identified 56 NVC
participant ventures that raised Angel and 21 that raised Other Early, together
corresponding to 129 HBS student participants. In unreported analysis, we find no
significant effects on Angel or Other Early at either the venture or individual level.
However, at the individual level, the effect on Angel is .022 with a p-value of .105,
suggesting that a weaker version of the main finding may exist for angel and seed
investment. These results support the argument that women face the biggest networking
barriers in raising formal VC.



5    Survey results

Our main results show that exposure to more VCs benefits male NVC participants more
than female participants. This is consistent with women having a more difficult time
taking advantage of networking opportunities with VCs. If there is a greater friction in
any given interaction between VCs and female participants, the overall impact will be more
consequential in panels with more VCs. To probe this channel further and determine the
degree to which this friction might be due to the participants or the investors, we turn
to the survey evidence. The first step in examining the survey evidence is to test for
response bias in the variables of interest. Table 7 columns 1 and 2 show that men were no
more likely than women to respond to the survey. Further, there is no association between
responsiveness and either the number of VCs on the panel or VC-backed entrepreneurship
(column 2).
    We then turn to analyzing the results within the sample of 172 respondents. Men

                                           23
were much more likely to report having reached out to a VC judge after the
competition. Columns 3 and 4 show that men were 16-21 percentage points more likely
to reach out, depending on whether we include person and competition controls. Among
survey respondents, 26 percent reached out. Therefore, our preferred specification in
column 4 implies that men were 81 percent more likely than women to reach out to
VCs. However, men were not significantly more likely than women to report a VC judge
reaching out to them after the competition (column 5).         Among participants who
reached out to a VC judge, we observe a positive but insignificant coefficient on
interaction M alei · #V CsP anelj (column 6). Conditional on reaching out to a judge,
male and female participants report the judge responding in equal numbers (column 7).
It is important to emphasize that the sample is very small in columns 6 and 7, so the
results should be interpreted with caution.
    Despite its limitations, the survey results offer suggestive evidence that our main
findings reflect women being less likely to initiate networking with VCs.      This is
corroborated by some of the responses to an open-ended question in the survey about
the importance or ease of networking at the NVC. For example, one woman wrote the
following: "I think [networking at the NVC] would have been amazing. I didn't think it
was appropriate at the time/or was perhaps a bit shy to reach out. In general, I think
encouraging    future    entrepreneurs        to   be   very   comfortable   scheduling
meetings/coffees/chats with the community would be hugely beneficial."



6    Conclusion

This paper helps to characterize one friction that might lead to the well-documented
discrepancy between the rates at which men and women found VC-backed startups:
barriers to networking between entrepreneurs and investors. There are of course many
(not mutually exclusive) potential reasons why women might not receive VC in the same

                                              24
proportion as their share of the population. Our goal in this paper is not to investigate
the relative importance of different drivers, but rather to study whether networking
frictions could be a source of differential access that might play an important role in the
variation we see in observed rates of VC finance. We expect that networking-related
information frictions are likely to be particularly important in VC, given the large
amount of asymmetric information and the high weight that VCs appear to place on
face-to-face connections and trusted referrals as deal sourcing methods. This reliance on
networks may privilege those who are more connected or those who are most
comfortable forming connections with investors.
   Exploiting random variation in the number of VCs across judging panels at the Harvard
Business School New Venture Competition (HBS NVC), we find that additional VCs on
a panel increase the likelihood of a male participant starting a VC-backed venture after
graduation but have no meaningful impact among female participants. That is, women
assigned to panels with many VCs benefit less from this `lucky draw' than men who were
assigned to these panels. Our survey evidence points to this difference being driven by
the fact that women are less likely to proactively reach out to VCs after the NVC.
   There are numerous reasons why women might be less likely to proactively network
than men. Men and women may have different beliefs about appropriate networking
norms. There may also be homophily in networking, where individuals might feel more
comfortable networking with others of the same gender. Since most VCs are men, this
would lead to lower rates of networking with VCs among women. Furthermore, women
may not reach out if they anticipate discrimination or harassment on the part of investors.
We cannot distinguish between these hypotheses. Nevertheless, the fact that the survey
points to the entrepreneurs rather than the VCs driving the networking discrepancy is
important. There is evidence that women are less proactive or hold themselves to a higher
standard than men in other settings as well. For example, Chari & Goldsmith-Pinkham
(2017) find that gender differences in submission rates of papers to the National Bureau of

                                            25
Economic Research's elite Summer Institute conference can explain the substantial gender
gap among accepted authors. As a second example, Kolev, Fuentes-Medel & Murray
(2019) find that the reason women score lower in blinded grant application evaluations
is because they tend to use more narrow words, despite having better scientific output
conditional on funding.12
       More generally, since the individuals behind ideas are intricately tied to the ideas
themselves at a venture's earliest stages, and the distribution of good ideas is not perfectly
correlated to the distribution of good access to VC, our results suggest that promising
ideas may go unfunded because of systematic variations in VC access rather than because
of the inherent quality of the idea. This is likely to be particularly salient when such access
is mediated by the extent to which entrepreneurs proactively reach out to, and network
with investors. Our results suggest that future research studying which interventions most
effectively reduce networking-related frictions will be extremely valuable.




  12
    Note that women are not universally less proactive in ways that are detrimental to their outcomes;
Exley, Niederle & Vesterlund (2019) isolate the decision to negotiate in a laboratory experiment and find
that while women tend to negotiate less, this is not suboptimal as negotiating more leads to losses.


                                                   26
References
Barber, B. M. & Odean, T. (2001), `Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
  stock investment', The quarterly journal of economics 116(1), 261­292.

Becker-Blease, J. R. & Sohl, J. E. (2007), `Do women-owned businesses have equal access to
  angel capital?', Journal of Business Venturing 22, 503­521.

Bell, A., Chetty, R., Jaravel, X., Petkova, N. & Van Reenen, J. (2018), `Who becomes an inventor
  in america? the importance of exposure to innovation', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  134(2), 647­713.

Bertrand, M. (2013), `Career, family, and the well-being of college-educated women', The
  American Economic Review 103(3), 244­250.

Bertrand, M., Goldin, C. & Katz, L. F. (2010), `Dynamics of the gender gap for young
  professionals in the financial and corporate sectors', American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics 2(3), 228­255.

Bertrand, M., Kamenica, E. & Pan, J. (2015), `Gender identity and relative income within
  households', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2), 571­614.

Brooks, A. W., Huang, L., Kearney, S. W. & Murray, F. E. (2014), `Investors prefer
  entrepreneurial ventures pitched by attractive men', Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences 111(12), 4427­4431.

Castillo, M., Petrie, R., Torero, M. & Vesterlund, L. (2013), `Gender differences in bargaining
  outcomes: A field experiment on discrimination', Journal of Public Economics 99, 35­48.

Chari, A. & Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. (2017), Gender representation in economics across topics
  and time: Evidence from the nber summer institute, Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Cohen, L., Frazzini, A. & Malloy, C. (2008), `The small world of investing: Board connections
  and mutual fund returns', Journal of Political Economy 116(5), 951­979.

Cook, C., Diamond, R., Hall, J., List, J. A. & Oyer, P. (2018), The gender earnings gap in the gig
  economy: Evidence from over a million rideshare drivers, Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Ewens, M. & Townsend, R. R. (2019), `Are early stage investors biased against women?', Journal
  of Financial Economics .

Exley, C. L., Niederle, M. & Vesterlund, L. (2019), Knowing when to ask: The cost of leaning-in,
  Technical report, Journal of Political Economy.

Fang, L. H. & Huang, S. (2017), `Gender and connections among wall street analysts', The
  Review of Financial Studies 30(9), 3305­3335.

                                               27
Goldin, C., Kerr, S. P., Olivetti, C. & Barth, E. (2017), `The expanding gender earnings gap:
  evidence from the lehd-2000 census', American Economic Review 107(5), 110­14.

Gompers, P. A. & Wang, S. Q. (2017), `Diversity in innovation', NBER Working Paper (23082).

Gornall, W. & Strebulaev, I. A. (2015), `The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence from
  public companies', Working Paper .

Gornall, W. & Strebulaev, I. A. (2018), `Gender, race, and entrepreneurship: A randomized field
  experiment on venture capitalists and angels'. Working Paper.

Hengel, E. (2017), `Publishing while female. are women held to higher standards? evidence from
  peer review.'.

Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A. & Lu, Y. (2007), `Whom you know matters: Venture capital
  networks and investment performance', The Journal of Finance 62(1), 251­301.

Howell, S. (2019), `Reducing information frictions in venture capital: Evidence from new venture
  competitions'. NBER Working Paper 23874.

Kaplan, S. N. & Lerner, J. (2010), `It ain't broke: The past, present, and future of venture
  capital', Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 22(2), 36­47.

Kerr, W. R. & Mandorff, M. (2015), Social networks, ethnicity, and entrepreneurship, Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kerr, W. R., Nanda, R. & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2014), `Entrepreneurship as experimentation', The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 25­48.

Kolev, J., Fuentes-Medel, Y. & Murray, F. (2019), `Is blinded review enough? how gendered
  outcomes arise even under anonymous evaluation'.

Lerner, J. & Malmendier, U. (2013), `With a little help from my (random) friends: Success and
  failure in post-business school entrepreneurship', Review of Financial Studies 26(10), 2411­
  2452.

Levine, R. & Rubinstein, Y. (2017), `Smart and illicit: who becomes an entrepreneur and do
  they earn more?', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), 963­1018.

Niederle, M. & Vesterlund, L. (2007), `Do women shy away from competition? do men compete
  too much?', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 1067­1101.

Pew (2013), `On pay gap millennial women near parity for now'. Pew Research Center Report.

Pew (2015), `Women and leadership public says women are equally qualified, but barriers persist'.
  Pew Research Center Report.

Puri, M. & Zarutskie, R. (2012), `On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital-and non-venture-
  capital-financed firms', The Journal of Finance 67(6), 2247­2293.

Reuben, E., Sapienza, P. & Zingales, L. (2014), `How stereotypes impair women's careers in
  science', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(12), 4403­4408.

                                               28
Sapienza, P., Zingales, L. & Maestripieri, D. (2009), `Gender differences in financial risk aversion
  and career choices are affected by testosterone', Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences 106(36), 15268­15273.

Scott, E. L. & Shu, P. (2017), `Gender gap in high-growth ventures: Evidence from a university
  venture mentoring program', American Economic Review P&P 107(5).

Stuart, T. E. & Sorenson, O. (2005), Social networks and entrepreneurship, in `Handbook of
  entrepreneurship research', Springer, pp. 233­252.




                                                29
Figure 1:    Relationship between Number of VCs on Panel and VC-backed
Entrepreneurship




Note: These figures show binscatters of the relationship between the number of VCs on the judging
panel for a participant, and the probability of VC-backed entrepreneurship for individuals on the
venture's team. The left figure restricts the sample to men, and the right figure to women. 0-2 and 6-8
VCs are collapsed into a single category. Together, the figures include all 964 individuals in the HBS
NVC.




                                                  30
Figure 2: Relationship between Venture Score in Panel and VC-backed Entrepreneurship




Note: This figure shows a binscatter of the relationship between the score that a venture receives, and
probabilities of VC-backed entrepreneurship for individuals on the venture's team. All 964 individuals
in the HBS NVC are included. A score of 5 is the best, and 1 is the worst.




                                                  31
                              Table 1: Characteristics of participants

                                         A. Count of individuals
                                                         All       Female    Male    Fraction female
  Number of individuals                                  964        307       657         0.32


                                          B. Team size (Means)
                                                         All       Female    Male       P-value
                                                                                     (male - female)
  Mean team size including non-HBS participants         2.53        2.55     2.52         0.56
  Mean team size, HBS participants only                 1.79        1.83     1.77         0.24


                             C. Professional background before HBS (Means)
                                                         All       Female    Male       P-value
                                                                                     (male - female)
  Entrepreneurship                                      0.26        0.23     0.27         0.17
  VC-backed company employment                          0.45        0.48     0.44         0.17
  VC firm employment                                    0.04        0.04     0.04         0.85
  Finance employment                                    0.27        0.32     0.25         0.01
  Consulting employment                                 0.29        0.31     0.28         0.34


                        D. Stated relevant interests and activities at HBS (Means)
                                                         All       Female    Male       P-value
                                                                                     (male - female)
  Interest in entrepreneurship                          0.18        0.19     0.17         0.48
  Interest in management                                0.07        0.06     0.08         0.29
  Interest in consulting                                0.12        0.19     0.09         0.00
  Interest in finance                                   0.28        0.24     0.29         0.08
  HBS Entrepreneurship club member                      0.08        0.08     0.08         0.91


Note: These panels contain statistics on the 964 HBS participants in the HBS NVC from 2000 to 2015.
Team size is a venture-level variable, but is summarized at the individual level. Team size including
non-HBS participants reflects additional individuals who are not included in estimation. Indicators for
professional background (e.g. Finance employment) reflect whether the individual had any instance of
that experience; participants may have had multiple jobs before HBS. P-value is two-tailed.




                                                   32
                            E. Panel composition and NVC outcomes (Means)


                                                          All      Female       Male        P-value
                                                                                         (male - female)
  Total number of judges on panel                         6.00       5.93       6.01           0.47
  Number of VC judges on panel                            3.29       3.21       3.33           0.28
  Number of male VC judges on panel                       2.78       2.71       2.81           0.32
  Number of judges in own sector on panel                 2.44       2.33       2.49           0.17
  Match to judges in own sector on panel                  0.80       0.84       0.79           0.09
  Match to VC judges in own sector on panel               0.72       0.74       0.71           0.27
  Number of entrepreneur judges on panel                  0.85       0.87       0.84           0.61
  Number of corporate executive judges on panel           0.97       0.93       0.99           0.32
  Number of ventures on the panel                         4.82       4.80       4.83           0.69


  Score in panel (1 worst, 5 best)                        3.27       3.39       3.22           0.01
  First round winner                                      0.20       0.21       0.19           0.40
  Finals winner or runner-up                              0.07       0.09       0.07           0.25


Note: This panel contains statistics on the 964 HBS participants in the HBS NVC from 2000 to 2015.
The unit of observation is the individual participant, but the first six variables are at the panel level (in
the first round of the competition, which is the focus of our study, ventures pitch and are scored within
panels). We observe a total of 180 panels across all years. As an example of interpretation, the first two
rows indicate that female participants are assigned to panels that have on average 5.93 judges, of which
3.21 are venture capitalists (VCs). The last three variables are at the team (i.e. venture) level, though
again the unit of observation is the individual. For example, female participants' teams average score is
3.39, and they have a 0.21 chance of winning the first round. P-value is two-tailed.




                                                     33
  Table 2: Characteristics of NVC Judging Panels by Number of VC Judges on Panel

                             A. Number of judges and participants (Means)


                                                    2 VCs         3-4 VCs          5 VCs
               Number of judges on panel                5.8          5.9           6.5
               Number of ventures in panel              3.6          3.6           3.6
               Number of participants                   5.2          5.4           5.5


               B. Share of panel participants with post-HBS VC-backed entrepreneurship


                                                    2 VCs         3-4 VCs          5 VCs
               Share of males                           0.09        0.12           0.18
               Share of females                         0.11        0.09           0.12


Note: This table reports descriptive statistics at the panel level, for the 180 judging panels in the HBS
NVC from 2000 to 2015. We separately consider panels by the number of VCs. There are 62 panels
with  2 VCs, 81 panels with 3-4 VCs, and 37 panels with at least 5 VCs.




                                                   34
                Table 3: Participant Entrepreneurship Outcomes After HBS

                       A. Individual entrepreneurship-related outcomes (Means)


                                                             All     Female   Male           P-value
                                                                                          (male - female)
  VC-backed entrepreneurship                                 0.12     0.10    0.13             0.36
  Non-VC-backed entrepreneurship                             0.20     0.17    0.21             0.23
  VC-backed startup employment                               0.48     0.52    0.46             0.07


                      B. Venture outcomes conditional on VC-backed entrepreneurship


                                                All               Female           Male             P-value
                                                                                                 (male - female)
                                          N       Mean       N        Mean    N      Mean
 Judge or judge's firm invested           114         0.02   32       0.00    82      0.02             0.38
 Funding within 2 yrs of NVC (mill $)     73          45     21        37     52          48           0.84
 Funding within 5 yrs of NVC (mill $)     73          128    21       231     52          87           0.07
 >10 employees as of March, 2018          114         0.64   32       0.69    82      0.62            0.52
 Venture acquired                         114         0.22   32       0.16    82      0.24             0.31


Note: This table reports descriptive statistics on HBS participants in the HBS NVC from 2000 to2015.
The number of observations is 964 (all participants) in Panel A. Panel B restricts the sample to the 114
ventures with VC funding founded by participants. Further, funding statistics are limited to the 73
ventures for which we have funding data. Note that indicators for professional outcomes (e.g.
VC-backed startup employment) reflect whether the individual had any instance of the outcome;
participants may have multiple jobs post-HBS. P-value is two-tailed.




                                                      35
 Table 4: Effect of VC Judges on Subsequent VC-backed Entrepreneurship by Gender


    Dependent variable: VC-backed Entrepreneurship



                                (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)       (8)

    Male·# VCs on Panel        .031**   .029** .027*    .044** .035** .029*       .026*    .028**
                               (.014)   (.014) (.014)   (.019) (.016) (.015)      (.014)   (.013)
    Male                        -.077    -.067   -.07    -.112   -.08  -.087       -.060   -.097*
                               (.049)   (.051) (.051)   (.071) (.062) (.064)      (.048)   (.051)
    # VCs on Panel              -.014    -.009  -.006           -.011  -.005       -.016   -.020*
                               (.012)   (.012) (.012)          (.012) (.012)      (.011)   (.012)
    Mixed·# VCs on Panel                                                                    .005
                                                                                           (.019)
    Mixed                                                                                   -.032
                                                                                           (.084)

    Person Controls              Y                         Y       Y                Y
    Competition Controls         Y       Y                 Y       Y                Y        Y
    Year (cohort) FE             Y       Y        Y                Y        Y       Y
    Panel FE                                               Y
    Male·Sector FE                                                 Y        Y
    Sector FE                                                      Y        Y

    N                           964      964     964      964     879      879      964      647
    R2                          .100    .071     .051    .260     .11     .068     .100     .036


Note: This table shows the effect of the number of venture capitalists (VCs) on the probability that
a male participant in the HBS NVC subsequently founds a VC-backed venture, relative to female
participants. In column 7, only VC financing for the first venture founded after the NVC is included in
the dependent variable. In column 8, we conduct the analysis at the venture level. We use a categorical
variable that takes one of three values for whether the team is: all female, mixed, or male. All female
is omitted. Person controls consist of the following indicator variables: Interest in entrepreneurship,
interest in finance, interest in management, entrepreneurship or VC clubs membership at HBS, previous
VC-backed entrepreneurship experience, previous work for a VC-backed startup, previous work for a VC
firm, previous non-VC backed entrepreneurship, honors at HBS, US citizen, computer science college
major, engineering college major, economics/business/management college major, and college degree
from an Ivy+ university. Competition controls consist of the following: The venture score in the panel,
indicator for winning the competition (overall or runner-up), the number of ventures on the panel,
the number of male judges on the panel, and the number of total judges on the panel. There are
six sectors: IT/Software/Web, Consumer Goods, Media/Education, Tough Tech (Tangible High Tech),
Financial/Real Estate, and Health. There are fewer observations in columns 5-6 because we do not
observe sector for all ventures. Standard errors are clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance
at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels.

                                                  36
      Table 5: Placebo Tests for Effect of VC Judges on VC-backed Entrepreneurship


 Dependent variable:               Non-VC-           VC-                   VC-backed Entrepreneurship
                                    backed          backed
                                   Entrep.          Co Emp

                                      (1)                (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)

 Male·# VCs on Panel                  .007            .006
                                     (.016)          (.022)
 Male·# Males on Panel                                              .021
                                                                   (.015)
 Male·# Own Sector on Panel                                                   .012
                                                                             (.013)
 Male·# non-VCs on Panel                                                               -.002
                                                                                      (.013)
 Male·# Entreps on Panel                                                                        -.015
                                                                                               (.022)
 Male·# Corp Execs on Panel                                                                              -.011
                                                                                                        (.024)
 Male                                 -.007           -.061         -.061     .019     .032     .037     .033
                                     (.058)          (.083)        (.065)    (.026)   (.044)   (.028)   (.028)

 Person Controls                       Y                 Y           Y         Y        Y        Y        Y
 Competition Controls                  Y                 Y           Y         Y        Y        Y        Y
 Year (cohort) FE                      Y                 Y           Y         Y        Y        Y        Y

 N                                    964             964            964      964      964      964      964
 R2                                  .060             .140          .098      .09     .097     .097     .098

Note: This table shows placebo tests for the main result. In all cases we include the independent effect of
the number of judges (e.g. # VCs on Panel or # Entreps on Panel) but do not report it to keep the table
parsimonious. Column 1 shows the effect of the number of VCs on the probability that the participant
founds a firm that does not receive VC backing. Column 2 shows the effect on working as an employee
at a company that is VC-backed. Columns 3-7 repeat the main regression in Table 4 Panel 1 column
1, but use the number of judges in categories besides VC. Corp. Exec. is an abbreviation of Corporate
Executive. Person and Competition controls are as listed in the note to Table 4. Standard errors are
clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels.




                                                    37
 Table 6: Relationship between NVC Scores, Gender, and VC-backed Entrepreneurship


    Dependent variable:              VC-backed                          Score in Panel
                                  Entrepreneurship

                                    (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)    (6)

    Score in Panel                .034***       .022*
                                   (.011)       (.011)
    Male·# VCs on Panel                                                                .028      .037
                                                                                     (.064)    (.064)
    Male                                         .023         -.200**    -.230***     -.270    -.320*
                                                (.022)         (.082)      (.079)    (.190)    (.190)
    # VCs on Panel                                                          -.030     -.005     -.055
                                                                           (.040)    (.060)    (.061)

    Person Controls                               Y                         Y                    Y
    Competition Controls                          Y                         Y                    Y
    Year (cohort) FE                 Y            Y              Y          Y            Y       Y

    N                               964           964           964         964        964       964
    R2                              .057         .096          .033        .170       .034      .170


Note: Columns 1-2 of this table show the relationship between judge scores of a team (i.e. venture) in the
NVC and whether the participant team member subsequently founded a VC-backed startup. Columns 3-4
show the relationship between participant gender and venture scores. Columns 5-6 examine whether this
relationship differs depending on the number of VCs on the panel. Scores are the average of individual
judge scores on the panel. They vary from 1 to 5, with 5 being the best. Person and Competition controls
are as listed in the note to Table 4. Standard errors are clustered by venture. , , and  denote
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels.




                                                   38
                       Table 7: Survey Response Predictors and Analysis


 Sample:                             All                    Survey responders          Survey responders who
                                                                                      reached out to VC judge

 Dependent variable:        Responded to            Reached out to      VC Judge      VC-backed     VC Judge
                               Survey                 VC Judge          Reached        Entrep.      Responded
                                                                          Out

                             (1)            (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)

 Male                        .019           .003    .160**    .210***      .028          -.290         .011
                            (.027)         (.027)   (.066)     (.080)     (.058)        (.360)        (.150)
 # VCs on Panel                             -.004               -.033                    -.075
                                           (.009)              (.027)                   (.065)
 VC-backed Entrep.                          .047                .064
                                           (.040)              (.100)
 Male·# VCs on Panel                                                                     .120
                                                                                        (.087)

 Person Controls                             Y                   Y
 Competition Controls                        Y                   Y
 Year (cohort) FE             Y              Y        Y          Y          Y

 N                            964          964        172       172         172           45           45
 R2                          .032          .068      .130      .320        .044          .041         .000


Note: Columns 1-2 of this table show predictors of responding to the survey (172/964 responded).
Columns 3-4 examine whether reaching out to a judge varies by gender, among responders. Column 5
examines whether, among responders, judges are more likely to reach out to men. Column 6 examines
whether, conditional on the participant reaching out to a judge, more VCs on a panel still have a
differential effect by gender. Column 7 examines whether, conditional on the participant reaching out to
a judge, judges respond more to men. Person and Competition controls are as listed in the note to Table
4. Standard errors are clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent,
and 1 percent levels.




                                                     39
                                            Appendix
                                   (for Online Publication)


   Figure A.1: Do some sectors have more male participants and/or more VC judges?




Note: This figure shows that sectors with relatively more male VC-backed entrepreneur participants do
not also have relatively more VCs on the panel. The left axis shows the average number of VCs on the
panel for companies in a given sector, such that the level of observation is the participant, and all 964
individuals in the HBS NVC are included. We use the number of VCs rather than the fraction on the
panel because that is what is used in our primary empirical analysis. Results are qualitatively the same
using the fraction on the panel. The right axis shows the difference by sector in the male and female
rates of VC-backed entrepreneurship. That is, we calculate the chances that a participant in a given
sector is of a certain gender and is a VC-backed entrepreneur. Then we subtract the female statistic
from the male one. The number of participants in each sector is as follows: 187 in Consumer Goods, 33
in Financial/Real Estate, 100 in Health, 433 in IT/Software/Web, 66 in Media/Education, and 60 in
Tough Tech.




                                          Online Appendix
                                  Table A.1: Sector Composition


                                                   Judges                Unique participants
       Sector                                  All       VCs           All    Female      Male

       IT/Software/Web                        0.39       0.42          0.45       0.45      0.52
       Consumer Goods                         0.17       0.17          0.19       0.28      0.18
       Health                                  0.15      0.16          0.10       0.10      0.12
       Media/Education                        0.22       0.30          0.07       0.09      0.07
       Tough Tech (Tangible High Tech)        0.19       0.25          0.06       0.05      0.08
       Financial/Real Estate                  0.31       0.32          0.03       0.02      0.04
       Total                                  1,309      631           964        289       590

Note : This table shows the probability that judges and participants are in each of six sectors. Note that
judges may be in more than one sector, while participants may not. 10 percent of participants are not
assigned a sector. "Tough tech" refers to tangible High Tech sectors, such as energy, biotech,
manufacturing, defense, and electronics.




                                          Online Appendix
                                        Table A.2: Do males tend to face more VC judges in their own sector than females?


                                                                             Female participants                 Male participants

                   VC Judge Sector           Venture Sector             # female         Mean # VC          # male          Mean # VC         Diff     P-value
                                                                       participants    judges on panel    participants    judges on panel
                                                                        in sector         this sector      in sector         this sector
Online Appendix




                   IT/Software/Web           IT/Software/Web               129               1.95              304              1.99          -.04        .80
                   Consumer Goods            Consumer Goods                 82                .85              105               .76          .09         .45
                   Health                    Health                         30               2.47              70               2.29          .18         .56
                   Media/Education           Media/Education                26               1.04              40               1.35          -.31        .29
                   Tough Tech                Tough Tech                     15               1.33              45               1.78          -.44        .26
                   Financial/Real Estate     Financial/Real Estate          7                1.71              26               1.38          .33         .45

                  Note : This table presents the difference in the means of the number of judges on panel in a certain sector conditional on the participant being in
                  that sector, by gender of the participant. We first restrict the sample to consist only of ventures in a given sector, and then test whether males
                  are more likely to have more VCs than females in their own sector. For example, in the first row, we restrict the sample to consist only of
                  ventures in IT. We observe that women participants with an IT venture on average face 1.95 VC judges in IT. Male participants with an IT
                  venture on average face 1.99 VC judges in IT. The difference is not significant. "Tough tech" refers to tangible High Tech sectors, such as energy,
                  biotech, manufacturing, defense, and electronics.
                        Table A.3: Effect by VC Judge Characteristics


          Dependent variable: VC-backed Entrepreneurship

                                                     (1)             (2)      (3)       (4)

          Male·# Male VCs on Panel                  .027*
                                                    (.016)
          Male·# Female VCs on Panel                 .050
                                                    (.034)
          Male·# VCs on Panel                                                         .035**
                                                                                      (.017)
          Male                                       -.075          .031      .035     -.076
                                                    (.048)         (.023)    (.026)   (.051)
          # Male VCs on Panel                        -.004
                                                    (.013)
          # Female VCs on Panel                     .027*
                                                    (.016)
          # VCs on Panel                                                                -.025
                                                                                       (.016)
          Judge invested                                                              .840***
                                                                                       (.065)

          Person Controls                             Y
          Competition Controls                        Y                        Y
          Year (cohort) FE                            Y              Y         Y         Y

          N                                           964            114       114      964
          R2                                         .100           .100      .140     .064

Note: Column 1 of this table shows the effect of the number of male and female VCs on the probability
that a male participant in the HBS NVC subsequently founds a VC-backed venture, relative to female
participants. Note that on average a participant faces just 0.5 female VCs, so half of panels have no
female VCs and very few have more than one. (The average participant faces 2.1 male VCs.) Columns
2-3 examine whether gender predicts the judge or judge's firm investing in the venture (there are only 4
instances of this). Column 4 examines whether controlling for the judge investing affects the main
result. Person and Competition controls are as listed in the note to Table 4. Standard errors are
clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels.




                                         Online Appendix
Table A.4: Effect of VC Judges on Subsequent VC-backed Entrepreneurship by Gender
and VC Stage


                     Dependent variable: VC-backed Entrepreneurship

                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)

                     Male·# Early VCs              .055*
                                                   (.031)
                     Male·# Late VCs                            -.011
                                                               (.038)
                     Male·# Not Specialized                                  .023
                     VCs
                                                                            (.022)
                     Male                           -.004       -.033        -.007
                                                   (.025)      (.025)       (.030)
                     # Early VCs                    -.041
                                                   (.025)
                     # Late VCs                                 -.021
                                                               (.037)
                     # Not Specialized VCs                                   -.013
                                                                            (.018)

                     Person Controls                 Y           Y            Y
                     Competition Controls            Y           Y            Y
                     Year (cohort) FE                Y           Y            Y

                     N                              964         964           964
                     R2                             .091        .090         .090


Note: This table shows the effect of the number of venture capitalists (VCs) and the stages of VCs
on the probability that a male participant in the HBS NVC subsequently founds a VC-backed venture,
relative to female participants. Person controls consist of the following indicator variables: Interest in
entrepreneurship, interest in finance, interest in management, entrepreneurship or VC clubs membership
at HBS, previous VC-backed entrepreneurship experience, previous work for a VC-backed startup,
previous work for a VC firm, previous non-VC backed entrepreneurship, honors at HBS, US citizen,
computer science college major, engineering college major, economics/business/management college
major, and college degree from an Ivy+ university. Competition controls consist of the following: The
venture score in the panel, indicator for winning the competition (overall or runner-up), the number of
ventures on the panel, the number of male judges on the panel, and the number of total judges on the
panel. Standard errors are clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance at the 10 percent, 5
percent, and 1 percent level.



                                          Online Appendix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Entrepreneurship



                                                                                                                          Dependent variable:             Amount of VC financing within                          Acquired     >10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            employees
                                                                                                                                                             2 years                         5 years




                  5 percent, and 1 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                  Level        Log     >90th       Level         Log   >90th
                                                                                                                                                                       pctile                          pctile

                                                                                                                                                   (1)         (2)      (3)         (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)

                                                                                                                          Male·# VCs on Panel     57.355      0.223  0.136*       173.081*      0.119   0.032     -0.034     -0.000
                                                                                                                                                 (49.496)    (0.379) (0.075)      (96.156)     (0.415) (0.031)   (0.035)    (0.062)
                                                                                                                          Male                   -161.932    -0.824 -0.565*      -647.996*     -0.441 -0.077     0.205*      -0.036
                                                                                                                                                 (118.735)   (1.114) (0.306)     (359.872)     (1.340) (0.075)   (0.123)    (0.229)




Online Appendix
                                                                                                                          # VCs on Panel          -45.213    -0.111 -0.125*     -156.531**     -0.030 -0.024      0.011      -0.026
                                                                                                                                                 (38.065)    (0.334) (0.064)      (74.097)     (0.336) (0.024)   (0.031)    (0.056)

                                                                                                                          Competition Controls      Y           Y        Y          Y            Y       Y          Y         Y
                                                                                                                          Year (cohort) FE          Y           Y        Y          Y            Y       Y          Y         Y

                                                                                                                          N                         73         73       73          73          73       73        114        114
                                                                                                                          R2                      0.247       0.396    0.306       0.409       0.538    0.263     0.389      0.195




                  small sample. Standard errors are clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance at the 10 percent,
                  Competition controls are as listed in the note to Table 4. No person controls are included due to the
                  startups founded by participants. There is funding amount data available for 73 of these startups.
                  Note: This table examines the effect of VC judges on the panel within the sample of 114 VC-backed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Table A.5: Effect of VC Judges on Startup Outcomes Conditional on VC-backed
Table A.6: Effect of VC Judges on VC-backed Entrepreneurship by Other Characteristics


                              Panel 1: Pre-HBS Professional Experience

  Dependent variable: VC-backed Entrepreneurship
                                              (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)

  Pre-VC-bckd Entrep.·# VCs on Panel            .033
                                               (.041)
  Pre-non-VC-bckd Entrep.·# VCs on Panel                 .027
                                                        (.025)
  Pre-VC-bckd Co Emp·# VCs on Panel                               -.014
                                                                 (.014)
  Pre-VC Firm Emp·# VCs on Panel                                           .051
                                                                          (.038)
  Pre-Consultant Emp.·# VCs on Panel                                                -.015
                                                                                   (.016)
  Pre-Finance Emp.·# VCs on Panel                                                            -.027
                                                                                            (.046)
  Pre-VC-backed Entrep.                         -.028
                                               (.120)
  Pre-non-VC-backed Entrep.                              -.031
                                                        (.076)
  Pre-VC-backed Co Employment                                     .038
                                                                 (.048)
  Pre-VC Firm Employment                                                   -.17
                                                                          (.120)
  Pre-Consultant Employment                                                         .025
                                                                                   (.050)
  Pre-Finance Employment                                                                     .012
                                                                                            (.015)
  # VCs on Panel                                .009     .006     .017     .010     .016     .009
                                               (.008)   (.010)   (.013)   (.009)   (.010)   (.010)

  Year (cohort) FE                               Y        Y        Y        Y        Y        Y

  N                                             964      964      964      964      964      964
  R2                                           .052     .055     .048     .050     .050     .048


Note: This panel shows the effect of the number of venture capitalists (VCs) on the probability that
a participant in the HBS NVC subsequently founds a VC-backed venture by pre-HBS professional
experience. Standard errors are clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent, and 1 percent levels.

                                        Online Appendix
                              Panel 2: Education and NVC Win Status

  Dependent variable: VC-backed Entrepreneurship
                                              (1)         (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)

  Ivy+ BA·# VCs on Panel                        -.023
                                               (.015)
  HBS Honors·# VCs on Panel                              -.025
                                                        (.024)
  Comp Sci Major·# VCs on Panel                                   .028
                                                                 (.026)
  Engineering Major·# VCs on Panel                                         .0048
                                                                           (.018)
  Econ or Business Major·# VCs on Panel                                             .034*
                                                                                    (.019)
  Round Winner·# VCs on Panel                                                                 -.018
                                                                                             (.022)
  Ivy+ BA                                      .100*
                                               (.053)
  HBS Honors                                             .100
                                                        (.079)
  Comp Sci Major                                                  -.059
                                                                 (.092)
  Engineering Major                                                         -.055
                                                                           (.056)
  Econ or Business Major                                                             -.084
                                                                                    (.069)
  Round Winner                                                                               .170**
                                                                                             (.083)
  # VCs on Panel                               .020*    .016*     .010      .012     .003     .017*
                                               (.011)   (.009)   (.009)    (.011)   (.010)   (.010)

  Year (cohort) FE                               Y        Y        Y         Y        Y        Y

  N                                              964      964      964      964       964      964
  R2                                            .052     .050     .049     .050      .054     .066


Note: This panel shows the effect of the number of venture capitalists (VCs) on the probability that a
participant in the HBS NVC subsequently founds a VC-backed venture. We interact the number of VCs
with education-related variables in Columns 1-5, and with winning the round in Column 6. Standard
errors are clustered by panel. , , and  denote significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1
percent levels.


                                         Online Appendix
 Table A.7: Sample Splits in Effect of VCs on VC-backed Entrepreneurship by Gender


          Dependent variable: VC-backed Entrepreneurship

          Sample:                        2010       > 2010      # ventures      # ventures
                                                               on panel  5     on panel 5

                                          (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)

          Male·# VCs on Panel              .021      .044**        .028**         .043**
                                         (.025)      (.017)        (.014)         (.019)
          Male                            -.066      -.089*         -.067          -.092
                                         (.097)      (.053)        (.047)         (.064)
          # VCs on Panel                  -.010       -.019        -.0099          -.019
                                         (.021)      (.013)        (.011)         (.016)

          Person Controls                  Y           Y             Y               Y
          Competition Controls             Y           Y             Y               Y
          Year (cohort) FE                 Y           Y             Y               Y

          N                              549           415           890            657
          R2                             .110         .150          .110           .120

Note: This table shows the effect of the number of VCs on the probability that a participant in the HBS
NVC subsequently founds a VC-backed venture using alternative samples. Columns 1 and 2 split the
sample roughly in half by year of the NVC. Columns 3 and 4 split the sample by the number of ventures
in the panel. Five ventures are included in both groups because the majority (583) of observations have
five ventures per panel. We find no effect when we exclude panels with five ventures. Competition and
Person controls are as listed in the note to Table 4. Standard errors are clustered by panel. , , and
 denote significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels.




                                         Online Appendix
