                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CLIMATE CHANGE, OPERATING FLEXIBILITY AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT
                              DECISIONS

                                         Chen Lin
                                     Thomas Schmid
                                    Michael S. Weisbach

                                     Working Paper 26441
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26441


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We are very grateful to David Weisbach, Hayong Yun, seminar participants at University of
Chicago, the Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, the Shanghai University of Finance and
Economics, and conference participants at the 2018 Summer Finance and Accounting Conference
in Jerusalem and the 2019 University of Oklahoma Energy and Commodities Finance Research
Conference for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Chen Lin, Thomas Schmid, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Climate Change, Operating Flexibility and Corporate Investment Decisions
Chen Lin, Thomas Schmid, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 26441
November 2019
JEL No. G30,G31

                                         ABSTRACT

Extreme temperatures lead to large fluctuations in electricity demand and wholesale prices of
electricity, which in turn affects the optimal production process for firms to use. Using a large
international sample of planned power plant projects, we measure the way that electric utilities'
investment decisions depend on the frequency of extreme temperatures. We find that they invest
more in regions with more extreme temperatures. These investments are mostly in flexible gas
and oil-fired power plants that can easily adjust their output, to improve their operating
flexibility. Our results suggest that climate change is becoming a meaningful factor affecting
firms' behavior.

Chen Lin                                        Michael S. Weisbach
Faculty of Business and Economics               Department of Finance
The University of Hong Kong                     Fisher College of Business
Hong Kong                                       Ohio State University
chenlin1@hku.hk                                 2100 Neil Ave.
                                                Columbus, OH 43210
Thomas Schmid                                   and NBER
Faculty of Business and Economics               weisbach.2@osu.edu
University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
schmid@hku.hk
                                  U.S. Midwest Freezes, Australia Burns: This is the Age of Weather Extremes
                                                                                  NY Times, January 29, 2019
                                Companies See Climate Change Hitting Their Bottom Lines in the Next 5 Years
                                                                                    NY Times, June 4, 2019
                                              Extreme Weather Sends Energy Demand Growth to 9-Year High
                                                                           Financial Times, June 12, 2019




1. Introduction

           The G20 recently called climate change "one of the greatest challenges of our time". More federal

money was spent on the consequences of extreme weather during 2012 than on education or transportation;

globally, the economic losses related to weather events such as prolonged periods of drought, heat waves,

cold snaps, and more frequent natural hazards like tornados amounted to about $150 billion.1 Increasing

temperatures and more extreme weather conditions in many regions of the world will lead to dramatic

changes in society and the economy, and we are only beginning to understand the nature of these changes.

           This paper investigates how firms respond to more extreme temperatures through investments and

changes to their asset structure. We focus on one industry which is meaningfully affected by weather

changes: electricity-producing firms. More extreme temperatures lead to changes in electricity demand and

the wholesale price of electricity, which in turn affects the optimal production process for firms to use.

Using the Platts World Electric Power Plant database that contains detailed information about plant-level

investments around the world, we consider a sample of 273 publicly traded electricity-generating firms

which are active in 43 deregulated regions with wholesale markets for electricity between 2000 and 2016.

These firms operate 37,965 power plants, and have plans to construct 4,425 new plants. We evaluate the

extent to which their investment decisions depend on the frequency of extremely hot or cold temperatures.

           Our focus on asset-level data to analyze investment decisions has at least three advantages relative

to accounting-based measures of investment such as Capital Expenditures. First, our data cover early-stage



1
    Cf. Allianz (2013), p. 7.


                                                        1
power plant projects at the planning-stage, so we know exactly when each firm makes its investment

decision. Second, we know the exact location of the planned plant. We use this locational information to

identify the effect of local changes of weather conditions on investment. Information on differences in

weather changes across regions allows us to exploit variations in investment decisions across different

regions within firms. Third, we observe the type of the planned power plants since our data provides detailed

information on their production technologies. These data allow us to ascertain the flexibility of any

particular power plant.

         To measure extreme weather conditions, we calculate the frequency of days with extremely hot or

cold temperatures in a region (i.e., an electricity wholesale market) and year, using temperature data for

individual weather stations from the Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN). To determine

whether a particular temperature is unusual, we compare it to the distribution of temperatures in the same

region in the base period from 1951 to 1980 (Hansen et al., 2012). A day in our sample period 2000 to 2016

is then classified as extreme if it would belong to the hottest or coldest one percent of days in the base

period (0.5 and five percent are used as robustness tests). By this classification scheme, the expected value

for this variable would be two percent if weather conditions did not change between the base period and

our sample period. Empirically, we find that about 3.4 percent of all days in the sample period are classified

as extremely hot or cold, which represents a substantial increase relative to the base period.

         Theoretically, one potential consequence of an increase in extreme weather conditions could be

more volatile temperatures. More volatile temperatures can then lead to more volatile electricity demand

because outside temperatures are key drivers of (residential) electricity demand due to heating and cooling

demands (Perez-Gonzalez and Yun, 2013). Because electricity storage is not possible in economically

meaningful terms, changes in demand typically lead to electricity price changes. For this reason, electricity

price volatility is likely to increase.

         More volatile electricity prices that occur because of these extreme temperatures make operating

flexibility in the form of flexible gas or oil-fired power plants more attractive for energy firms for two

reasons. First, flexible methods of electricity generation, such as gas-fired power plants, can adjust their


                                                      2
output quickly and at low cost when electricity prices change. In contrast, inflexible plants, such as coal-

fired plants, have high fixed cost and require long time to adjust production volume. Consider, for example,

the 2019 heat wave in Texas, during which there was a record high demand and electricity prices.2 More

flexible methods of production would be valuable to electricity producers in times of extreme weather to

cope with the demand and take advantage of the high prices. Second, more supply flexibility is needed to

cope with higher demand volatility and to avoid system breakdowns ("blackouts"). For these two reasons,

when electricity demand and prices become more volatile, we hypothesize that firms invest more in flexible

production to increase their operating flexibility.

        We find that utilities increase their investments in flexible power plants in regions in which weather

conditions are becoming more extreme. When we exploit variations of weather conditions across regions

and time, the estimates imply that the planned capacity of flexible power plants, scaled by the total existing

capacity, increases by 0.8 percentage points if one percent more days have extreme weather. The model

further predicts that a one-standard deviation increase in the fraction of extreme days increases flexible

investment by about two percentage points, which corresponds to a relative increase of 25 percent. If we

focus exclusively on the variation of weather conditions over time in a particular market region, the point

estimates are slightly smaller and imply that a one-standard deviation increase in the fraction of extreme

days increases investments in flexible plants by 1.2 percentage points. The outcome is similar if we only

focus on variations across regions within a firm by including firm times year fixed effects. The inclusion

of control variables such as regional GDP or firm-level factors (which are already controlled for in the

model with firm times year fixed effects) has no material impact on the results.

        For investments in inflexible plants, which have relatively high fixed costs, the uncertainty about

the exact degree of future weather changes and regulators' responses to climate change may play an

important role. In line with results for political uncertainty (Julio and Yook, 2012; Gulen and Ion, 2016) or

theoretical models which assume irreversible investments (McDonald and Siegel, 1986; Dixit and Pindyck,


2
  https://www.reuters.com/article/texas-power-demand/texas-power-prices-jump-to-record-high-as-heat-bakes-state-
idUSL2N25W0AB


                                                       3
1994)3, higher uncertainty could cause firms to delay the construction of power plants, especially inflexible

plants with high fixed cost. For renewables, it is well possible that firms want to increase their investments

in wind and solar plants to reduce their CO2 emissions in regions in which climate change is more severe.

In these regions, public pressure is likely to be especially high on firms to act in an environmentally friendly

manner. There is no clear prediction for total investments as the effect of pressure to reduce emissions on

overall investment in power plants is the sum of its impact on different types of power plants, each of which

is likely to be different from one another.

        We find no evidence of any effect of extreme weather conditions on investments in inflexible

plants. For renewable plants, we find a negative point estimate, which is not statistically significantly

different from zero. The results suggest that neither investments in inflexible nor renewable plants are

materially affected by extreme weather. Given the strong positive impact on flexible investments and the

non-effects for other types of plants, it is not surprising that the aggregate effect on total investments is

positive as well.

        We conduct multiple robustness tests for our main result that more extreme weather conditions

increase planned investments in flexible generation. We document that this result is not driven by firms that

have high market power or by differences in gas prices or spark spreads (i.e., electricity price minus cost of

natural gas). We also subsequently exclude all single markets to make sure that we document a general

effect which is not driven by one particular region. Furthermore, we use alternative ways to measure

extreme weather conditions, alternative definitions of planned investments (e.g., based on the number

instead of the capacity of plants), alternative fixed effects or clustering of standard errors, and additional

control variables which capture capital market development, electricity market characteristics, or other

aspects of a firm's production assets. All of these tests confirm our main findings.

        So far, we have argued that firms invest in flexible generation because more frequent extreme

weather conditions increase the volatility of electricity demand and prices, which would lead firms to favor


3
  However, models that consider time-to-build, which is typically years for power plants, find that the uncertainty-
investment relation is considerably weaker or, in extreme cases, even reversed (Bar-Ilan and Strange, 1996).


                                                         4
production techniques for which quantities can be adjusted quickly and at low cost. To test this possible

mechanism, we start by examining the way in which other weather characteristics change when the weather

becomes more extreme. Our estimates indicate that both cooling and heating degree days increase, which

suggests more electricity is needed for cooling and heating. At the same time, daily average temperatures

become more volatile. These changing weather characteristics affect electricity demand. While we find

clear evidence that residential demand increases, the effect for total demand is positive but not statistically

significant. The volatility of electricity demand increases substantially in regions in which the weather

becomes more extreme.

        Not surprisingly, these demand-side changes have an effect on wholesale prices for electricity. Our

price measures are based on hourly electricity prices in the different wholesale markets. For the price level,

we find positive point estimates, but they are marginally insignificant, which is in line with the result that

total demand did not increase significantly. Consistent with more volatile electricity demand, we find

evidence of a substantial increase in the price volatility. The point estimates suggest that a one-standard

deviation increase of the frequency of extremely hot or cold days lead to an electricity price volatility

increase of about 15 to 20 percent. These results suggest that more extreme weather mainly affects the

volatility of electricity prices, but not necessarily their level.

        When we use electricity price volatility directly as an independent variable in models explaining

flexible investments, we find estimates that are consistent with those discussed above: higher price volatility

increases planned investments in flexible plants. Thus, higher electricity price volatility due to more

extreme weather conditions is a likely channel for firms' increases in planned investments in flexible

generation. We find no evidence that alternative mechanisms like more stringent environmental regulations

or differences in the penetration of renewables play a substantial role.

        Next, we focus on the question whether extreme weather realizations today have predictive power

for future weather conditions. To this point we have argued that firms increase investments in flexible

generation when the weather becomes more extreme to increase their future operating flexibility. The logic

of this argument depends on more extreme weather conditions today being associated with more extreme


                                                         5
weather conditions in the future when the newly constructed plants go online. To investigate the predictive

power of current extreme weather realizations for the future, we calibrate a forecasting model with a market-

specific linear trend function and include or exclude the more recent extreme weather realization. We find

that including the most recent extreme weather realization in the calibration reduces the forecast error by

five to ten percent. Thus, adjusting investment plans based on realizations of extreme weather seems

meaningful because these realizations help to update predictions about future weather conditions.

        We also investigate the role of operating flexibility in more detail. We find that firms increase their

operating flexibility substantially in regions in which weather conditions become more extreme. This result

holds regardless of whether we use the planned change in flexible production capacity, or the actual change

in flexible production capacity over the next four years. When we analyze which firms invest in flexible

power plants as response to more extremely hot or cold days, we find that the building-up of flexible

production capacity is stronger in firms with a low level of existing operating flexibility. These results

suggest that firms react to more extreme weather conditions by adjusting their production portfolio towards

more operating flexibility.

        One factor that could reduce the impact of extreme weather is more precise weather forecasting. If

market operators and firms know well in advance that temperatures and demand will change, they can

prepare and plan production adjustments, which would reduce the importance of operating flexibility. Using

detailed weather forecasts data from multiple providers, we find that the impact of extreme weather on

flexible investments is more pronounced if the average 3-day temperature forecast error is high and if the

forecasts of different forecast providers are more dispersed.

        Although this study focuses exclusively on energy utilities, our results potentially have implications

for other industries as well. While the nature of the impact of extreme weather conditions is likely to vary

by industry and is undoubtedly different from the electricity generating industry we study here because of

the unique relation between energy demand and weather, operating flexibility will likely play a key role for

many firms, not only for energy utilities, to react to new climatic conditions. Firms from many industries




                                                      6
will have to cope with adjustments of their production process,4 disruptions to their supply chains,5 less

predictable consumer demand,6 shifts of consumer preferences,7 or new regulations8 as result of more

extreme weather conditions. The real effects of climate change on businesses in many industries are likely

to be consequential and are not well understood at this point.

        Our analysis extends the literature in several ways. First, we provide asset-level evidence on firms'

investment decisions. In particular, this study is related to prior work which investigates how investment is

linked to uncertainty in general (e.g., Abel, 1983; Dixit and Pindyck, 1994; Bloom, 2009), political

uncertainty (e.g., Julio and Yook, 2012; Gulen and Ion, 2016), economic volatility (e.g. Giroud and Mueller,

2019), or product market characteristics (e.g., Dixit, 1980; Akdogu and MacKay, 2008). By doing so, our

paper also adds to the broader literature of determinants of corporate investment (e.g., Gan, 2007a,b; Billett,

Garfinkel, and Jiang, 2011; Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2013; Giroud, 2013; Harford and Uysal, 2014). We

extend this literature by showing that weather conditions as a macro factor can have a strong explanatory

power for firm-level investments. By focusing on the establishment network of the firms and within-firm

investment decisions, our paper also contributes to the recent literature on firm networks and investments

(e.g. Giroud and Mueller, 2019). Analyzing how firms' investment decisions affect their operating

flexibility adds to the literature which highlights the role of flexibility for firms (e.g., D'Acunto et al., 2018).

        Second, the paper contributes to a new and emerging line of research on weather, climate risk and

finance. For instance, in their early works, Hirshleifer and Shumway (2003) find a positive relation between

sunshine and market returns. More recently, Krueger, Sautner, and Starks (2018) explore how climate

change affects institutional investors' risk perception. Painter (2019) examines the impact of climate change



4
  Many firms in the food production industry need to adjust their production process to changing climatic conditions
(https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/sep/19/climate-change-affect-food-production).
5
  Extreme weather could trigger a beer shortage because breweries could face shortages in their supply of barley
(https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-07015-7).
6
  Sales of beer or bottled water is strongly linked to weather conditions during the summer months in many countries
(https://www.thelocal.no/20180719/norwegians-set-records-for-beer-consumption-during-hot-summer).
7
   The tourism industry needs to adjust its "assets" because consumers' demand shifts to different regions
(http://www.ktoo.org/2014/08/04/report-alaska-tourists-may-shift-new-areas-climate-change).
8
   Chinese steel producers have to cope with tougher environmental regulations to reduce pollution levels
(http://www.reuters.com/article/china-steel-environment-idUSL4N0VE3R820150204).


                                                         7
on the underwriting fees and initial yields of municipal bond issuance. Murfin and Spiegel (2019) studies

the real estate price implications of the rise of sea levels. Our paper, to our best knowledge, is the first paper

that explores how climate change and extreme weather conditions affect corporate investments.

        Third, this paper also contributes to a long line of research about the economics of energy utilities.

Frésard, Rose and Wolfram (2007), for instance, analyze how deregulation affects the efficiency of energy

utilities. Becher, Mulherin, and Walkling (2012) investigate corporate mergers in the energy utilities

industry, Perez-Gonzalez and Yun (2013) use energy utilities to measure the value of risk management with

derivatives, and Rettl, Stomper, and Zechner (2016) evaluate the importance of competitor inflexibility in

this industry. Reinartz and Schmid (2016) analyze the impact of production flexibility on the financial

leverage in the electricity-generating industry, and Lin, Schmid, and Weisbach (2019) investigate how price

risk due to electricity price volatility affects firms' cash holdings.



2. Data description

2.1. Sample of energy utilities

        To construct a global sample of energy utilities, we start by combining lists of active and inactive

public utility companies from Thomson Reuters. The sample covers the years 2000 to 2016, which is the

period for which we can obtain the necessary annual data on firms' production assets. After cleaning the

sample and filtering those firms which operate in regions with wholesale markets for electricity,9 we end

up with 273 energy utilities.

        Figure 1 shows the example of Vattenfall AB, a Swedish power company which had electricity

generation capacity in Sweden, Denmark, Netherlands, Germany, the U.K. and Finland in 2014. For the

construction of our dataset, we consider all electricity market regions in which a firm owns capacity as long


9
  First, we eliminate all firms without a primary security classified as equity. Second, we wish to consider only
companies that focus on the generation of electricity. To ensure that other companies are not included, we rely on
firms' SIC and ICB codes, their business description obtained from Capital IQ, and additionally conduct manual
research on their business lines. Finally, we eliminate all firms that do not have any operations in regions with
wholesale markets for electricity, and we exclude the Russian electricity market because weather-based measured are
problematic for a market that spans multiple climatic zones.


                                                        8
as the regional capacity accounts for at least one percent of the total production capacity and the fraction of

renewable production capacity in that region is less than 50 percent. On average, every firm is active in

about three different electricity markets (median: two markets). Overall, our sample firms are active in 43

electricity market regions from 32 countries, they operate 37,965 unique power plants, and plan to construct

4,425 new plants during our sample period.



2.2. Measuring power plant investments

          Data on individual power plants is obtained from the annual versions of the Platts World Electric

Power Plant database, which provides information on power plants around the globe. It includes

information on single power plant units, including their production technologies, capacities, geographic

locations, start dates of commercial operation, and their owners/operators. We obtain the annual version of

this database for all years between 2000 and 2016 and manually match each power plant unit to the energy

utilities sample.10 About one-third of the worldwide production capacity for electricity matches to our

sample firms; the remainder are plants owned by large utilities that are not publicly listed or plants in non-

deregulated regions without wholesale markets for electricity and are excluded from our sample for this

reason.

          Most important for our purposes, this database does not cover only completed power plants, but

also contains information on planned plant construction projects.11 These data on existing power plants as

well as planned power plant projects allow us to construct our investment variables. The variable

"FLEXIBLE INVESTMENT" is defined as planned construction projects of flexible power plants (in

megawatt, MW) of firm i in region j and year t, scaled by the capacity of existing power plants (in MW) of


10
  We use the yearly version of the database because historical owner/operator information is not included.
11
  These are plants with the status code PLN, which means planned (still in planning or design). Platts states that "the
decision to include new power projects in the WEPP Data Base is [...] made on a case-by-case basis. Key determinants
in approximate order of importance are: 1) order placement for generating equipment or engineering, procurement,
and construction (EPC) services, 2) the status of licensing or permitting activities, 3) funding, and 4) the availability
of fuel or transmission access. Projects may also be included even if such data are lacking if there are generalized
national or regional policies that are driving power plant development." (Platts Data Base Description and Research
Methodology, p.19).


                                                           9
the same firm i in the same region j and year t. The variable is set to one if the planned capacity exceeds

the existing capacity. We classify power plants using gas, oil, or pump storage as production technology as

flexible. The variables "INFLEXIBLE INVESTMENT", "RENEWABLE INVESTMENT", and "TOTAL

INVESTMENT" are constructed in the same way, but we consider planned inflexible plants (coal and

nuclear), renewable plants (wind and solar), or all planned plants.

        For robustness, we also use alternative variables to measure flexible investment. First, we apply a

dummy variable that equals one if firm i has any planned flexible power plant projects in region j and year

t. Second, we use the unscaled logarithm of the total capacity of all flexible planned power plant projects

of firm i in region j and year t. Third, we consider the number of planned power plants, rather than their

capacity, scaled by the number of existing plants. Fourth, we use the logarithm of the number of planned

flexible plants.

        Table 1 provides an overview on the planned power plant projects, separately for flexible,

inflexible, and renewable plants as well as the single technologies therein. There are 1,605 projects to

construct flexible power plants, which account for a total of 401 GW. The average capacity of planned

flexible plants is 216 MW (median: 183 MW). Most planned flexible plants are gas and gas combined-

cycle plants. For inflexible plants, there are 612 projects with a capacity of 433 GW. The average planned

inflexible plant has a capacity of about 810 MW (median: 832 MW), about four times the average capacity

of planned flexible plants. For renewables, we identify 1,079 projects, mostly in wind plants. Their

combined capacity is 100 GW, and the average size of planned renewable plants is 74 MW (median: 25

MW). The "others" group, which includes for example hydro, biogas, biomass, geothermal, or waste plants,

is not explicitly considered when we distinguish the power plant types, but these plants are included in our

analysis focusing on total investments. In total, there are 4,425 unique investment projects in our sample,

which have a combined capacity of 1,046 GW. This amount is similar to today's installed electricity

generation capacity of the U.S., which is about 1,100 GW according to the U.S. Energy Information

Administration (EIA).




                                                     10
2.3. Measuring extreme weather

Our weather data come from the Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN). We use the daily average

temperatures (GHCN-DAILY) to construct our measures of extreme weather. Based on approximately 200

million individual temperature observations at the weather station level, we start by calculating the average

temperature in degrees Celsius in each market region and year from 1951 to 2016.12 The variable

"EXTREME WEATHER" is then calculated as the fraction of days with an extreme temperature in a

particular year and market. A day is classified as extreme if its temperature would belong to the one percent

hottest or coolest days during the base period 1951 to 1980.13 In the absence of climatic changes, we would

expect to classify one percent of days as extremely hot and one percent of day as extremely cold during our

sample period 2000 to 2016, which leads to an expected value for this variable of two percent. For

robustness tests, we alternatively classify the hottest and coldest 0.5 percent or five percent as "extreme"

days, only consider hot days, or use weekly instead of daily temperatures.

         The average values of the extreme weather variable across all markets over time are presented in

Figure 2. This figure documents that the fraction of extreme days shows an increasing trend since the end

of the base period in 1980, as both the linear and the quadratic fits are upward sloping. During our sample

period, 3.4 percent of all days are classified as extreme weather days, which is substantially more than the

two percent which we would expect if temperatures stayed the same as during the base period. If we weight

the temperature observations by firms, the fraction of extreme days is 2.8 percent (see Table 2). These

observations clearly indicate that extreme weather became more common during the last decades, a

development that is likely related to climate change.




12
   Temperatures are calculated as the average across all weather stations in an electricity market region. This approach
is potentially problematic for very large market regions like Russia, which spans multiple climatic zones. As explained
before, we therefore exclude Russia from the sample.
13
   Hansen et al. 2012 explain they "choose 1951­1980 as the base period for most of our illustrations, for several
reasons. First, it was a time of relatively stable global temperature, prior to rapid global warming in recent decades.
Second, it is recent enough for older people, especially t he "baby boom" generation, to remember. Third, global
temperature in 1951­1980 was within the Holocene range, and thus it is a climate that the natural world and civilization
are adapted to. We require at least 20 years of non-missing data on the average temperature during this base period.


                                                          11
2.4. Control variables

        Our source for financial variables is Worldscope. The financial control variables which we use are

size (measured as the logarithm of total assets in $US), profitability (EBITDA scaled by total assets),

Tobin's Q (market capitalization of equity plus total liabilities scaled by the sum of the book value of equity

plus total liabilities), leverage (total debt scaled by the sum of total debt and book value of equity), and cash

holdings (cash and short-term equivalents scaled by total assets). We also control for the two country-level

variables GDP per capita and inflation rate, which are based on Worldbank data, to account for the fact that

electricity consumption and economic development can be correlated (Da, Huang, and Yun, 2017). All

variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels; their detailed descriptions can be found in Appendix A.



2.5. Descriptive statistics

        Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for our sample firms, averaged for the whole sample period.

On average, the planned investments in flexible power plants account for 7.9 percent of the existing capacity

of energy utilities. The respective numbers for investments in inflexible and renewable plant projects are

4.9 percent and 2.3 percent. If we consider all power plant projects, investments account for 17.8 percent

of the existing capacity. On average, 2.8 percent of all days are classified as days with extreme temperatures.

The firm-level variables indicate that the energy utilities in our sample are comparatively large, with

average total assets of about 26 billion USD.



3. Estimating the impact of extreme weather conditions on utilities' investments

3.1. Empirical specification

        The dataset which we use for firm-level regressions is organized as a firm-region-year panel. We

estimate an equation predicting investment for a particular firm in each region in which it operates. We first

present a specification with just year effects. This specification has the advantage of utilizing both time

series and cross-sectional variation in extreme weather. However, it does not control for firm or region

level omitted variables. We next estimate a specification that contains year, region, firm, and firm times


                                                       12
region fixed effects. This specification only exploits variations in the frequency of extremely hot or cold

days within a particular market region in which a firm operates. Finally, we estimate a specification that

includes firm times year fixed effects. This specification exploits the fact that many firms in our sample, as

is illustrated for Vattenfall in Figure 1, operate in more than one region. All standard errors for firm-level

regressions are clustered by country and firm. For analyses which do not require firm data, we use data

organized as a region-year panel and cluster standard errors by country.



3.2. Estimates of the impact of extreme weather on investments

        We present estimates of these specifications in Table 3. We start with investments in flexible power

plants (gas, oil, and pump storage) in Panel A. Theoretically, extreme weather should affect investments in

these types of power plants since they can better adjust production levels when electricity demand and price

volatility increase because of more extreme weather conditions. All columns include year-fixed effects;

Columns 2 and 3 include firm, region, and firm times region fixed effects, and Column 4 additionally

includes year x firm-fixed effects. In each specification, the estimated coefficient for extreme weather is

positive and statistically significantly different from zero. This positive coefficient indicates that firms'

investments in flexible power plants are higher in regions in which temperature are more extreme.

        The magnitude of the coefficient for extreme weather is 0.87 when both time-series and cross-

sectional variation are used. When we only exploit variation of extreme weather over time, the estimated

coefficient is between 0.51 and 0.55, depending on whether controls and firm times year fixed effects are

included or not. These estimates imply that a one-standard deviation change of the frequency of extremely

hot days leads to a 1.3 to 2.3 percentage point increase in flexible investment (which is defined as the

capacity of planned flexible power plants relative to existing plants). Because the average flexible

investment is 7.9 percent, these numbers translate into a relative increase of 16 to 29 percent. The estimates

also imply that flexible investment increases by 0.5 to 0.9 percentage points if one percent more days exhibit

extreme weather than in the base period. Thus, this effect is not only statistically significant, but also large




                                                       13
enough to be economically relevant. The effect of the control variables is in line with expectations: large

firms and those with higher market to book ratios invest more on average.

        A graphical illustration of this effect can be found in Figure 3 in which we plot the average flexible

investment for extreme weather deciles. In line with our regression results, there clearly a positive relation

between both variables. Panel B presents the estimates for inflexible plants (nuclear and coal), renewable

plants (wind and solar), and all power plants. The coefficient estimates for both inflexible and renewable

plants are negative, but they are not significantly different from zero. For all power plants, we find positive

coefficient estimates that are statistically significant. These results suggest that more extreme weather

conditions lead to an overall increase in power plant investments that is made up primarily of those with

flexible generation.



3.3. Robustness tests: market power, input prices, and market-specific effects

        We evaluate several potential concerns for the validity of our results in Table 4. First, we focus on

the market power of firms. Firms with a (very) high market power could conceivably influence electricity

price characteristics through their bidding behavior. If the effect of market power occurs more often when

there is more extreme weather, then our results could reflect this market power. However, as we show in

Panel A, our results also hold if we exclude firms that account for more than 20 percent, 10 percent, or one

percent of the production capacity in a particular market. The finding that the interaction term between

extreme weather and market share is not statistically significant also mitigates the concern that our results

are driven by firms' market power.

        In Panel B, we analyze explicitly control for the gas price and the spark spread (i.e., the difference

between the wholesale price of electricity and the cost of natural gas, see Appendix A for a detailed

description of both variables). If extreme weather had a direct on gas prices or spark spreads, our previous

results might not capture a direct effect of extreme weather on investment. However, the estimates in Panel

B show the extreme weather has a strong positive impact on flexible investments even after controlling for

gas prices or spark spreads, or interacting both centered variables with extreme weather. Not surprisingly,


                                                      14
spark spreads themselves are also linked to flexible investments, with higher spark spreads leading to more

flexible plants being constructed because of their higher profitability.

        We also subsequently exclude all single markets to make sure that we document a general effect

which is not driven by one particular region. Figure 4 shows the coefficient estimates for our base

specification in Table 3, Panel A, Column 2 when we exclude single markets. The results indicate that we

document a general effect which is not driven by any particular market.



3.4. Robustness tests: alternative specifications

        Appendix B contains estimates using alternative specifications. The first, which is presented in

Panel A, focuses on the way in which of extreme temperatures. In the analysis presented in Table 3, we

classify a day as extreme if it would belong to the hottest or coldest one percent of days in the same region

during the base time period (1951-1980). We present specifications redefining our measure of extreme

weather classifying a day as extreme if it belongs to the hottest or coldest 0.5 percent or 5 percent of days,

or we only consider the hottest one percent of days. The estimates presented in Columns 1 to 3 show that

these alternative measures of extreme weather also have a positive impact on investments in flexible plants.

In Column 4, we use weekly instead of daily temperatures and find similar results.

        Panel B contains estimates using alternative definitions for flexible investment, which scales the

total capacity of planned flexible power plants by the capacity of the existing generation assets in the same

region. In Column 1 we instead use a dummy variable that equals one if a firm has any investments in

flexible plants and zero otherwise. In Column 2, we use the non-scaled natural logarithm of one plus the

total capacity of planned flexible plants. Columns 3 and 4 focus on the number of plants instead of their

capacity. In these specifications, we use the number of planned flexible plant projects, scaled by the number

of existing plants, and the natural logarithm of one plus flexible plant projects. The estimates in each

specification suggest that extreme weather leads to more investments in flexible power plants.

        The third series of robustness tests in Panel C includes alternative fixed effects. We include year

and firm fixed effects in Column 1, year and region fixed effects in Column 2, and year plus region plus


                                                      15
firm fixed effects in Column 3. In Column 4, we add year times continent fixed effects to our main

specification to allow for continent-specific time trends. All these specifications indicate that more extreme

weather conditions lead to more investments in flexible power plants. Instead of clustering standard errors

by firm and region, Panel D shows the outcome if we cluster standard errors by firms (Column 1), regions

(Column 2), regions and years (Column 3), or regions plus years plus firms (Column 4). The results are

similar to those of our main specification.

        Panel E adds additional controls for regional characteristics besides those already included in Table

3. Although extreme weather is likely to be exogenous to country-level factors, we nevertheless add controls

for capital market development in Column 1. These are stock market capitalization and domestic credit to

the private sector, both scaled by a country's GDP. In Column 2, we add the electricity market

characteristics total production capacity, average capacity share of flexible power plants, and years since

the incorporation the electricity market. Columns 3 controls for firm-specific operations in a market by

adding its production capacity in this market and the share of this market for its total capacity. Finally,

Column 4 includes all these additional control variables at the same time. The estimates using each of these

specifications are similar to the ones reported in Table 3.



4. The Channel through Which Extreme Weather Affects Investments

        We have documented that changes in extreme temperatures lead firms to increase their construction

of new power plants, with the increase coming from plants that rely on relatively flexible production

technologies. A possible reason why firms invest in flexible generation is that more frequent extreme

weather conditions increase the volatility of electricity demand and prices, which would lead firms to favor

production techniques for which quantities can be easily adjusted to changing market conditions. To

evaluate the extent to which increased electricity price volatility is the reason why more extreme

temperatures lead to increased construction of flexible power plants, we examine the underlying hypothesis

of this argument: that more extreme weather conditions do in fact increase the volatility of electricity

demand and prices.


                                                      16
4.1. Other weather characteristics, electricity demand, and electricity prices

         We start by examining the way in which other weather characteristics change when the weather

becomes more extreme. Our estimates in Panel A of Table 5 are based on region-year level regressions and

indicate that the numbers of both cooling and heating degree days increase. Cooling degree days in Column

1 measure the cooling demand as the difference between the average outside temperature and a base

temperature of 18.3 degrees Celsius. Heating degree days in Column 2 approximate the heating demand by

how much the outside temperature is below the base temperature of 15.5 degrees Celsius. The increase of

cooling and heating degree days suggests that the demand for heating and cooling rises when the weather

becomes more extreme. At the same time, outside temperature become more volatility, as indicated by the

higher standard deviation of temperatures and their logarithm in Columns 3 and 4.

        These changing weather characteristics likely affect electricity demand. The demand tests in Panel

B focus on IEA data for U.S. regions because monthly demand data is not available elsewhere. Column 1

shows that residential consumption increases, which is in line with the idea that (residential) electricity

demand is closely linked to temperatures due to heating and/or cooling needs (Perez-Gonzalez and Yun,

2013). In Column 2, we analyze total electricity consumption, which consists of residential, commercial,

industrial, and transportation consumption. We find that the total consumption has a lower coefficient

estimate which is not significantly different from zero, indicating that extreme weather has limited effects

on the overall electricity demand. However, when we turn to volatility of the overall electricity demand,14

we find clear evidence that more extreme weather leads to a more volatile demand, no matter whether we

use the volatility itself or its logarithm (Columns 3 and 4). This finding indicates that more extreme weather

affects electricity demand mainly by increasing the volatility of the demand, not necessarily its level.

        These demand-side changes affect wholesale prices for electricity. To measure the wholesale

electricity price level and volatility, we collect data on electricity prices from different sources, e.g., directly

from the websites of the exchanges (see Lin, Schmid, and Weisbach, 2019, for more details). We then


14
  Demand volatility is approximated as the standard deviation of monthly electricity generation within a year,
normalized by the market's average generation.


                                                         17
calculate electricity price volatility as the standard deviation of hourly electricity prices, normalized by the

market average. Electricity prices are measured in US$ per megawatt hour (MWh) and local electricity

prices are converted to US$ using daily exchange rates. We use the logarithm of the price and its volatility

to restrict the impact of extreme values. For the price level in Columns 1 and 2, we find positive point

estimates, but they are marginally insignificant no matter whether we control for GDP per capita and

inflation or not. This result is in line with the finding that total consumption does not increase significantly.

Also consistent with the higher electricity demand volatility, we find that electricity price volatility

increases substantially if temperatures become more extreme. The point estimates suggest that a one-

standard deviation increase of the frequency of extremely hot or cold days lead to an electricity price

volatility increase of about 15 to 20 percent, depending on whether we include regional control variables.

Consistent with our electricity demand result, these tests suggest that extreme weather has a strong impact

on the volatility of electricity prices, but not necessarily their level.

        In Panel D of Table 5, we use electricity prices and their volatility directly as an independent

variable in models explaining flexible investments. These tests, which are conducted at the firm-region-

year level as our main analyses, show that there is no statistically significant impact of the electricity price

level on flexible investments (Column 1). In Column 2, we find that higher electricity price volatility

increases planned investments in flexible plants. These results are similar if we include both the electricity

price level and the volatility in the regression with or without additional control variables (Columns 3 and

4). We conclude that higher electricity price volatility due to more extreme weather conditions is a likely

channel for firms' increases in planned investments in flexible generation.



4.2. Alternative mechanism tests

        An alternative explanation for our findings could be that extreme weather leads to a higher public

or political pressure for environmental-friendly electricity production. This pressure could have two effects:

first, firms would use more solar and wind generation in regions in which the weather is more extreme.

Because wind and solar are intermittent generation technologies, flexible plants would be needed to take


                                                        18
care of generation if they cannot produce electricity. Following this logic, more extreme weather could lead

to more investments in flexible generation because a higher penetration of renewables makes flexible plants

more valuable. However, when we analyze this potential mechanism in Appendix C, Panel A, we find no

empirical support for its validity. Neither is there any correlation between extreme weather and renewable

penetration (which is in line with our previous result that extreme weather does not affect investments in

renewables), nor does renewable penetration directly affect flexible investment.

         The second potential consequence of this higher awareness for environmental issues could be that

firms could prefer flexible gas-fired plants over inflexible coal-fired plants not because of their differences

in flexibility, but because gas plants are less detrimental to the environment than coal plants. To evaluate

whether this potential mechanism explains our findings, we use the Environmental Policy Stringency index

(EPSI).15 If extreme weather affects flexible investments via this environmental awareness channel, we

would expect to find that more extreme weather leads to a stricter environmental policy and higher values

of the EPSI. However, we find no evidence for such relation in Columns 1 and 2 of Panel B, Appendix C.

When we use the EPSI directly in regressions explain flexible investments, we find no evidence for any

relation between those two as well (Columns 3 and 4). We conclude that higher environmental awareness

due to more extreme weather is unlikely to cause our main results.



5. Extreme weather predictability, operating flexibility, and weather forecasting

5.1. What do current realizations of extreme weather reveal about the future?

         To this point we have argued that firms increase investments in flexible generation when the

weather becomes more extreme to increase their future operating flexibility. The logic of this argument

depends on more extreme weather conditions today being associated with more extreme weather conditions

in the future when the newly constructed plants go online. To evaluate the predictive power of current



15
   This index, which is developed by the OECD, "is a country-specific and internationally-comparable measure of the
stringency of environmental policy. Stringency is defined as the degree to which environmental policies put an explicit
or implicit price on polluting or environmentally harmful behaviour" ( https://doi.org/10.1787/2bc0bb80-en).


                                                          19
extreme weather realizations for the future, we use a forecasting model and investigate how the forecast

error changes when we include or exclude the latest extreme weather realization in the calibration.

        For the model calibration, we use ten years of past extreme weather data to calibrate a market-

specific linear trend function. We then forecast the average extreme weather for the next three, five, and

ten years. Table 6 reports the average absolute forecast error across all markets and years. In the first

column, we include the most recent extreme weather realization in the calibration period (t-9 to t=0). In the

second column, we exclude the most recent extreme weather realization and use the ten-year period from

t-10 to t-1 to calibrate the model. The third column shows the relative difference in the mean absolute

forecast error when including or excluding the most recent realization.

        The results show that including the most recent extreme weather realization for the calibration of

the model reduces the forecast error by about five to ten percent relative to a calibration which excludes the

most recent realization. This finding indicates that adjusting investment plans based on realization of

extreme weather is meaningful because these realizations are useful for updating predictions about future

weather conditions.



5.2. The role of operating flexibility

        Our hypothesis is that energy firms invest in flexible generation assets to increase their operating

flexibility and adjust to more volatility electricity prices. An important issue is the extent to which utilities'

operating flexibility does in fact change because of these investments. To address this issue, we follow two

approaches. First, we calculate the difference between a firm's current operating flexibility and the

flexibility it would have once all planned power plants have been completed, where we define operating

flexibility as the ratio of flexible production capacity to the sum of flexible and inflexible capacity. The

second approach considers realized changes in operating flexibility, calculated as the relative change in

operating flexibility between now and four years in the future. These comparisons are presented in Table

6, Panel A. This panel documents that more extreme weather conditions increase both the planned and

realized change in operating flexibility.


                                                        20
        An additional prediction is that a firm's existing operating flexibility should affect its likelihood to

invest in flexible power plants. More volatile electricity prices coming from more extreme weather

conditions should be especially problematic for firms with low levels of existing operating flexibility. Thus,

we expect that investments in flexible generation should be larger for firms with existing flexibility. Panel

B of Table 6 presents estimates of equations predicting investments in flexible power plants as a function

of firms' existing flexibility. We define existing operating flexibility as a firm's flexible production capacity

scaled by the sum of flexible and inflexible capacity. In the first two columns, we split the sample into

observations with above and below median operating flexibility. Extreme weather conditions have a very

strong positive impact on flexible investments for firms with low levels of operating flexibility in Column

1. Although extreme weather also has a positive effect on flexible investments in firms with higher levels

of operating flexibility, the coefficient estimate in Column 2 is substantially smaller (0.37 vs 0.84). Using

an interaction term for the full sample of firms confirms this result. Both in specifications without or with

(Columns 3 and 4) control variables, we find that extreme weather leads to more investments in flexible

plants, but the interaction term between extreme weather and operating flexibility is negative. Assuming a

firm with only flexible power plants, these estimates imply that extreme weather conditions would not

trigger investments in flexible plants for such a firm with an operating flexibility value of one (coefficient

estimates of 1.39 versus -1.40 in Column 4). These estimates suggest that investments in flexible assets are

concentrated in firms with lower levels of existing operating flexibility.



5.3. Weather forecasting and the impact of extreme weather on flexible investments

        One factor that could potentially affect the impact of extreme weather on flexible investment is the

weather forecasting accuracy. If market operators and firms have precise forecasts about changes of

temperatures and demand, they can prepare and plan long or medium-term electricity generation

adjustments. On the other hand, highly flexible plants are needed if temperature and demand changes occur

unexpectedly, especially if extreme temperatures are common. As a consequence, we expect that extreme




                                                       21
weather has a stronger positive impact on flexible investments especially in regions in which weather

forecasting is less accurate.

         We obtain detailed temperature forecast data from multiple forecast providers from

ForecastWatch.16 We focus on the three-day temperature forecast, which is available for the U.S. from

2005, Canada from 2007, and other countries from 2012. The forecast error for a particular day is calculated

as the absolute value of the three-day forecast average temperature forecast, averaged across all forecast

providers, minus the actual average temperature on that day. We then calculate the average of all daily

forecast errors in a given year and market region. Alternatively, we calculate forecast dispersion as the

inter-quartile range of 3-day temperature forecasts across different forecast providers to measure for

forecast uncertainty.

         Table 8, Panel A, shows that extreme weather has a positive impact on flexible investments in

regions and years in which the average 3-day temperature forecast error is above or below the median

(Columns 1 and 2). However, the coefficient estimate is higher for the high forecast error subsample (0.65

vs. 0.34). When we interact the forecast error with extreme weather in Columns 3 and 4, we again find that

extreme weather has a stronger impact on flexible investments if the forecast error is higher. The results for

forecast dispersion, which are presented in Panel B, are similar to those for the forecast error and indicate

that higher firms react stronger to weather uncertainty if temperature forecast uncertainty is high.



6. Conclusion

         The changing climate is potentially one of the most consequential phenomena in human history.

Much attention has been focused on the way changing weather patterns affects ocean levels, the likelihood

and violence of storms, and agricultural productivity. Yet, there are many other potential effects of climate

change that could impact many aspects of the economy. Firms in a number of different industries will have



16
  According to their website, they "collect weather forecast data from thousands of locations throughout the U.S. and
around the world [...]. This information is added to an ever -growing and unparalleled historical database of more than
800 million weather forecasts gathered from a variety of resources" (www.forecastwatch.com/about -us/).


                                                          22
to alter the way that they do business, sometimes in a substantial way. The ability to adjust their operations

quickly to new situations and market conditions has potentially become more important. We study the

effect of the frequency of extreme temperatures on one industry that is likely to be considerably affected

by it, the electricity producing industry.

        A major factor in the demand for electricity is the weather. Theoretically, more extreme

temperatures can lead to large fluctuations in electricity demand and the wholesale price of electricity,

which in turn affects the optimal production process for firms to use. Especially flexible power plants which

can quickly adjust their production to changing market conditions can become more valuable in such a

situation, and firms might increase their investments in those types of plants. Alternatively, climate change

and extreme weather can increase uncertainty for energy firms, causing them to delay their investments.

        In this paper, we consider a sample of 273 electricity producing firms operating in 43 electricity

markets over the 2000-2016 period. These firms have 4,425 planned power plant projects, of which 1,605

are flexible gas, oil, or pump storage plants. We evaluate the extent to which changes in the regional

frequency of extreme temperatures affected our sample firms' decisions to invest in new power plants. The

estimates indicate that the quantity of new, flexible power plants that firms build increases in regions in

which temperatures are becoming more extreme. These estimates imply that a one standard deviation

increase in the frequency of days with extreme temperatures leads to a 15 to 25 percent relative increase in

investments in flexible plants, suggesting that changes in weather have had a substantial impact on these

firms' investment decisions. We show that the mechanism for this increase is that extreme weather leads to

more volatile temperatures, which then leads to more volatile electricity demand and prices. Firms react to

this higher volatility by investing in a way that improves their operating flexibility.

        These results are consistent with the view that the effects of climate change have affected the

investment decisions of electricity producing firms. Presumably, as the earth continues to warm and weather

becomes even more extreme, firms will continue to favor flexible power plants for which output can be

adjusted easily. Ironically, the type of plant most responsible for the CO2 emissions that cause climate

change is the coal-fired plant. These plants are relatively inflexible, so have a relatively high cost of


                                                      23
changing their output. Consequently, because of climate change, firms appear to be shifting away from the

coal fired plants, not because of their CO2 emissions, but because of their inflexibility. Unfortunately, the

weather induced shift has not been to renewable energy, although there has been an increase in renewables

for other reasons.

         While investments in power plants are an important topic, we hope our paper makes a larger point:

changing weather conditions fundamentally changes the economics of many businesses. Our results

suggest that it leads energy producing companies to increase investments to enhance their operating

flexibility. In addition, changing weather conditions potentially lead firms to invest more in other industries

as well. However, the impact of culminate change on the way firms in different industries invest is likely

to vary substantially. Future research that characterizes the way in which climate change affects different

industries is likely to be fruitful.




                                                      24
                                               References

Abel, A. B. (1983) "Optimal investment under uncertainty", American Economic Review, 73, 228-233.

Allianz (2013): The Weather Business ­ How Companies Can Protect Against Increasing Weather
Volatility. Industry report.

Bar-Ilan, A. and Strange, W.C. (1996) "Investment lags," American Economic Review, 86, 610-623.

Becher, D. A., J. H. Mulherin, and R. A. Walkling (2012) "Sources of Gains in Corporate Mergers: Refined
Tests from a Neglected Industry", Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47, 57­89.

Billet, M. T., J. A. Garfinkel and Y. Jiang (2011) ,,The influence of governance on investment: Evidence
from a hazard model," Journal of Financial Economics, 102, 643-670.

Bloom, N. (2009) "The impact of uncertainty shocks," Econometrica, 77, 623­685.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2013) "Market timing, investment, and risk management," Journal of
Financial Economics, 109, 40-62.

D'Acunto, F, R. Liu, C. Pflueger, and M. Weber (2018) "Flexible Prices and Leverage," Journal of
Financial Economics, 129, 46-68.

Da, Z., D. Huang, and H. Yun (2017) "Industrial Electricity Usage and Stock Returns," Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 52, 37-69.

Dixit, A. K. (1980) "The role of investment in entry-deterrence," Economic Journal, 90, 95-106.

Dixit, A. K. and Pindyck, R. S. (1994) "Investment under Uncertainty," Princeton University Press,
Princeton

Fabrizio, K., N. Rose, and C. Wolfram (2007) "Do Markets Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of
Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric Generation Efficiency," American Economic Review 97, 1250­
77.

Gan, J. (2007a) "Collateral, debt capacity, and corporate investment: Evidence from a natural experiment",
Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 709-734.

Gan, J. (2007b) "The Real Effects of Asset Market Bubbles: Loan- and Firm-Level Evidence of a Lending
Channel," Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1941­1973.

Giroud, X. (2013) "Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128, 861­915.

Giroud, X. and Mueller, H. (2019) "Firms' Internal Networks and Local Economic Shocks," American
Economic Review, 70, 1767-1804.

Gulen, H. and Ion, M. (2015) "Policy Uncertainty and Corporate Investment," Review of Financial Studies,
29, 523-564.



                                                    25
Hansen, J., Sato, M., Glascoe, J., and Ruedy, R. (1998) "A common-sense climate index: Is climate
changing noticeably?" Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95 (8), 4113­4120.

Hansen, J., Sato, M., and Ruedy, R. (2012) "Perception of climate change," Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 109 (37), 241-2423.

Harford, J. and V.B. Uysal (2014) "Bond market access and investment," Journal of Financial Economics,
112, 147-163.

Hirshleifer, D. and Shumway, T. (2003) "Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the Weather", Journal of
Finance, 58, 1009-1032.

Julio, B. and Yook, Y. (2012) "Political Uncertainty and Corporate Investment Cycles," Journal of Finance,
67, 45-83.

Krueger, P., Sautner, Z., and Starks, L. "The Importance of Climate Risk for Institutional Investors," Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Lin, C., Schmid, T., and Weisbach, M. S. (2019) "Price Risk, Production Flexibility, and Liquidity
Management: Evidence from Electricity Generating Firms," NBER Working Paper No. 23434 .

McDonald, R. and Siegel, D. (1986) "The value of waiting to invest," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
101, 707-727.

Murfin, J. and Spiegel, M. (2019) "Is the risk of sea level rise capitalized in residential real estate?," Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Painter, M. (2019) "An inconvenient cost: The effects of climate change on municipal bonds, " Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Pérez-González, F. and Hayong, Y. (2013) "Risk Management and Firm Value: Evidence from Weather
Derivatives," Journal of Finance, 68, 2143-2176.

Reinartz, S. and Schmid, T. (2016) "Production Flexibility, Product Markets, and Capital Structure
Decisions," Review of Financial Studies, 29, 1501-1548.

Rettl, D. A., Stomper, A.m and Zechner, J. (2016) "The Stability of Dividends and Wages: Effects of
Competitor Inflexibility," Working Paper.




                                                       26
Figure 1: To illustrate our data structure, this figure shows the main countries in which Vattenfall
AB owns production capacity (Source: Vattenfall annual report 2014). In our dataset, we observe
Vattenfall's existing production capacity as well as planned new power plants individually for each
electricity market (and year).




                                                27
Figure 2: Average fraction of days with extreme temperature over time. A day is classified as
extreme if its temperature would belong to the 1% hottest or coolest days during the base period
1951 to 1980. A value of 2% indicates that extremely hot or cold days are equally common than
during the base period. Linear and quadratic fits are shown in red and green, respectively.




Figure 3: Flexible investments for extreme weather deciles. Linear and quadratic fits are shown in
red and green, respectively.



                                               28
Figure 4: Coefficient estimates for our base model in Column 2 of Table 3 when we subsequently
exclude single markets.




                                             29
  Table 1: Descriptive statistics: planned power plant projects

                          total                capacity (MW)
 technology           number GW              average    median

 Flexible               1,605        401       216        183
  Oil                    121          6         50         18
  Gas                    715          98       138         65
  Gas comb. cycle        675         271       402        400
  Pump storage            94          26       274        250
 Inflexible              612         433       810        832
  Coal                   484         301       623        660
  Lignite                 44          22       506        455
  Nuclear                 84         109      1,300      1,380
 Renewable              1,079        100        74        25
  Solar                  237           9        39         10
  Wind                   842          91       108         40
 Other                  1,129        112       143        143

 Total                  4,425        1,046     236        100

This table presents descriptive statistics for the planned invest-
ment projects of the sample firms. Reported are the total number
of power plant projects, the total capacity of planned plants in
gigawatt (GW), and the average and median capacity of planned
plants in megawatt (MW).




                                30
         Table 2: Descriptive statistics: firm-level

 Variable                 Obs     Mean       p50        SD

 Flexible investment      4978     0.079     0.000     0.207
 Inflexible investment    4978     0.049     0.000      0.184
 Renewable investment     4978     0.023     0.000      0.106
 Total investment         4978    0.178      0.000      0.309
 Extreme weather          4978     0.028     0.019     0.026
 Price volatility         4361     0.726     0.406      1.070
 Log(price volatility)    4361    -0.731    -0.902      0.764
 Assets (USD bn)          3836    25.810    13.383     30.167
 Log(assets)              3836    15.999    16.410      1.863
 Profitability            3833     0.050     0.055     0.074
 Tobin's Q                3598     1.210     1.141      0.459
 Leverage                 3836     0.525     0.535      0.189
 Cash                     3836     0.072     0.048     0.082
 Log(GDP per capita)      4621    10.453    10.770      0.844
 Inflation                4621     2.355     2.109      1.912

This table presents descriptive statistics. Reported are the
number of observations (N), mean value, median, and stan-
dard deviation (SD). A detailed description of all variables
can be found in Appendix A.




                             31
Table 3: How does extreme weather affect investments in power plants?

 Panel A: investments in flexible power plants

 Column                        1           2         3               4

 Extreme weathert-1        0.87***      0.51***   0.55***      0.52**
                            (3.34)       (4.05)    (3.32)      (2.24)

 Log(assets)t-1                                     0.021*          n/a
                                                    (1.75)
 Profitabilityt-1                                   -0.034          n/a
                                                   (-1.21)
 Tobin's Qt-1                                     0.024***          n/a
                                                    (3.65)
 Leveraget-1                                        -0.040          n/a
                                                   (-0.91)
 Casht-1                                             0.11           n/a
                                                    (1.66)
 Log(GDP per capitat-1 )                             0.33          0.33*
                                                    (1.53)         (1.70)
 Inflationt-1                                      -0.0013         0.013*
                                                   (-0.62)         (2.02)

 Year-FE                      yes         yes       yes             yes
 Region-FE                    no          yes       yes             yes
 Firm-FE                      no          yes       yes             yes
 Firm x region-FE             no          yes       yes             yes
 Firm x year-FE               no           no        no             yes
 Observations                4,978       4,931     3,850           2,926
 Adj. R2                     0.012        0.56      0.57            0.60

 Panel B: investments in other power plants

 Column                        1           2         3               4
                             inflex      renew             total

 Extreme weathert-1         -0.025      -0.099    0.45***      0.53**
                            (-0.34)     (-1.58)    (2.86)      (2.71)

 Controls                      no          no        no             yes
 Year-FE                      yes         yes       yes             yes
 Region-FE                    yes         yes       yes             yes
 Firm-FE                      yes         yes       yes             yes
 Firm x region-FE             yes         yes       yes             yes
 Observations                4,931       4,931     4,931           3,850
 Adj. R2                      0.71        0.51      0.62            0.65
                       continued on next page




                                   32
                           Table 3 continued

The dependent variable in Panel A is flexible investment, which
is defined as early-stage flexible power plant construction projects (in
megawatt, MW) of firm i in region j (and year t), scaled by the capacity
of existing power plants (in MW) of the same firm i in the same region
j (and year t). Gas, oil, and pump storage power plants are classified
as flexible plants. The dependent variables in Panel B are inflexible in-
vestment, renewable investment, and total investment. The non-reported
control variables follow those in Panel A. Extreme weather is the fraction
of days with an extreme temperature in a particular year and electricity
market. A day is classified as extreme if its temperature would belong to
the 1% hottest or coolest days during the base period 1951 to 1980. T-
statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by regions and firms
are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance on the
1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed description of all vari-
ables can be found in Appendix A.




                                   33
               Table 4: Robustness tests I/II: market power and input prices

Panel A: market power

Column                                          1            2            3              4
Market share (capacity)                       < 20%        < 10%        < 1%            all

Extreme weathert-1                           0.51***      0.36***      0.58***        0.57***
                                              (3.99)       (3.73)       (3.66)         (3.66)
Market share (capacity)                                                                -0.075
                                                                                      (-1.23)
Extreme weathert-1 x market share                                                      -0.30
                                                                                      (-0.58)

Year-FE                                        yes          yes           yes           yes
Firm x region-FE                               yes          yes           yes           yes
Observations                                  3,663        2,916         1,386         4,921
Adj. R2                                        0.60         0.65          0.71         0.56

Panel B: spark spread and gas price

Column                                                1            2             3             4

Extreme weathert-1                           0.42***      0.41***       0.31**        0.28**
                                              (3.91)       (4.09)       (2.81)        (2.44)

Gas pricet-1                                 -0.00059     -0.00064
                                              (-0.51)      (-0.56)
Extreme weathert-1 x gas price   t-1                       0.0014
                                                           (0.14)
Spark spreadt-1                                                        0.00093**     0.00074**
                                                                         (2.50)        (2.55)
Extreme weathert-1 x spark spread      t-1                                             0.0079
                                                                                       (1.32)

Year-FE                                        yes          yes           yes           yes
Firm x region-FE                               yes          yes           yes           yes
Observations                                  3,754        3,754         3,241         3,241
Adj. R2                                        0.60         0.60          0.61         0.61
                                  continued on next page




                                             34
                                        Table 4 continued

The baseline specification is as follows: the dependent variable is flexible investment, which is
defined as early-stage flexible power plant construction projects (in megawatt, MW) of firm i
in region j (and year t), scaled by the capacity of existing power plants (in MW) of the same
firm i in the same region j (and year t). Gas and oil-fired power plants are classified as flexible
plants. Extreme weather is the fraction of days with an extreme temperature in a particular
year and electricity market. A day is classified as extreme if its temperature would belong
to the 1% hottest or coolest days during the base period 1951 to 1980. T-statistics based on
robust standard errors clustered by regions and firms are presented in parentheses.
In Panel A, Columns 1 to 3, only firms that account for less than 20%, 10%, or 1% of the
production capacity in a particular market and year are considered. In Column 4, we interact
firms' market share in terms of capacity with extreme weather. Panel B controls for the gas
price and the spark spread. The spark spread is the difference between the wholesale price
of electricity and the cost of producing electricity using natural gas (we assume an efficiency
of 50% of gas-fired power plants for its calculation). Gas prices come from the EIA for U.S.
states and the IEA for all other countries.
***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed
description of all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                                35
            Table 5: Mechanism: how does extreme weather affect electricity?

Panel A: weather characteristics

Column                           1               2              3                   4
Sample                                            region-year-level
Dependent                      CDD              HDD       weather vol       log(weather vol)

Extreme weathert-1            1,714***        1,175***       14.0***            2.33***
                               (4.63)          (2.99)         (8.51)             (8.72)

Controls                         no              no             no                 no
Year-FE                         yes             yes            yes                yes
Region-FE                       yes             yes            yes                yes
Observations                    570             570            570                570
Adj. R2                         0.99            0.98           0.97               0.98

Panel B: electricity demand

Column                           1               2              3         4
Sample                                      region-year-level (U.S. only)
Dependent                  log(residential) log(total) vol(demand) log(demand vol)

Extreme weathert-1             0.50**            0.23         0.45**             3.02**
                               (2.45)           (0.90)        (3.70)             (2.89)

Controls                         no              no             no                 no
Year-FE                         yes             yes            yes                yes
Region-FE                       yes             yes            yes                yes
Observations                    489             451            488                450
Adj. R2                         0.70            0.74           0.71               0.72

Panel C: electricity price characteristics

Column                           1                2              3                   4
Sample                                             region-year-level
Dependent                     log(electricity price)              log(price volatility)

Extreme weathert-1              0.80             1.12         3.08**            3.62***
                               (1.05)           (1.67)        (2.56)             (3.03)

Controls                         no             yes             no                yes
Year-FE                         yes             yes            yes                yes
Region-FE                       yes             yes            yes                yes
Observations                    489             451            488                450
Adj. R2                         0.70            0.74           0.71               0.72
                                 continued on next page




                                           36
                                        Table 5 continued


 Panel D: price characteristics and flexible investments

 Column                             1                 2              3             4
 Sample                                             firm-region-year-level
 Dependent                                            flexible investment

 Log(electricity pricet-1 )      0.018                           -0.018         -0.026
                                 (0.56)                          (-0.52)        (-0.73)
 Log(price volatilityt-1 )                       0.035***       0.039***       0.037***
                                                  (4.63)         (4.27)         (4.70)

 Controls                          no                no            no             yes
 Year-FE                           yes               yes           yes            yes
 Region-FE                         yes               yes           yes            yes
 Observations                     4,090             4,072         4,072          3,172
 Adj. R2                          0.57              0.58          0.58            0.58

Panel A explores how extreme weather affects other weather-related aspects. These are cool-
ing degree days (CDD) in Column 1, heating degree days (HDD) in Column 2, the volatility
of the daily temperatures in Column 3, and the logarithm of this volatility in Column 4.
Extreme weather is the fraction of days with an extreme temperature in a particular year
and electricity market. A day is classified as extreme if its temperature would belong to the
1% hottest or coolest days during the base period 1951 to 1980.
Panel B focuses on the impact of extreme weather on electricity demand. This panel is esti-
mated only for U.S. electricity markets because monthly generation data is not available else-
where. The logarithm of residential consumption is the dependent variable in Column 1, the
logarithm of total consumption in Column 2, the standard deviation of the total generation
(which approx. equals demand in a market/year), standardized by the average consumption
in that market, in Column 3, and the logarithm of this standard deviation in Column 4.
Panel C analyzes how extreme weather affects electricity price characteristics. These are
the logarithm of the average electricity price in a market (and year) in Columns 1 and 2
and the standard deviation of hourly electricity prices, normalized by a market's average
electricity price level, in Columns 3 and 4. The non-reported regional control variables are
GDP per capita and inflation. Panel D links the average electricity price and its volatility
to investments in flexible power plants using the firm-region-year dataset. The non-reported
control variables equal those in Column 3 of Table 3.
T-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by regions (for region-year-level anal-
yses) or regions and firms (for firm-region-year level analyses) are presented in parentheses.
***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed
description of all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                               37
Table 6: Do current realizations of extreme weather help to predict the future?

       Panel A: forecasting the average over next 3 years

       Latest realization in calibration:    included   excluded   error 
       Mean absolute fc error                 0.0148     0.0160     7.3%

       Panel B: forecasting the average over next 5 years

       Latest realization in calibration:    included   excluded   error 
       Mean absolute fc error                 0.0133     0.0141     5.9%

       Panel C: forecasting the average over next 10 years

       Latest realization in calibration:    included   excluded   error 
       Mean absolute fc error                 0.0115     0.0128     9.7%

     This table shows the mean absolute error of extreme weather forecasts
     for different forecast horizons.
     In Panels A to C, we forecast the yearly average extreme weather
     during the next three years (t+1 to t+3), next five y ears ( t+1 to
     t+5) and next ten years (t+1 to t+10). To generate the forecasts, we
     use a market-specific p rediction m odel w ith a l inear t rend function
     and ten years of annual extreme weather data for the calibration. In
     the first column, include the latest extreme weather realization in the
     calibration period (t-9 to t=0). In the second column, we exclude the
     latest extreme weather realization and use data only until the previous
     year (t-10 to t-1). The third column shows the relative difference of
     the mean absolute forecast error between when we include or exclude
     the latest extreme weather realization.




                                        38
      Table 7: Which role does operating flexibility play for investment decisions?

 Panel A: change in operating flexibility

 Column                                        1          2             3           4
                                              planned change            actual change

 Extreme weathert-1                         0.78***     0.72***      0.74**           0.92**
                                             (4.78)      (4.10)      (2.55)           (2.31)

 Controls                                       no         yes          no              yes
 Year-FE                                       yes         yes         yes              yes
 Region-FE                                     yes         yes         yes              yes
 Firm-FE                                       yes         yes         yes              yes
 Firm x region-FE                              yes         yes         yes              yes
 Observations                                 3,993       3,179       2,386            1,915
 Adj. R2                                       0.57        0.58        0.35            0.42

 Panel B: existing operating flexibility and investments

 Column                                        1            2           3                4
                                            low flex    high flex               all

 Extreme weathert-1                         0.84***     0.37***      1.38***           1.39***
                                             (3.01)      (3.56)       (3.94)            (3.27)
 Operating flext-1                                                   -0.0033            -0.020
                                                                     (-0.061)          (-0.34)
 Extreme weathert-1 x OpFlext-1                                     -1.44***          -1.40***
                                                                     (-3.47)           (-2.90)

 Controls                                       no          no          no              yes
 Year-FE                                       yes         yes         yes              yes
 Region-FE                                     yes         yes         yes              yes
 Firm-FE                                       yes         yes         yes              yes
 Firm x region-FE                              yes         yes         yes              yes
 Observations                                 2,266       2,266       4,572            3,609
 Adj. R2                                       0.60        0.57        0.56            0.58

The dependent variables in Panel A are planned flexibility change and actual flexibility
change. Planned flexibility change is calculated as current plus planned capacity of flexible
power plants, relative to current capacity flexible power plants. Actual flexibility change
is the relative change of the capacity of flexible power plants between year t and year t+4.
In Panel B, the dependent variable is flexible investment. Operating flexibility is the ratio
of flexible production capacity to flexible plus inflexible production capacity.
Extreme weather is the fraction of days with an extreme temperature in a particular year
and electricity market. A day is classified as extreme if its temperature would belong to
the 1% hottest or coolest days during the base period 1951 to 1980. The non-reported
control variables equal those in Column 3 of Table 3.
T-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by regions and firms are presented
in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, re-
spectively. A detailed description of all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                             39
Table 8: Which role does the forecastability of weather play for investment decisions?

Panel A: average absolute forecast error

Column                                           1          2         3             4
Sample                                          low       high              all

Extreme weathert-1                             0.34*    0.65**    0.28**           0.22*
                                               (1.97)   (2.90)     (2.50)          (1.86)
Forecast errort-1                                                  -0.018         -0.0097
                                                                  (-0.48)         (-0.21)
Extreme weathert-1 x fc errort-1                                  1.35**          1.50**
                                                                  (2.13)          (2.15)

Controls                                         no        no        no             yes
Year-FE                                         yes       yes       yes             yes
Firm x region-FE                                yes       yes       yes             yes
Observations                                   1,161     1,202     2,478           1,966
Adj. R2                                         0.74      0.77      0.76            0.74

Panel B: dispersion of weather forecasts by different providers

Column                                           1          2         3             4
Sample                                          low       high              all

Extreme weathert-1                              0.21    0.63**    0.19**        0.15
                                               (1.09)   (2.52)     (2.20)      (1.52)
Forecast dispersiont-1                                             -0.057      -0.044
                                                                  (-1.27)      (-1.19)
Extreme weathert-1 x fc dispersiont-1                             3.00**      2.91***
                                                                  (2.48)       (2.89)

Year-FE                                         yes       yes       yes             yes
Firm x region-FE                                yes       yes       yes             yes
Observations                                   1,156     1,169     2,478           1,966
Adj. R2                                         0.70      0.76      0.76            0.75
                               continued on next page




                                         40
                                     Table 8 continued

The dependent variable is flexible investment, which is defined as early-stage flexible power
plant construction projects (in megawatt, MW) of firm i in region j (and year t), scaled
by the capacity of existing power plants (in MW) of the same firm i in the same region
j (and year t). Gas, oil, and pump storage power plants are classified as flexible plants.
Extreme weather is the fraction of days with an extreme temperature in a particular year
and electricity market. A day is classified as extreme if its temperature would belong to
the 1% hottest or coolest days during the base period 1951 to 1980. The non-reported
control variables equal those in Column 3 of Table 3.
Weather forecast data obtained from ForecastWatch is available for the U.S. from 2005,
for Canada from 2007, and for most other countries from 2012. Temperature forecasts
from multiple providers are included. Forecast error is the absolute difference between
the average 3-day temperature forecast across all providers and the actual temperature on
that day. Forecast dispersion is the interquartile range of the 3-day temperature forecasts
from all forecast providers for that day.
T-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by regions and firms are presented
in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels,
respectively. A detailed description of all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                             41
Appendix

                                Appendix A: Definition of variables

Variable                 Description

Investment variables

Flexible investment      Planned flexible power plant construction projects (in megawatt, MW) of
                         firm i in region j and year t, scaled by the capacity of existing power plants
                         (in MW) of the same firm i in the same region j and year t. The variable
                         is set to one if planned flexible investments exceeds total installed capacity.
                         Gas, oil, and pump storage plants are classified as flexible plants. Source:
                         Own calculations based on Platts WEPP data.
Inflexible inv.          The construction follows the flexible investment variable. Inflexible power
                         plants are coal and nuclear power plants.
Renewable inv.           The construction follows the flexible investment variable. Renewable power
                         plants are solar and wind plants.
Total investment         The construction follows the flexible investment variable. All planned power
                         plants are considered.

Weather variables

Extreme weather          Extreme weather is the fraction of days with an extreme temperature in a
                         particular year and electricity market. A day is classified as extreme if its
                         temperature would belong to the 1% hottest or coolest days during the base
                         period 1951 to 1980. In the absence of climatic changes, we would expect
                         to classify one percent of days as extremely hot and one percent of day as
                         extremely cold during our sample period, which leads to an expected value
                         for this variable of two percent. Source: Own calculations based on GHCN
                         data.
Extreme weather0.5%      The construction follows the extreme weather variable, but uses the 0.5% of
                         hottest and coolest days during the base period.
Extreme weather5%        The construction follows the extreme weather variable, but uses the 5% of
                         hottest and coolest days during the base period.
Extreme                  The construction follows the extreme weather variable, but uses weekly in-
weather1%,weekly         stead of daily temperatures.
Extreme                  The construction follows the extreme weather variable, but uses only ex-
weather1%,hottest        tremely hot days.
Weather volatility       Standard deviation of daily average temperatures in a market and year.
Weather forecast error   Absolute difference between the average 3-day temperature forecast across
                         all providers and the actual temperature on that day. Forecast data from
                         multiple forecast providers is available for the U.S. from 2005, for Canada
                         from 2007, and for most other countries from 2012. Source: Own calculations
                         based on ForecastWatch data.
Weather fc dispersion    Interquartile range of the 3-day temperature forecasts from all forecast
                         providers for that day.




                                              42
                                 Definition of Variables - continued
Variable                 Description
Electricity variables

Electricity price        Average wholesale market price of electricity in a market and year based on
                         hourly prices. Electricity prices are in US$ per megawatt hour (MWh). Local
                         electricity prices are converted to US$ using daily exchange rates. Source:
                         Own calculations based on hourly electricity prices.
Electricity price vol.   Standard deviation of hourly electricity prices in a market and year, normal-
                         ized by the market's average electricity price level. Source: Own calculations
                         based on hourly electricity prices.
CDD                      Cooling degree days. Calculated as the yearly sum of daily cooling degrees.
                         Cooling degrees is the number of degrees Celsius by which the daily average
                         temperature exceeds the base temperature of 18.3 degree Celsius.
HDD                      Heating degree days. Calculated as the yearly sum of daily heating degrees.
                         Heating degrees is the number of degrees Celsius by which the daily average
                         temperature is below the base temperature of 15.5 degree Celsius.
Residential demand       Electricity sales to residential consumers in MWh per market and year.
                         Source: EIA.
Total demand             Total electricity sales in MWh per market and year. Source: EIA.
Vol(demand)              Standard deviation of the monthly electricity generation in a market and
                         year, normalized by the market's average generation. Source: Own calcula-
                         tions based on EIA data.

Other variables

Market share             Generation capacity of of firm i in region j and year t, scaled by the total in-
                         stalled production capacity in region j and year t. Source: Own calculations
                         based on Platts WEPP data.
Operating flexibility    Flexible production capacity scaled by the sum of flexible and inflexible pro-
                         duction capacity. Source: Own calculations based on Platts WEPP data.
Gas price                Price of natural gas in US$ per MWh. Source: EIA for U.S. states and IEA
                         for all other countries.
Spark spread             Difference between the wholesale price of electricity and the cost of producing
                         electricity using natural gas. Calculated as electricity price in US$ per MWh
                         minus gas price in US$ per MWh scaled by an efficiency factor of 0.5.
EPSI                     Environmental policy stringency index for the energy sector. Source: OECD.
Renewable                Wind and solar generation capacity in a market and year scaled by total
penetration              capacity. Source: Own calculations based on Platts WEPP data.
Assets                   Total assets [wc02999] in US$. Source: Worldscope
Profitability            Earnings before interest and taxes [wc18198] scaled by total assets.
Tobin's Q                Market capitalization of equity [wc08001] plus total liabilities [wc03351]
                         scaled by the sum of total liabilities plus book value of equity [wc03501].
Leverage                 Total debt [wc03255] scaled by the sum of total debt plus book value of
                         equity [wc03501]).
Cash                     Cash and short term investments [wc02001] scaled by total assets.
GDP per capita           GDP per capita (in 2010 US$) in a country and year. Source: Worldbank.
Inflation                Yearly inflation rate in a country. Source: Worldbank.




                                              43
           Appendix B: Robustness tests II/II: alternative specifications

Panel A: alternative measurement of extreme weather

Column                               1           2             3               4

Extreme weather0.5%
               t-1                0.55***
                                   (3.99)
Extreme weather5%
               t-1                            0.34***
                                               (3.88)
Extreme weather1%
               t-1
                  ,hottest
                                                          0.54***
                                                          (4.21)
Extreme weather1%
               t-1
                  ,weekly
                                                                            0.38***
                                                                             (4.12)

Year-FE                             yes         yes           yes             yes
Firm x region-FE                    yes         yes           yes             yes
Observations                       4,931       4,931         4,931           4,931
Adj. R2                            0.56        0.56          0.56            0.56

Panel B: alternative measurement of flexible investment

Column                              1             2          3               4
                                  dummy       log(mw)      number       log(number)

Extreme weathert-1                0.75***     6.40***       0.47**          1.40***
                                   (3.05)      (4.88)       (2.34)           (4.34)

Year-FE                             yes         yes           yes             yes
Firm x region-FE                    yes         yes           yes             yes
Observations                       4,931       4,931         4,931           4,931
Adj. R2                            0.61        0.62          0.54            0.64

Panel C: alternative fixed effects

Column                               1           2             3               4

Extreme weathert-1                0.55***     0.51***      0.50***          0.56***
                                   (2.84)      (3.99)       (3.72)           (3.59)

Year-FE                             yes         yes           yes             yes
Firm-FE                             yes         no            yes             yes
Region-FE                           no          yes           yes             yes
Firm x region-FE                    no          no            no              yes
Year x continent-FE                 no          no            no              yes
Observations                       4,967       4,978         4,967           4,929
Adj. R2                            0.31        0.076         0.35            0.57
                              continued on next page




                                         44
                            Table Appendix B continued


Panel D: alternative clustering of standard errors

Column                                 1           2             3           4
                                     firm        region     region/year   r/y/firm

Extreme weathert-1                 0.51***      0.51***      0.51***      0.51***
                                    (4.40)       (4.03)       (3.92)       (3.95)

Year-FE                               yes          yes         yes           yes
Firm x region-FE                      yes          yes         yes           yes
Observations                         4,931        4,931       4,931         4,931
Adj. R2                              0.56         0.56        0.56          0.56

Panel E: further control variables

Column                                 1           2            3            4

Extreme weathert-1                 0.56***      0.54***      0.57***      0.56***
                                    (3.45)       (3.17)       (3.59)       (3.28)

Stock market to GDPt-1             0.00074*                                -0.23***
                                    (1.92)                                  (-3.32)
Credit to GDPt-1                   -0.00072                                   -0.40
                                    (-1.48)                                 (-1.65)
Log(market production capat-1 )                  -0.29***                  -0.12***
                                                  (-3.83)                   (-11.5)
Market flexibilityt-1                              -0.27                    0.00034
                                                  (-1.07)                    (1.12)
Market aget-1                                   -0.065***                  -0.00043
                                                  (-4.28)                   (-1.05)
Log(firm production capat-1 )                               -0.070***     -0.066***
                                                              (-5.07)       (-4.82)
Market fractiont-1                                            -0.053        -0.053*
                                                              (-1.68)       (-1.75)

Year-FE                               yes          yes         yes           yes
Firm x region-FE                      yes          yes         yes           yes
Observations                         3,564        3,830       3,850         3,550
Adj. R2                              0.57         0.58        0.60          0.60
                                continued on next page




                                           45
                               Table Appendix B continued

The baseline specification is as follows: the dependent variable is flexible investment,
which is defined as early-stage flexible power plant construction projects (in megawatt,
MW) of firm i in region j (and year t), scaled by the capacity of existing power plants (in
MW) of the same firm i in the same region j (and year t). Gas and oil-fired power plants
are classified as flexible plants. Extreme weather is the fraction of days with an extreme
temperature in a particular year and electricity market. A day is classified as extreme if
its temperature would belong to the 1% hottest or coolest days during the base period
1951 to 1980. T-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by regions and firms
are presented in parentheses.
In Panel A, alternative measure for extreme weather are used. Their exact definitions
can be found in Appendix A. In Panel B, alternative proxies for flexible investments are
used. In Column 1, we use a dummy variable which equals one if there is any investment
in flexible plants in of firm i in region j (and year t), and zero otherwise. In Column
2, the unscaled capacity of planned flexible power plants is used as dependent variable.
The dependent variable in Column 3 is the number of planned flexible plants scaled by
the number of existing plants. The logarithm of the unscaled number of plants is used as
dependent variable in Column 4. In Panel C, we use alternative fixed effects. Panel D
shows the results if we cluster standard errors by firm, region, region and year, or region
and year and firm. Further control variables (in addition to those in Table 3) are included
in Panel E.
***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed
description of all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                            46
                  Appendix C: Alternative mechanisms tests

 Panel A: renewable penetration in market

 Column                           1            2             3            4
 Sample                           region-year-level      firm-region-year level
 Dependent                     renewable penetration       flexible investment

 Extreme weathert-1            -0.0075        0.00015
                               (-0.21)        (0.0040)
 Renewable penetrationt-1                                -0.050      -0.046
                                                         (-0.19)     (-0.18)

 Controls                        no            yes        no           yes
 Year-FE                        yes            yes        yes          yes
 Firm x region-FE               yes            yes        yes          yes
 Observations                   554            554       4,908        3,830
 Adj. R2                        0.82           0.83      0.55         0.57

 Panel B: environmental protection stringency

 Column                           1            2             3            4
 Sample                           region-year-level      firm-region-year level
 Dependent                              EPSI               flexible investment

 Extreme weathert-1             0.75            0.87
                               (0.61)          (0.71)
 EPSIt-1                                                 0.0020      -0.0031
                                                         (0.18)      (-0.26)

 Controls                        no            yes        no           yes
 Year-FE                        yes            yes        yes          yes
 Firm x region-FE               yes            yes        yes          yes
 Observations                   402            402       4,496        3,508
 Adj. R2                        0.78           0.78      0.56         0.57

The dependent variable is flexible investment, which is defined as early-
stage flexible power plant construction projects (in megawatt, MW) of firm i
in region j (and year t), scaled by the capacity of existing power plants (in
MW) of the same firm i in the same region j (and year t). Gas, oil, and pump
storage power plants are classified as flexible plants.
Renewable penetration is the generation capacity of wind and solar plants in
a market and year, scaled by the market's total capacity. EPSI is the yearly
environmental policy stringency index for the energy industry as published by
the OECD. The non-reported controls for region-year level regressions are GDP
per capita and inflation. The non-reported controls for the firm-region-year
level regressions equal those in Column 3 of Table 3.
T-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by regions (for region-
year-level analyses) or regions and firms (for firm-region-year level analyses)
are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-,
5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed description of all variables can be
found in Appendix A.



                                         47
