                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  CAPITAL CONTROLS:
                                 THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                          Bilge Erten
                                        Anton Korinek
                                     José Antonio Ocampo

                                      Working Paper 26447
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26447


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




This manuscript was prepared for the Journal of Economic Literature. We thank our editor Steven
Durlauf as well as three anonymous referees for helpful comments and Dennis Quinn for
generously sharing data on capital control indices. Additionally, we are grateful for insightful
discussions with Chang Ma, Olivier Jeanne, Alessandro Rebucci, and Joseph Stiglitz as well as
research assistance by Daniel Harper, Mrithyunjayan Nilayamgode, and Hasan Toprak. Korinek
acknowledges financial support from the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Bilge Erten, Anton Korinek, and José Antonio Ocampo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Controls: Theory and Evidence
Bilge Erten, Anton Korinek, and José Antonio Ocampo
NBER Working Paper No. 26447
November 2019
JEL No. D62,E44,F32,F38,F42,H23

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper synthesizes recent advances in the theoretical and empirical literature on capital
controls. We start by observing that international capital flows have both benefits and costs, but
some of these are not internalized by individual actors and thus constitute externalities. The
theoretical literature has identified pecuniary externalities and aggregate demand externalities that
respectively contribute to financial instability and recessions. These externalities provide a
natural rationale for counter-cyclical capital controls that lean against boom and busts cycles in
international capital flows. The empirical literature has developed several measures of capital
controls to capture different aspects of capital account openness. We evaluate the strengths and
weaknesses of different measures and provide an overview of the empirical findings on the
effectiveness of capital controls in addressing the externalities identified by the theory literature,
i.e. in reducing financial fragility and enhancing macroeconomic stability. We also discuss
strategies to deal with the endogeneity of capital controls in such statistical exercises. We
conclude by providing an overview of the historical and current debates on the role of capital
controls in macroeconomic management and their relationship to the academic literature.

Bilge Erten                                       José Antonio Ocampo
Northeastern University                           Columbia University
Economics Department                              New York, NY 10027
Boston, MA 02115                                  ocampo.joseantonio@yahoo.com
erten.bilge@gmail.com

Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall 246
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22904
and NBER
anton@korinek.com




Teaching materials including slides are available at http://www.korinek.com/capitalcontrols
   Integration into global capital markets exposes economies to boom and bust
cycles in international capital ows.          In good times, capital inows often ge-
nerate overheating; in bad times, the reversal of capital ows often triggers
recessions and nancial crises. It has been documented that increased capital
market liberalization is associated with increased nancial and macroeconomic
instability (Reinhart and Rogo, 2009; Gallagher, Grith-Jones, and Ocampo,
2012). Given the high welfare costs of nancial crises, policymakers in a number
of emerging markets have responded by actively managing international capital
ows, for example by imposing counter-cyclical capital controls that are tig-
htened during booms and relaxed during busts (Ostry et al.                 2010; Ocampo,
2017, ch. 4). In earlier decades, the economic literature had little guidance to
oer to policymakers on why it may be desirable to intervene in the free mar-
ket equilibrium, how to optimally regulate capital ows, and what the welfare
implications of international spillovers from such policies may be.
   We synthesize the recent theoretical and empirical literature on capital con-
trols and discuss to what extent the resulting framework can provide useful
guidance to academics and policymakers on how to optimally regulate inter-
national capital ows.        Recent theoretical advances show that private capital
ows may lead to macroeconomic externalities, i.e. externalities that increase
nancial instability and interfere with aggregate demand management at the
macroeconomic level. A novel strand of literature demonstrates that these ex-
ternalities lead private agents to over-borrow and take on excessive risks. The
theoretical literature has proposed that these externalities can be corrected by
counter-cyclical capital account interventions. In this article, we integrate these
theoretical predictions with recent empirical literature that has investigated the
eectiveness of capital account regulations in reducing nancial fragility and
enhancing macroeconomic stability. Finally, we evaluate the policy implications
for how emerging market economies can incorporate capital account regulations
into their policy tool kits, and we discuss whether there is a need for global
economic coordination to reduce their spillover eects across countries.
                                                                                   1
   An initial comment on terminology is in order. The term capital controls
refers to interventions in the capital account, which is the part of the balance
of payments that records nancial transactions between domestic and foreign
actors. Capital controls is also the term used by the IMF Articles of Agreement
for such interventions. Some of us prefer, however, the term capital account
regulations, and indeed they are now widely considered part of the family of
macroprudential regulations.         Still other authors refer to capital controls as
capital account management, and the IMF has recently called them capital
ow management (CFM) measures in its               Institutional View   on this issue (IMF,
2012). We will use the terms synonymously throughout this paper.
   The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 examines re-
cent theoretical advances in how capital controls can be used to correct for
macroeconomic externalities.         Section 2 presents an overview of the varieties

  1 For   complementary surveys of the literature, see also Jeanne, Subramanian, and William-
son (2012) and Rebucci and Ma (2019).




                                              2
of capital control measures and reviews the empirical evidence on their eecti-
veness. Section 3 reviews historical and current policy debates on the role of
capital controls in macroeconomic management and their relationship to the
academic literature, and Section 4 provides some brief conclusions.



1 Theory: Externalities of Capital Flows
The conventional wisdom of the 1990s was that all countries should aim to li-
beralize their capital accounts, based on a perhaps naïve application of the rst
welfare theorem to international capital ows. In stylized textbook models, ex-
emplied by Obstfeld and Rogo (1996), openness to international borrowing
and lending generates the traditional gains from trade on both sides of the tran-
saction. In the recipient country, capital inows can be invested in productive
investments, or alternatively, allow domestic agents to smooth their consump-
tion.   In the source country, lenders earn higher returns to their capital and
achieve greater diversication of their assets and liabilities. In addition to these
neoclassical benets, foreign investment, especially in the form of FDI, may
lead to technology transfer, and if this occurs in the nancial system, enhance
nancial development. The main implication of this view is that the presence
of capital controls that restrict such mutually-benecial transactions would re-
duce economic eciency and welfare. Following this conventional wisdom, many
economists at the time argued that all countries should aim to liberalize their
capital accounts (see e.g. Dornbusch, 1998; Summers, 2000; and Fischer, 2003).
    The East Asian crisis of 199798 thoroughly shook the mainstream view
prevailing at the time by showing that large private capital ows can render even
relatively well-governed economies vulnerable to catastrophic nancial crises.
This triggered a growing literature that emphasizes how free capital ows may
magnify market imperfections that lead to instability and crisis (Bhagwati, 1998;
Rodrik, 1998; and Stiglitz, 2002). In the early 2000s several countries that had
liberalized their capital account began to reintroduce capital controls (see Figure
5 below and Klein, 2012, Table A1). This process gained momentum after the
onset of the 200809 Global Financial Crises,
                                                         2 when a number of emerging
market economies, including Brazil, Korea, and Peru imposed new restrictions
on capital inows or tightened existing capital account regulations to reduce the
risks created by currency appreciation and asset price ination.
    Over the past two decades, a growing number of theoretical studies have
provided micro-foundations for why capital controls may enhance welfare. The
common theme of this strand of literature is that capital ows may generate
externalities that private agents do not internalize. The main categories of such
externalities emphasized by the literature are pecuniary externalities, associated
with nancial instability, and aggregate demand externalities, associated with
unemployment. Such externalities induce private agents to borrow too much,

   2 From   the perspective of emerging developing countries, the 200809 crisis should be more
adequately termed the North-Atlantic Financial Crisis, as it centered in the United States and
Western Europe.




                                               3
to buy too little insurance or take on excessive risk, and to borrow excessively
short-term.
      A distinct advantage of an externality view of capital controls is that it ap-
plies the lessons of modern welfare economics to the domain of international
capital ows (see e.g. Korinek, 2011b).           Earlier debates on the desirability of
capital controls were concerned with broad questions that are dicult to ans-
wer in general such as are international capital ows desirable or not?                     By
contrast, the literature on externalities emphasizes that there are clearly both
benets and costs to international capital ows, but that some of the benets
or costs may be external to the individual decision maker. If the externalities
of capital ows are correctly identied and well-regulated, it can be left to the
market to determine the cost/benet analysis and decide how to allocate capital,
combining the benets of thoughtful regulation with the power of markets. In a
sense, the literature on the externalities of capital ows thus has a more modest
goal: instead of providing a comprehensive analysis and evaluation of the over-
all benets and costs of international capital ows, it identies and evaluates
specic external benets or costs, and leaves the comprehensive evaluation of
the private benets and costs of capital ows to the market.
      In the following subsections, we rst lay out a baseline model in which mar-
kets are perfect so there is no case for intervention. We next introduce a generic
externality to illustrate how to design capital controls that alleviate externali-
ties in a Pigouvian fashion. Then we will describe simple models of pecuniary
externalities and aggregate demand externalities that motivate capital controls
to mitigate nancial instability and aggregate demand problems.



1.1 Baseline setup
Assume a small open economy with two time periods                     t = 0, 1,   a unit mass
i  [0, 1]   of identical domestic consumers and large international lenders. An
individual domestic consumer       i   has preferences


                                  U i = u ci      i
                                           0 + u c1

and receives endowments of traded goods               yT,0   and   yT,1 .   She smooths con-
sumption by purchasing      bi   units of discount bonds from international lenders.
International lenders are large in comparison to the small open economy so they
demand or supply bonds perfectly elastically at a gross interest rate               R =1+r
that we assume satises      R = 1.       The domestic consumer's budget constraints
are


                                    ci           i
                                     0 = yT,0 - b /R                                       (1)

                                    ci
                                     1   = yT,1 + bi
                                                                                           (2)


bi < 0   reects period 0 borrowing, i.e. capital inows from international lenders
in period 0 and outows to repay them in period 1; the reverse holds for                bi > 0.
Since there is a single representative consumer, the saving/borrowing decision
bi   also maps directly into the current account of the economy. Saving              bi /R > 0

                                             4
generates a current account and trade surplus of                  bi /R > 0     in period 0 and a
                                                  i
current account and trade decit of               b    in period 1, and vice versa if       bi < 0.
    We denote the period 0 optimization problem of consumer                       i   as


                         max
                          i
                             U i = max
                                    i
                                       u yT,0 - bi /R + V bi                                         (3)
                          b              b

where period 1 continuation utility of consumer                i for given borrowing bi       is given
by the value function
                                     V bi = u yT,1 + bi
All our models of externalities below will build on the basic structure of optimi-
zation problem (3), but dierent economic environments will map into dierent
continuation utility functions        V (·).
    The consumer's optimality condition gives rise to the Euler equation


                                      u ci
                                         0 = RVb b
                                                  i
                                                                                                     (4)

                                                  =u      ci
                                                           1

which implies perfect consumption smoothing. Together with the budget con-
straints, this yields    ci    i
                          0 = c1 = (yT,1 + RyT,0 ) / (1 + R)           and    bi = ci
                                                                                    1 - yT,1 .


Welfare Analysis              From the perspective of a domestic policymaker who de-
termines the external bond allocation of the economy, domestic welfare is given
by the optimization problem


                              W = max u (yT,0 - B/R) + V (B )
                                     B

The only dierence from the individual consumer problem is that the policyma-
ker chooses aggregate bond holdings              B    of the economy instead of the individual
bond holdings      bi   of consumer      i.   However, the problem yields the same Euler
equation (4), the same borrowing choice and the same consumption allocation
for domestic consumers.            This is unsurprising since there are no market im-
perfections in our baseline setup.
                                              3 The decentralized allocation is thus socially
ecient and policy intervention cannot achieve a Pareto improvement compa-
red to the decentralized allocation. In the following subsections, we will break
this result and introduce externalities that provide a motive for capital controls
rooted in economic theory.



1.2 Introducing Externalities
We introduce a generic externality into our baseline setup to illustrate how to
employ capital controls to internalize externalities. Assume that an aggregate
level of bond holdings        B   imposes an externality        (B )   with    (B ) > 0     on consu-
mers in period 1, which is not internalized by the individual consumer. (Since

   3 More   specically, markets are complete, all agents are price-takers and preferences are
locally non-satiated, satisfying the conditions of the rst welfare theorem.




                                                      5
debt corresponds to negative bond holdings, this implies that the marginal so-
cial benet of additional borrowing is negative,                 - (B ) < 0.)   We will provide
detailed micro-foundations for externalities of debt in the context of pecuniary
externalities and of aggregate demand eects below.
                                                                    4 For now, we capture the
externality by the generic term             (B )   to describe how to analyze the externali-
ties of borrowing in the simplest possible setting. The externality modies the
period 1 budget constraint of consumers to


                                        ci           i
                                         1 = yT,1 + b +  (B )

The continuation utility of consumer               i   in period 1 is then given by the value
function
                               V bi ; B = u yT,1 + bi +  (B )                              (5)

Notice that consumer          i's   value function now depends both on her individual
bond holdings      bi ,   which determine her repayment, and on aggregate bond hol-
dings in the economy, which determine the externality. Even though each con-
sumer experiences the externality            (B ), she rationally recognizes that aggregate
                                                                             1
bond holdings are the result of their collective behavior             B = 0 bi di, and the
                                                                               j
contribution of each individual            consumer j is negligible, dB/db = 0. As a
result, she simply takes aggregate bond holdings as given in her optimization
problem. An individual consumer solves optimization problem (3) with this new
value function and arrives at the Euler equation




                                     u ci        i
                                        0 = RVb b ; B                                      (6)

                                              =u        ci
                                                         1

    Both lines are analogous to the Euler equation (4) in our baseline model.
As a result, domestic agents smooth consumption as in our baseline model.
Aggregate consumption and borrowing are given by the system of equations
c0 = c1 = (yT,1 +  (B ) + RyT,0 ) / (1 + R)              and   B = c1 - yT,1 -  (B ).

Welfare Analysis             A policymaker, by contrast, internalizes the externalities
of international capital ows and solves


                            W = max u (yT,0 - B/R) + V (B ; B )                            (7)
                                    B

which yields the optimality condition


                             u (c0 ) = R [Vb (B ; B ) + VB (B ; B )]                       (8)

                                     = u (c1 ) [1 +  (B )]
  4 Additional   reasons why foreign borrowing may impose externalities on consumers include
negative eects of capital inows on competitiveness, and the risk that high levels of foreign
borrowing may give rise to bailouts that are ultimately borne by consumers.




                                                   6
The partial derivative with respect to the rst argument                   Vb bi ; B = u (c1 )
reects the direct benet of an additional unit of bond holdings, and the partial
derivative with respect to the second argument                VB bi ; B = u (c1 )  (B ) >
0   reects the marginal externality cost of aggregate bond holdings.                        In the
planner's Euler equation 8, note that          bi = B        since the planner internalizes
that she simultaneously chooses both individual and aggregate bond holdings.
The planner's Euler equation reects that there is an extra benet to holding
more bonds (and borrowing less); her optimal allocation thus satises                     c0 < c1 .
Comparing the allocations chosen by the planner and by individual consumers,
it is clear that the decentralized allocation exhibits excessive borrowing and
consumption in period 0.
     Figure 1 depicts both the laissez-faire equilibrium of the economy and the
planner's allocation in a demand/supply diagram of foreign bond holdings                      bi =
B. For a small open economy, supply of bonds is perfectly elastic at the exoge-
nous discount price 1/R, as indicated by the line S . The demand of an individual
consumer   i                                        Di that traces out the
               is depicted by the downward-sloping curve
                                             i      i
consumer's marginal rate of substitution u c1 /u c0 as a function of the
               i                                                        i
bond position b . The equilibrium level of bond holdings, indicated by b ,
occurs where supply equals demand or, analytically, at the point where


                                   1           u ci 1
                                           =                                                   (9)
                                   R           u ci
                                                  0
                                  supply
                                                   demand

The planner's eective demand curve accounts for the externality and can be
represented by tracing out    u ci                 i
                                 1 [1 +  (B )] /u c0               as a function of the ag-
gregate bond position    B.   The planner's optimum, indicated by                 B,    occurs at
the point where
                              1   u ci
                                     1 [1 +  (B )]
                                =                                                             (10)
                              R       u ci0

     The planner can implement the optimal allocation in the economy using
capital controls that take the form of either quantity or price regulations.


Capital Controls: Quantity Regulation                       Denoting by   B   the solution to
the policymaker's optimization problem (7), the optimum allocation is restored
by imposing the quantity limit
                                       bi  B                                                  (11)

on individual consumers, as indicated in Figure 1. (Recall that              bi   and   B   denote
bond holdings, which are negative in the case of borrowing; the constraint can
thus be read as instructing consumers not to borrow more than                       -B       units
of discount bonds.) If the capital account is closed to private transactions, a
similar eect is obtained if a government entity, for example the central bank,
accumulates the bond position     B,   for example in the form of reserves.




                                               7
                 Figure 1: Demand and supply for foreign bonds



Capital Controls: Price Regulation                Equivalently, the policymaker may
impose a tax wedge        on the borrowing/saving decision such that the consumer
obtains only a fraction     (1 -  )    of the funds borrowed or pays only a fraction
(1 -  )   of the funds saved. We assume that the revenue from the tax is rebated
to consumers (or if      B > 0,       the revenue required for the implied subsidy is
raised from consumers) as a lump-sum transfer          T0 =  B/R.   This changes the
period 0 budget constraint to


                            ci                   i
                             0 = yT,0 - (1 -  ) b /R - T0                        (12)


As can be seen from this budget constraint, the specic interpretation of          
depends on the signs of    bi    and is illustrated in Table 1: if the country is a
                                and
               i
net borrower, b < 0, then  > 0 represents a tax on foreign borrowing, or a tax
on capital inows and, conversely,  < 0 represents a subsidy to capital inows;
                                 i
if the consumer is a net saver, b > 0, then  > 0 represents a subsidy to capital
outows whereas  < 0 is a tax on outows.


                                               >0               <0
              bi > 0   (saving)          outow subsidy      outow tax
              bi < 0   (borrowing)         inow tax       inow subsidy


                   Table 1: Interpretation of capital control    

   Solving the analogous optimization problem to (3) with the new budget
constraint (12), the consumer arrives at the Euler equation


                            (1 -  ) u (c0 ) = RVb bi ; B                         (13)




                                              8
Combining the Euler equations of the policymaker (8) and of the consumer (13),
we see that the two allocations coincide if we set the tax rate on the consumer
to
                                        RVB (·)
                                    =                                              (14)
                                        u (c0 )
This tax rate makes the consumer internalize the externality of an additional
unit of bond holdings   VB (·) that is not internalized by the individual consumers.
In our specic example here, the optimal tax rate is

                                    u (c1 )
                                =           ·  (B ) > 0
                                    u (c0 )
Intuitively, this tax rate signals the social benet of an additional unit of bond
holdings (or equivalently, the social cost of an additional unit of borrowing)
to the individual consumer. In Figure 1, the tax rate         (normalized by       )    is
given by the vertical dierence between the planner's eective demand curve
and the demand curve of individual consumers, as can be seen from comparing
expressions (9) and (10).


Multiple State of Nature          Our model of externalities is set in perfect fo-
resight so far, but it is easy to generalize it to multiple states of nature, with
either complete or incomplete nancial markets. Consider an economy in which
there are multiple states of nature   in period 1, together with a probabi-
                P ( ) that denes an expectations operator E [·]. Any variables
lity distribution
that depend on the state of nature are indexed by  . For example, consider
an economy with two states  = {L, H } in which there are externalities from
                                   L           H
borrowing in the low state only so B (·) > 0 = B (·). We can then construct
                     i
value functions V   b ; B for    along the same lines as (5).
     If consumers face complete nancial markets, trading w.l.o.g.           with risk-
neutral international lenders, then they choose their security holdings          bi,   for
each state separately by solving the optimization problem


            Ui =     max     u yT,0 - E bi, /R +  E V  bi, ; B 
                    {bi, }


A policymaker would solve the analogous optimization problem for            bi, = B 
                                                              
and would arrive at state-contingent quantity limits      B      or taxes on capital
ows       analogous to equations (11) and (14).
     Alternatively, if consumers can only trade uncontingent bonds     ¯
                                                                       bi   with inter-
national lenders, their optimization problem is


                    U i = max u yT,0 - ¯
                                       bi /R +  E V  ¯    ¯
                                                     bi ; B
                           ¯
                           bi

This similarly gives rise to an optimal quantity limit    ¯
                                                          B   or tax rate    ¯   on un-
contingent bond holdings.
     A common view is that capital ows and repayments in low states of na-
ture, during recessions or crises, create negative externalities of the type that is



                                          9
captured in this model or in the ensuing subsections. By contrast, capital ows
and repayments in good states of nature are viewed as considerably more be-
nign. This creates a compelling case for dierentiating capital controls based
on the risk characteristics of the nancial ows that they apply to (see Korinek,
2010, 2018).



1.3 Balance Sheet Eects, Pecuniary Externalities, and
    Overborrowing
Much of the attention of the recent theoretical literature motivating capital con-
trols has focused on pecuniary externalities that arise from balance sheet eects.
At the center of most recent nancial crises were private sector borrowers who
had taken on excessive leverage  in contrast with an earlier literature that
focused on crises that resulted from awed government policies such as incon-
sistent exchange rate regimes (see e.g. Krugman, 1979). When a large number
of borrowers in an economy experience nancial diculty at the same time and
engage in deleveraging, their collective actions lead to asset price declines and
exchange rate depreciations, which frequently reduce the value of the assets on
borrowers' balance sheets and/or increase the value of their liabilities.
                                                                                      5 As a
result, the creditworthiness of borrowers declines further, leading to a feedback
loop of further deleveraging, asset price and exchange rate depreciations, and
balance sheet eects. In the context of international capital ows, this mecha-
nism of nancial amplication was rst described informally in Calvo (1998) as
sudden stops, and more formally by Krugman (1999a).
                                                                     6


Model of Pecuniary Externalities                To capture such nancial amplication
eects as well as the resulting externalities, we consider a variant of our baseline
model with three time periods, loosely based on Korinek (2011b). Consumers
value only traded goods in the rst and last period but a composite              ci
                                                                                 1   of traded
and non-traded goods in the intermediate period 1,


                    U i =u ci        i   2   i
                            T,0 + u c1 +  u cT,2                                         (15)


                          where       ci      i      i
                                       1 = c cT,1 , cN,1 =       ci    i
                                                                  T,1 cN,1               (16)


Consumers receive exogenous endowments of all goods                 yT,t and yN,1 where we
normalize    yN,1 = 1.   They trade discount bonds       bi
                                                          1   and   bi
                                                                     2 that pay o one unit
of traded good in periods 1 and 2 respectively, giving rise to a period 0 budget

  5 These   valuation eects of assets and liabilities on borrowers' balance sheets, which in
turn aect the nancial health of borrowers and have real eects because of nancial market
imperfections, are what the literature calls balance sheet eects.
  6 Krugman    was also the rst to suggest that there was an externality at work when there is
a currency mis-match between assets and liabilities, observing that Loosely speaking, there
appears to be a sort of external diseconomy to borrowing in foreign currencies (p. 21 in
Krugman, 1999a).




                                              10
constraint equivalent to (1) and the period 1 and 2 budget constraints


                            ci         i      i                        i
                             T,1 + pN cN,1 + b2 /R = yT,1 + pN yN,1 + b1                       (17)

                                                 ci
                                                  T,2   = yT,2 +   bi
                                                                    2

where     pN    is the relative price of non-traded goods in terms of traded goods (or
real exchange rate) in period 1 and debt is denoted in traded goods.
                                                                                       7 To capture
balance sheet eects in a simple manner, we introduce a nancial constraint of
the general form,
                                            bi
                                             2 /R  - (pN )                                     (18)

which satises        0 <  (pN ) < 1, i.e. the maximum amount of borrowing is capped
by a function         (·) that is increasing in pN . This constraint reects that a lower
value of non-traded goods reduces the value of collateral such as land held by
borrowers and therefore lowers the amount of debt                       -bi
                                                                          2 /R   that borrowers can
take on. A particularly common version of this constraint in the literature (see
e.g. Mendoza, 2005; Korinek, 2007, 2018; Bianchi, 2011; Benigno et al., 2013) is


                                      bi
                                       2 /R  - [yT,1 + pN yN,1 ]                               (19)


In this version of the constraint, the derivative             (pN )  yN,1 =  is a constant
and explicit solutions can be obtained for our model. The precise form of the
constraint is irrelevant; what matters for our results here is that borrowing
capacity depends positively on the level of the real exchange rate, as suggested
by empirical evidence.
    We solve the model via backward induction and focus on equilibrium in
periods 1 and 2 rst. Consumers accordingly solve the period 1 optimization
problem

                                                           i
                   max           u   ci    i
                                      T,1 cN,1 + u yT,2 + b2               s.t. (17), (18)
               ci      i     i
                T ,1 ,cN,1 ,b2


with optimality conditions


                                       ui         i
                                        T,1 = Ru cT,2 + 
                                                         i

                                        pN = ci     i
                                              T,1 /cN,1                                        (20)


where     ui             i
           T,1 = u (·) /cT,1          and   i   is the shadow price on the nancial constraint
(18).
    In a symmetric equilibrium, the second optimality condition (20) toget-
her with market clearing for non-traded goods                      ci
                                                                    N,1 = yN,1 = 1     implies that
pN = cT,1 ,       i.e. the real exchange rate is fully determined by aggregate traded
consumption.           When the nancial constraint is binding, traded consumption
cT,1   is pinned down by the period 1 budget constraint together with the binding
borrowing constraint,
                                      cT,1 = yT,1 + B1 +  (cT,1 )
   7 We   will introduce a nominal exchange rate in the following section and discuss the rela-
tionship to the real exchange rate studied here.




                                                    11
This xed point equation implicitly denes a function         cT,1 (B1 ) and by extension
pN (B1 ) = cT,1 (B1 )    with slope

                                                 1
                                pN (B1 ) =
                                             1 -  (pN )
The consumer's value function can then be expressed as


V i bi
     1 ; B1 = max
               i
                  u         yT,1 + bi    i               i  i i
                                    1 - b2 /R +u yT,2 + b2 + b2 /R +  (pN (B1 ))
                 b2
                                                                                   (21)
Using this value function, the period 0 borrowing choices of individual con-
sumers are described by the same Euler equation (6) as in our generic model
of externalities.     Since the value function satises    Vb (·) = uT,1   for individual
consumers, they fully smooth traded consumption between periods 0 and 1.
   We analyze the problem of a constrained planner in the spirit of Stiglitz
(1982) to analyze the constrained eciency of the borrowing decisions of indi-
vidual consumers. In other words, we ask if a planner (or policymaker) who is
subject to the same nancial constraint as individual consumers would choose
the same allocation. This reects the problem faced by nancial regulators who
can regulate individual borrowing decisions but cannot lift the constraints that
the market imposes on individuals for incentive, selection, or enforcement re-
asons. In other words, in an environment with nancial constraints, it would
be an unfair exercise to compare the allocations of constrained consumers with
the rst-best allocations that could be obtained by a planner who does not face
any nancial constraints.       In the given setup, the problem of the constrained
planner also coincides with that of a Ramsey planner who is restricted to a
single instrument  a tax that allows her to intervene in the borrowing choices
of individual consumers.
   Formally, the period 1 problem of the constrained planner is to solve problem
(21) while internalizing that aggregate allocations coincide with the allocations
chosen by individual agents,      B1 = bi
                                        1    etc.   In period 0, this gives rise to the
same Euler equation (8) as that of the planner in the previous section. However,
the envelope condition of the constrained planner is modied  she internalizes
that there is an additional eect from borrowing, which reects a pecuniary
externality and is captured by

                              VB (·) =  (pN ) · pN (B1 )
Intuitively, a marginal increase in the country's aggregate bond holdings in pe-
riod 0 (i.e. a reduction in borrowing) increases domestic traded consumption in
period 1, which appreciates the real exchange rate by    pN and relaxes the con-
straint by      which has shadow value    = uT,1 - u (cT,2 ) for the representative
consumer.     When the constraint is    binding so  > 0, the externality term is
positive   VB (·) > 0.   In short, less borrowing in period 0 mitigates the balance
sheet eects and nancial amplication dynamics in period 1.
   Following equations (11) and (14), the policymaker can restore constrained
eciency by imposing a quantity limit on borrowing or a tax that reects the



                                            12
magnitude of the externality in period 0,

                                         (pN ) · pN (B1 )
                                   =
                                          u (cT,0 )

Literature        A rich body of literature has employed models of balance sheet
eects and nancial amplication to capture emerging market nancial crises.
Aside from Krugman (1999a), Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee (2000, 2001),
Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2004) and Mendoza (2010) also develop inu-
ential emerging market models of balance sheet eects.
                                                                     8 Chang and Velasco
(2000a, 2000b, 2001) develop crisis models based on nancial fragility and runs,
in which the exchange rate also plays an important role.
    Following this body of work, a growing number of papers have investigated
the normative implications of nancial crises that involve balance sheet eects,
as illustrated in our simple model above, focusing on pecuniary externalities.
The central insight of this literature is that private agents do not internalize
how their joint behavior aects market prices such as exchange rates or asset
prices, which interact with nancial constraints. As a result, individual private
agents impose externalities on each other. The externalities are pecuniary ex-
ternalities since they occur via movements in market prices such as asset prices
and exchange rates. In a standard Arrow-Debreu model with complete markets,
the rst welfare theorem tells us that pecuniary externalities do not matter for
Pareto eciency because price changes simply generate wealth eects that are
equivalent to lump sum transfers across agents. However, when nancial mar-
kets are imperfect, e.g.        due to balance sheet eects, pecuniary externalities
generally lead to constrained Pareto inecient outcomes, i.e. a constrained so-
cial planner or policymaker who takes the nancial market imperfections as
given, can coordinate the behavior of private agents in a way that generates a
Pareto improvement.
                          9
    Dávila and Korinek (2018) distinguish pecuniary externalities in economies
with nancial imperfections into two categories:
    First, distributive pecuniary externalities arise when risk-sharing is incom-
plete and a planner can aect market prices in a way that achieves a wealth
redistribution between agents that improves risk-sharing. For example, Cabal-
lero and Krishnamurthy (2003) and Lorenzoni (2008) show that a planner who
restricts dollar borrowing or leverage, respectively, mitigates exchange rate and

   8 In   the context of traditional macroeconomics, this type of adverse feedback mechanism
between prices and nancial constraints has long been recognized, dating back to Fisher
(1933)'s description of debt deation during the Great Depression, and including formal mo-
dels by Bernanke and Gertler (1985, 1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Bernanke, Gertler,
and Gilchrist (1999) under the term nancial accelerator or nancial amplication.
   9 The   general insight that pecuniary externalities may lead to constrained Pareto inecient
outcomes has been observed e.g.      by Hart (1975), Stiglitz (1982), Greenwald and Stiglitz
(1986), and Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986).        However, in principle, the pecuniary
externalities could go in either direction, as emphasized e.g. by Dávila and Korinek (2018).
One of the contributions of the body of literature on balance sheet crises and pecuniary
externalities is to establish that under broad circumstances, the direction of externalities that
arise during nancial crises is quite predictable.




                                               13
asset price declines in crisis states, which improves the terms-of-trade of constrai-
ned borrowers who engage in re sales and thereby leads to better risk-sharing
between borrowers and lenders. Caballero and Lorenzoni (2014) identify distri-
butive externalities between entrepreneurs and workers in a small open economy
that create a case both for ex-ante and ex-post intervention.
   Second, collateral pecuniary externalities (or, more generally, price-in-the-
constraint externalities) arise when market prices such as asset prices or ex-
change rates show up in a binding nancial constraint and a planner can engage
in actions that increase the price and relax the nancial constraint.         This is
the case in our simple example above, in which the exchange rate shows up in
the nancial constraint. Korinek (2007, 2011a) shows that such collateral ex-
ternalities may induce emerging market borrowers to take on too much foreign
currency debt.   Jeanne and Korinek (2010) and Bianchi (2011) observe that
they may lead to excessive borrowing in general.        Korinek (2011b, 2018) de-
monstrates that they generate excessive risk-taking and under-insurance  ows
that increase risk-sharing, such as FDI, involve negligible externalities, whereas
uncontingent debt ows, especially if denominated in foreign currency, lead to
substantial externalities.   Benigno et al. (2013) introduce an additional deci-
sion margin, production, in a similar setting and show that it is also distorted,
providing an additional policy target. Benigno et al. (2016, 2019) demonstrate
that a planner can relieve the nancial constraint and thus resolve any collate-
ral pecuniary externalities if she has sucient instruments, in particular if she
can set the exchange rate to a level such that the nancial constraint is slack
without introducing other distortions in the economy. Importantly, these three
papers study the policy options of a planner who can intervene during crises
episodes, not just ex-ante before crises occur. In a model of endogenous growth,
Ma (2018) nds that collateral externalities also lead to welfare losses because
of excessively volatile growth.



1.4 Recessions, Aggregate Demand Externalities, and Over-
    borrowing
Another strand of literature has focused on how capital ows in open economies
may generate externalities by interfering with aggregate demand management.
Such aggregate demand externalities may arise whenever aggregate demand
diers from aggregate supply, for example because an economy features sticky
prices that give rise to non-clearing of markets (see for example, Woodford, 2004,
and Galí, 2015). When markets do not clear, aggregate demand  like prices
in the previous section  is an equilibrium object that individual private agents
take as given. This implies that individual agents rationally do not internalize
their contribution to aggregate demand, generating scope for externalities.
   International capital ows may give rise to aggregate demand externalities
because they reallocate spending between domestic and foreign agents who have
dierent consumption baskets and by implication dierent marginal propensities
to consume (MPC). Specically, domestic agents have a higher MPC on domes-
tic goods than foreigners.    Capital inows thus generally lead to an increase



                                         14
in domestic aggregate demand and outows to a reduction in domestic aggre-
gate demand. If other tools for macroeconomic management are imperfect, for
example because emerging economies face limited autonomy in monetary and
exchange rate policy and the use of scal policy is costly, then these changes
in demand have real implications and generate externalities. As we will show
in the following example, a constrained planner who internalizes these eects
can generally improve welfare by coordinating the nancial market transactions
of private agents so as to improve aggregate demand management, for example
by curbing borrowing and risk-taking of domestic agents during booms so as to
improve domestic aggregate demand management in future periods.


Model of Aggregate Demand Externalities                          We extend our baseline setup
by introducing non-traded goods and nominal price stickiness to study aggregate
demand externalities. We assume a unit mass of domestic consumer-producers
who value both traded and non-traded goods in period 1,


                   U i = u ci         i
                            T,0 +  u c1 - d
                                                         i


                              where        ci      i      i
                                            1 = c cT,1 , cN,1 =       ci    i
                                                                       T,1 cN,1


ci
 1   is a period 1 consumption index that combines traded and non-traded goods
                        i
as in (16), and    d          is a disutility term for period 1 labor eort. Consumer-
producers obtain a traded goods endowment               yT,1 .   The non-traded good is pro-
                        i         i
duced using labor      yN, 1 =        . The rst-best allocation in the economy (denoted
by stars) is described by the two optimality conditions


                                       u c             
                                          T,0 = uT,1 (c1 )
                                       uN,1 (c        
                                              1) = d ( )                                       (22)


where we use the notation             uT,1 (·) = u (c (cT,1 , cN,1 )) /cT,1       and   uN,1 (·) =
u (·) /cN,1 .     Note that this allocation could be decentralized by setting the
relative price of non-traded goods in period 1 to the marginal rate of substitution
(MRS) between the two goods in the rst-best,                 p                  i     i
                                                              N = uN,1 /uT,1 = cT,1 /cN,1 .


Aggregate Demand Eects                    However, to create a role for aggregate demand
eects, we introduce price stickiness in the economy. We normalize the nominal
                                                  
prices of traded goods in both periods 0 and 1 toPT   1 in foreign currency
                    
so they are PT = EPT in domestic currency, where E is the country's exchange
rate. Furthermore, we assume that the nominal price of the non-traded good
is xed at    PN = 1         because of price stickiness in period 1.
                                                                          10 So far these as-
sumptions are not restrictive  if the exchange rate was exible, the rst-best

  10 To relate this setup to the model of pecuniary externalities in the previous section,   observe
that we can express our measure of the real exchange rate there as       pN = PN /PT = PN /E ;
the real exchange rate is lowered by depreciations in the nominal     exchange rate E .




                                                15
allocation described above can be implemented by allowing the exchange rate
to move to the level that clears the market.
                                                          11
     However, to capture aggregate demand eects, we also assume that the ex-
change rate is pegged at             E =1    in this section. Furthermore, we assume that
consumer-producer            i    cannot consume her own non-traded goods production.
Instead, she agrees to produce and sell the quantity demanded at the prevailing
price to a random consumer               j = i       to whom she is matched.                  This genera-
tes a motive for agents to trade in the market for non-traded goods so that
the market price and demand conditions for the good matter.      For given de-
                                                                                        12
        j
mand cN,1 by consumer j , consumer-producer i thus provides
                                                               i
                                                                  = cj
                                                                     N,1 units
of labor to produce the output that is demanded. In a symmetric equilibrium,
 i        j
yN, 1 = cN,1 = cN,1 i, j . In summary, whenever relative prices do not corre-
spond to the rst-best MRS, the production of non-traded goods adjusts to
re-equilibrate the economy.
     The optimization problem of consumer                 i   is


                             bi                                        i
    max           u yT,0 -          + u       ci      i
                                               T,1 · cN,1 - d                                           (23)
    i  i
bi ,cT ,1 ,cN,1              R
                                              s.t.   PT ci         i         i      i      i
                                                         T,1 + PN cN,1 = PT yT,1 + b + PN yN,1
                                                                                                        (24)
                                                                i          i
                                                               yN, 1   =       = cN,1

The last equality in the third line captures our assumptions on how the market
equilibrates. The budget constraint (24) is equivalent to constraint (17) multi-
plied by the nominal price of traded goods                PT = E .         We combine consumer            i's
optimality conditions on traded and non-traded consumption to nd


                                              ci
                                               T,1   PN
                                                   =                                                    (25)
                                              ci
                                               N,1   PT

Since     PN = PT       due to price stickiness, consumers demand traded and non-
traded goods in equal proportion. In a symmetric equilibrium, the non-traded
output of consumer-producer              i   is determined by aggregate demand for non-
                                                                                                     i
traded goods, which in turn equals aggregate traded consumption,                                    yN, 1 =
cN,1 = cT,1 .        Dropping non-traded consumption and production from the pe-
riod 1 budget constraint, we further nd that aggregate traded consumption is
cT,1 = yT,1 + B .       In combination,


                                       cN,1 = cT,1 = yT,1 + B                                           (26)

  11 The   New Keynesian literature typically assumes that prices are set optimally but subject
to certain adjustment frictions that generate suboptimal relative prices.                    For expositional
simplicity, we simply assume that prices are xed here.
  12 Much     of the New Keynesian literature generates a motive for agents to trade by assuming
 in similar fashion, but generating signicant additional notation  that there is a continuum
of intermediate goods producers who agree to sell any quantity demanded at prevailing prices,
and that these intermediate goods are combined using a Dixit-Stiglitz production function to
yield a nal good. The substantive insights are the same.




                                                     16
Price stickiness implies that the demand for non-traded goods depends on con-
sumers' traded endowment and bond holdings.                    In an economy with exible
prices, an increase in the traded income of the consumers in the economy (for
example because of higher aggregate bond holdings                B ) would imply an increase
in the   relative price   of nontraded goods.           However, since prices are sticky, it
implies an increase in the     demand         for nontraded goods in our setup.
   An individual consumer-producer               i   who faces aggregate demand for non-
traded goods (26) and solves the optimization problem (23) consumes


                                      yT,1 + bi + cN,1          bi + B
                   ci      i
                    T,1 = cN,1 =                       = yT,1 +
                                             2                     2
Intuitively, half of her income derives from the traded endowment plus her
individual bond holdings; the other half derives from nontraded production,
which is demand-determined and depends on aggregate bond holdings.


Welfare Analysis          We note that a consumer-producer             i   facing nontraded de-
                               i
mand     cN,1 supplies labor       = cN,1 .   Furthermore, for allocations with symmetric
traded/non-traded consumption, we can simplify notation so                     ci      i      i
                                                                                T,1 = cN,1 = c1
and   uT,1 = uN,1 = u ci
                       1 /2.
   We then write the period 1 value function of consumer-producer                    i   as


                                                  bi + B
                    V bi ; B = u yT,1 +                      - d (yT,1 + B )
                                                     2
The resulting Euler equation for bond holdings is, in analogy to our baseline
model,
                               u (c0,T ) = RVb = uT,1 (c1 )
   Individual consumer-producers rationally take aggregate demand as given.
A planner who can aect the savings decisions of consumers, by contrast, inter-
nalizes that her savings decisions aect aggregate demand for non-traded goods,
given that prices are sticky. The eect of an increase in aggregate bond holdings
that is not internalized by individual consumers can be expressed as


                                    VB = uN,1 (c1 ) - d ( )

This expression is commonly referred to as a measure of the labor wedge  it
represents the dierence between the marginal benet of producing one more
unit of nontraded output and the marginal cost of the labor required. It can
also be interpreted as the marginal contribution of aggregate bond holdings
to the output gap. In an ecient allocation (e.g. if prices were exible), the
labor wedge is zero, and there are no uninternalized eects of consumers' foreign
savings decisions on the market for nontraded goods. This applies e.g. to the
rst-best described in (22).          By contrast, when prices are sticky, if there is a
demand shortage for non-traded goods                 uN,1 (c1 ) > d ( ),   greater foreign bond
holdings would lead to higher traded consumption, raise demand for non-traded
goods and increase welfare; if there is excess demand for non-traded goods



                                                 17
uN,1 (c1 ) < d ( ),   a reduction in foreign bond holdings would lower traded
consumption and lower demand for non-traded goods so as to increase welfare.
   More formally, the planner's maximization problem is given by problem (7).
The resulting Euler equation is


      u (c0 ) = R [Vb (B ; B ) + VB (B ; B )] = uT,1 (c1 ) + uN,1 (c1 ) - d ( )

   Using formula (14), the planner can correct the externality and restore an
ecient allocation by imposing the capital control


                                   uN,1 (c1 ) - d ( )
                              =
                                        u (c0 )

or an equivalent quantity regulation. If there is a demand shortage in period
1, then the labor wedge is positive and        >0   so the planner taxes borrowing
(subsidizes saving) in period 0; if there is excess demand in period 1, the planner
subsidizes borrowing (taxes saving) in period 0 so as to reduce overheating.
   Notice that it is generally not optimal for the planner to fully eliminate
the labor wedge as intervening in the borrowing/saving decision of consumer-
producers creates an intertemporal distortion. The planner chooses the point
where the marginal cost of this intertemporal distortion equals the marginal
benet of reducing the distortion in the labor wedge. We noted earlier that a
simple way to avoid aggregate demand imbalances and the associated externa-
lities in our simple model is to let the exchange rate adjust.      For example, if
a capital outow in period 1 reduces demand for non-traded goods in parallel
with the lower availability of traded goods, then an exchange rate depreciation
would make non-traded goods cheaper and close the labor wedge. However, in a
fuller model, such exchange rate depreciations frequently cause a separate set of
problems for emerging economies arising from the pecuniary externalities that
we covered earlier.


Related Literature       Farhi and Werning (2012, 2014) show that restrictions
on monetary and exchange rate policy in an open economy with sticky prices
create aggregate demand externalities and a case for capital controls as second-
best instruments to manage demand, similar to our simple example above. Ho-
wever, they observe that even with exible exchange rates, there is a case for
capital controls when monetary policy alone cannot optimally manage the sec-
toral composition of demand. Similarly, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) show
that xed exchange rates and nominal wage stickiness give rise to aggregate
demand externalities that may motivate capital controls. Korinek and Simsek
(2016) demonstrate that a binding zero-lower bound that restricts monetary
policy creates a case for nancial market taxes to address the resulting aggre-
gate demand externalities. Farhi and Werning (2016) lay out a general theory
of aggregate demand externalities that emphasizes that such externalities arise
whenever aggregate demand management is imperfect and nancial market in-
terventions can contribute to demand management in a second-best manner.




                                         18
   Policymakers often face a dicult trade-o in managing the two problems
that we have described in the past two sections, i.e. adverse balance sheet ef-
fects and aggregate demand problems.           The use of scal policy is frequently
constrained in emerging economies, particularly during crises. Many other ex-
post policy measures aect balance sheets and aggregate demand in opposite
directions, creating a dicult trade-o. For example, policymakers frequently
use interest rate hikes during periods of capital outows to reduce the outows
and counteract exchange rate depreciations so as to mitigate balance sheet ef-
fects, but higher interest rates also reduce aggregate demand, worsening the
resulting contraction of output.   This trade-o is frequently one of the main
points of contention in the policy debate on how to respond to nancial crises
(see e.g. Stiglitz, 2002). In turn, during booms, policymakers may be induced
to reduce interest rates so as to reduce capital inows and associated aggregate
demand eects.
   More generally, procyclical capital ows reduce the space to adopt counter-
cyclical macroeconomic policies, and may actually lead authorities to adopt pro-
cyclical macroeconomic policies (Ocampo, 2008). From an ex-post perspective,
the trade-o is analyzed in Lahiri and Végh (2003). The use of capital controls
can mitigate this trade-o by addressing both pecuniary and aggregate demand
externalities ex-ante, as shown for example by Farhi and Werning (2016) in
Application 3 of their paper in a framework that integrates aggregate demand
problems and a price-dependent collateral constraint.



1.5 Other Categories of Distortions and Externalities
Although the recent economic literature to motivate capital controls has been
most active on the topic of pecuniary and aggregate demand externalities as ex-
posed in the past two subsections, we should also mention two further categories
of potential distortions generated by international capital ows.


Moral Hazard and Bailouts           A recurrent theme in the literature is that
borrowers may engage in excessive borrowing because they expect that they
will not have to repay their full debts in the event of crisis because of bailouts.
To capture this analytically, we return to our baseline setup from section 1.1 and
assume consumers are borrowers,    bi < 0,     who are subject to imperfect contract
enforcement coupled with debt bailouts.         Specically, let us focus on a single
state of nature in which consumer    i   reneges on a fraction        of her repayments
to international lenders, but the government of the small open economy bails out
international lenders and makes them whole for their credit losses. Since lenders
do not suer any losses, they provide funds at the risk-free interest rate        R,   and
the period 0 budget constraint (1) is unchanged. The government nances the
bailout by a lump-sum tax   T = B < 0       in period 1 where     B   is again aggregate
borrowing. The period 1 budget constraint of consumer         i   is then


                            ci                  i
                             1 = yT,1 + (1 - ) b + T                                  (27)




                                          19
and the period 1 continuation utility is

                         V bi ; B = u yT,1 + (1 - ) bi + B                             (28)

Given this value function, observe that the Euler equations (6) and (8) of both
private agents and the social planner continue to hold.              Under bailouts, the
envelope condition     Vb (·) = (1 - ) u (·) reects that private agents internalize
only a fraction    (1 - ) of their cost of repayment, whereas the externality term
VB (·) = u (·)      reects the remaining social cost that arises because borrowing
increases the tax revenue needed for bailouts.
    The argument that bailouts expectations create moral hazard and induce gre-
ater leverage and risk-taking is regularly advanced to explain nancial booms
and busts.      For example, McKinnon and Pill (1997, 1998) provide models of
nancial booms and overborrowing due to moral hazard, and Krugman (1999b)
analyzes whether the East Asian crisis can be understood through that lens.
However, although models of moral hazard provide an account of both the
large risk-taking in booms and the frequently sizeable bailouts in busts, the-
reby generating a coherent narrative of crisis, they assign perhaps too much
foresightedness and rationality to the agents taking on risk in nancial booms.
For example, in the context of the mortage boom before the US nancial cri-
sis of 200809, Cheng, Raina, and Xiong (2014) show that many of the actors
who exposed the nancial sector to large risks took on even greater risks in
their personal investments, for which bailouts were highly unlikely. This sugge-
sts that their behavior was driven more by over-optimism rather than bailout
expectations.


Over-Optimism            If borrowers are overly optimistic about future economic
prospects, they naturally tend to borrow more than what is optimal under more
realistic prospects. The welfare implications of such over-optimism are two-fold:
First, over-optimism reduces the realized welfare of the borrower who takes on
too much debt compared to what would be optimal under realistic expectations;
we may call this an internality rather than an externality because the borrower
imposes this welfare loss on herself due to her unrealistic expectations. Second,
over-optimism exacerbates any other externalities from borrowing that may be
present in the economy, including the externalities laid out in the previous secti-
ons, because it induces individuals to borrow even more. Similar implications
result from other, related behavioral biases, e.g. myopic preferences as proposed
by Laibson (1997). Boz (2009) shows that over-optimism (and over-pessimism)
in emerging economies may arise from a signal extraction problem.
    To capture over-optimism in a simple analytic setting, let us extend the ba-
seline setup from section 1.1 by assuming that consumers are overly optimistic
and expect a period-1 endowment that is greater than the actual endowment
they will receive,    ~T,1 > yT,1 .13
                      y                 Private agents will optimally smooth consump-

  13 An   alternative way of capturing over-optimism is to assume that agents over-value the
probability of states of nature with good outcomes and undervalue the probability of states
of nature with bad outcomes. See e.g. section 5 of Korinek (2018) for such a setting in the
context of capital controls.




                                              20
tion from their optimistic perspective so  u ci0 = RVb (·) = Ru c    ~i
                                                                      1                   where
  i           i
c
~1 = y~T,1 + b reects the inated level of consumption that consumers                      expect
due to their over-optimism. Naturally, when the true endowment yT,1                       is rea-
                                                            i
lized in period 1, the resulting allocation will satisfy u c1 > u c~i
                                                                    1 ,                   i.e. the
marginal utility of consumers will be higher than they anticipated. A                     policy-
maker who is non-paternalistic, i.e. who takes the preferences and beliefs of
consumers as given, will not nd any reason to intervene in the resulting allo-
cation. By contrast, a paternalistic policymaker who knows the true realization
of   yT,1 ,   would disagree with the overly optimistic choices of individual consu-
mers and would choose a lower level of borrowing (higher bond holdings) that
instead leads to an allocation such that            u (C0 ) = Ru (C1 ) < Ru ci
                                                                             1           , where
upper-case variables denote the planner's choices. We capture the internality

by dening the term          VB  R u (C1 ) - u               ~1
                                                            C       > 0,   where   ~1 = y
                                                                                   C    ~T,1 + B
is the consumption level anticipated by overly optimistic consumers under the
planner's choice of      B.   Note that         ~1 > c
                                                C    ~i   since the planner chooses less debt,
                                                      1
                                        i
i.e. higher bond holdings        B > b      .    The term   VB    simply reects the dierence
between the true and the overly optimistic marginal utility of consumers. Under
this denition, the optimal tax formula (14) continues to hold for the case of
regulating internalities from overborrowing due to over-optimism.
     A signicant challenge for policy is that phenomena such as over-optimism
are dicult to ascertain in practice. For example, it is common for regulators
and policymakers to become infected by the same optimism that drives indivi-
dual market participants during booms. Furthermore, when policymakers and
private agents disagree because policymakers overly pessimistic, paternalistic
regulation to reduce borrowing would be welfare-reducing.                     These are exam-
ples of the conceptual problems in advocating paternalism. For these reasons,
policymakers are justiably more hesitant to respond to internalities, such as
those from over-optimism, than to respond to externalities, such as those that
we analyzed earlier.
                         14 However, even a non-paternalistic policymaker will tig-
hten regulation when over-optimism leads private borrowers to borrow more
and thereby impose greater externalities on others. Section 5 of Korinek (2018)
provides a careful analysis of this case.



2 Measurement and Eectiveness of Capital Con-
  trols
This section examines the classication and measurement of capital controls as
well as the empirical evidence on how eective capital controls are in reducing
nancial and macroeconomic fragility. Relating the theories of capital controls
we laid out to empirical evidence requires that we rst discuss the dierent va-
rieties of capital controls observed in practice.                Then we describe the context
in which emerging and developing countries experience boom-bust cycles in ca-

  14 For   a careful discussion of liberalism versus paternalism and solutions to the resulting
tension in policymaking, see e.g. Sunstein and Thaler (2003).




                                                   21
pital ows and use capital controls as a tool to manage these cycles. Next we
analyze how dierent measures of capital controls capture dierent aspects of
capital account openness. We also examine the channels through which capital
controls aect the economy, distinguishing between direct eects as well as sig-
naling and expectations eects. Then we review the empirical literature on how
capital controls aect (i) nancial fragility outcomes including domestic credit
growth, composition and maturity of external liabilities, and other vulnerabi-
lities associated with sudden stops in capital inows, and (ii) macroeconomic
outcomes such as long-term economic growth, short-term output and consump-
tion volatility, and exchange rate uctuations. We describe literature focusing
on both aggregate macroeconomic variables and rm-level variables. We also fo-
cus on dierences in capital control measures and empirical methodologies that
give rise to dierences in ndings for each set of outcomes, and we highlight the
strengths and pitfalls of dierent empirical approaches and draw conclusions for
promising venues for future research.



2.1 Varieties of Capital Controls
Whereas capital controls in theoretical models can be expressed as elegant tax
wedges or quantity limits, the practical implementation of capital controls is
considerably more complex and depends signicantly on institutional details.
In practice, capital controls can be categorized along a number of dimensions:
   First, capital controls can be distinguished depending on what they are
imposed on, as we have already seen in section 1.2. An important dimension of
this is the direction of capital ows, i.e. whether controls are placed on inows
or outows of capital. A second important dimension is which type of private
capital account transactions they are imposed on, for example FDI, portfolio
investment into equities or bonds, or other investments which include bank
loans and other banking ows. In the context of bonds and loans, an important
aspect is whether controls distinguish between foreign and local currency and
short-term versus long-term ows.
   Second, another distinction is whether capital controls are price-based, i.e. taxes
or subsidies on capital ows, or quantitative or administrative restrictions, such
as outright prohibitions or quantity limits on transactions in certain asset ca-
tegories. Generally speaking, the principle of dualism, already noted in section
1.2, implies that every quantity-based control corresponds to an equivalent price-
based control. In practice, the equivalence does not hold when the agents subject
to controls are heterogeneous or when there is uncertainty about the parameters
of the economy (see Weitzman, 1974).
   Third, capital controls are also distinguished by the timing of controls with
regard to the objective of reducing nancial and macroeconomic instability, i.e.
whether controls are imposed ex-ante or ex-post with respect to such instabi-
lity. Ex-ante capital controls are prudential tools that reduce the risk of nancial
crises by preventing excessive risk-taking. Examples include tightening of con-
trols that aim to reduce capital inows during booms and reductions in outow
controls that encourage outows during booms to reduce overheating pressu-



                                        22
Figure 2: Fixed quantity-based controls equal counter-cyclical price-based con-
trols


   15 Capital inow and outow controls may also be used as ex-post interventi-
res.
ons once a crisis occurs. For example, measures that encourage new borrowing
from abroad by reducing capital inow regulations are ex-post interventions that
may increase the availability of credit after a crisis. Similarly, putting in place
or tightening capital outow controls once a crisis has materialized may halt a
self-reinforcing feedback cycle of capital outows and exchange rate depreciati-
ons when complemented with responsible macroeconomic policies (Saborowski
et al., 2014). Prior to the 200809 Global Financial Crisis, the dominant view
was that the best time to intervene was ex post, after a crisis has occurred,
as opposed to in the run up to a crisis when fragility builds up, as suggested
e.g. by the Greenspan doctrine. However, Jeanne and Korinek (2013, 2019)
and Benigno et al. (2016) show it is optimal to use a mix of ex-ante prudential
regulations and ex-post policies to minimize the welfare costs of nancial and
macroeconomic instability, since ex-post policy interventions generally impose
deadweight losses on their own and may distort ex-ante incentives.
   Fourth, capital controls are sometimes distinguished into structural (or long-
standing) capital controls that are typically in place for a long time, versus
cyclical (or episodic) capital controls that are regularly adjusted over the bu-
siness cycle (see e.g. Klein, 2012). Structural controls typically take the form
of quantity-based controls, whereas cyclical controls frequently take the form of
price-based controls. Interestingly, this implies that the dierence between the

 15 For   example, several emerging market economies, including Brazil and Korea, have incre-
ased or implemented new capital inow controls in response to the surge in capital inows in
2009. South Africa has liberalized its capital outow controls during the same period (Baba
and Kokenyne, 2011).




                                              23
two types of controls may be smaller than what is commonly appreciated: xed
quantity controls are equivalent to counter-cyclical price-based controls, given
that capital ows to emerging economies are generally pro-cyclical. Figure 2 il-
lustrates this for the case of a closed capital account, equivalent to the quantity
restriction    B = 0.    Assume that the supply of foreign funds uctuates over the
cycle and is high during booms (indicated by the S -curve and the low interest
     1
rate   ) and low during busts (indicated by the S -curve and the high interest
     R
     1
rate
     R , where R > R). During booms, the zero quantity restriction is equiva-
lent to a positive inow tax         ( > 0),     i.e. consumers that are taxed precisely at
the rate         indicated in the gure would be willing to hold zero bonds. This
prevents any excessive borrowing that would otherwise take place during booms.
Conversely, during busts, as the supply of available foreign funds declines to                S   ,
the zero quantity restriction on international capital ows is equivalent to an
outow tax       ( < 0), reducing the outow of capital that would otherwise take
place. Hence, xed quantity controls are               de facto   equivalent to price controls
that are adjusted counter-cyclically over the course of the business cycle.
    Finally, another important distinction is whether a policy measure is an
explicit capital control directly imposed on cross-border transactions or whether
it is a domestic regulation that restricts the nancial transactions of domestic
agents or the domestic use of foreign currency.                  Although the latter type of
regulations are not notionally aimed at international capital ows, they have a                 de
facto   eect of inuencing the level of such ows. Ocampo (2017, ch. 4) observes
that there is a continuum of nancial regulations that begins with regulations on
nancial transactions by domestic residents in the domestic currency (traditional
prudential regulation, including counter-cyclical macroprudential regulations).
Next there are restrictions on the domestic use of foreign currency by domestic
residents (FX-related regulations
                                          16 ), which do not ocially count as capital
controls but have the side eect of applying to most transactions with foreigners
who typically transact in foreign currency.              Finally there are restrictions on
domestic agents' transactions with foreign residents, which we will refer to as
nancial sector regulations below, for example limits on residents' capacity to
borrow and hold accounts abroad, as well as on the capacity of non-residents to
hold domestic accounts  these discriminate between residents and non-residents
and therefore ocially count as capital controls.
    From a theory perspective, Korinek and Sandri (2016) argue that the con-
current use of both capital controls and domestic macroprudential policy is de-
sirable: the two policies target two dierent kinds of problems, excessive foreign
credit versus excessive credit at large.             They may be complementary or may
be used as substitutes, depending on the source of credit expansion. However,
in countries that have completely liberalized their capital accounts or signed
agreements (such as bilateral investment treaties with the US or membership

  16 These   include outright prohibitions of certain domestic transactions in foreign currencies,
restrictions on what lending can be done locally in foreign currencies or what securities can
be issued denominated in foreign currencies, dierential treatment (e.g., dierential reserve
requirements) on deposit accounts in foreign currencies, and limits on the foreign exchange
positions of nancial intermediaries.




                                                24
agreement of EU) that prohibit the use of explicit capital controls, domestic
prudential regulation typically plays an important role as a second-best instru-
ment in lieu of direct capital controls. In such cases, even simple countercyclical
regulations of bank leverage, such as those advocated by Admati and Hellwig
(2013), may have an important eect on the magnitude of international capital
ows. For example, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) argue that tighter bank
regulations in the periphery of the Eurozone during the run-up to the 2008/09
nancial crisis would have mitigated the severity of the Euro crisis.



2.2 Capital Flow Volatility
Figure 3 shows that net capital ows to emerging and developing countries have
been large and volatile, following a pattern of boom-bust cycles. These cycles
pose several challenges for countries and may generate signicant externalities,
as we highlighted in the theory section, especially in countries with less develo-
ped nancial markets. During capital ow surges, countries experience currency
appreciations, associated declines in competitiveness, increases in trade decits,
higher ination, and bubbles in housing and stock markets. When external -
nancing dries up, during what Calvo (1998) termed episodes of sudden stops of
capital ows, other challenges emerge, including currency depreciation and asso-
ciated balance sheet eects and inationary pressures, slower economic growth,
and a burst of asset price bubbles.
   Since the 1990s, Figure 3 shows that emerging and developing countries have
experienced three major boom-bust cycles in external nancing. The rst one
started in the early 1990s and came to an end with the 199798 East Asian
Financial Crisis. This phase of expansion in capital ows to emerging markets
was briey interrupted by the Mexican peso crisis in 1994.         The East Asian
Financial Crisis that began in Thailand in 1997 spread to other East Asian
economies (including Indonesia, Malaysia, and Korea), Russia, Latin America
(notably Argentina and Brazil), and Turkey.       The second cycle of expansion
began in 2003, shortly after the dot-com crisis in the US as the Fed began to
reduce interest rates, and ended in 2007 with the subprime mortgage market
crisis in US, which in turn was the beginning of the Global Financial Crisis.
As Figure 3 shows, the net capital inows of emerging and developing countries
reached a record high of more than 3.5 percent of GDP. The ensuing downturn
phase lasted only a few years, with most developing countries experiencing the
largest outows in 200809.
   The third cycle began in 2010 as the expansionary monetary policies in the
US and other advanced countries triggered another boom of capital ows into
emerging and developing economies. The beginning of the downturn took place
with the tapering of quantitative easing policy of the Fed in 2013.      The con-
traction in capital ows continued as the super-cycle of commodity prices ended
in 2014 and a number of negative developments in China's capital markets resul-
ted in large outows from China beginning in 2015 (Ocampo, 2017). Although
there was a slight uptick in 201617, recent indicators of net capital ows to
the developing world generally indicate that the contraction phase continued



                                        25
                                                4.0




                                                3.0




                 Net Capital Flows (% of GDP)
                                                2.0




                                                1.0




                                                0.0




                                                -1.0
                                                   1990   1995             2000          2005              2010              2015

                                                           FDI (net)                   Portfolio and other private flows (net)
                                                           Official flows (net)




Figure 3: Capital ows to emerging and developing countries (as % of GDP)
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Institute of International Finance




in 2018 and 2019, given higher US interest rates, and a number of emerging
economies (notably Argentina and Turkey) experienced capital outows, strong
depreciation pressures, and weak economic performance.
   In response to such large and volatile capital ows, policymakers often seek
policy tools that can help to manage them eectively.                                                                       In general, countries
adopt a combination of macroeconomic policies to tackle the challenges posed
by capital ow volatility. During capital inow surges, for instance, they may
adjust interest rates, tighten scal policy, allow exchange rates to appreciate,
accumulate foreign exchange reserves, and encourage capital outows.                                                                      Howe-
ver, each of these policy responses have signicant limitations and costs. For
example, lowering interest rates is a procyclical policy response that may cause
overheating and ination (although mitigated by exchange rate appreciation);
tightening scal policy may result in currency appreciation and face political
hurdles; allowing exchange rate to appreciate may hurt competitiveness and
lead to Dutch disease; reserve accumulation may have a high scal cost and
result in an inecient allocation of resources; and encouraging capital outows
may have limited impact.                                   These limitations and costs have generated a ma-
jor rethinking of alternative strategies in the aftermath of the Global Financial
Crisis, including a reconsideration of capital controls and domestic prudential
regulations as macroprudential policy tools (Ostry et al. 2011b; Ghosh, Ostry,
and Qureshi, 2017b).



2.3 Measuring Capital Controls
To evaluate whether the use of capital controls in a counter-cyclical fashion can
be an eective policy tool in managing capital ows, the rst step is to measure
the strength of capital controls. One of the major challenges facing empirical
work on this issue is how to represent the controls used in practice as a nume-




                                                                                  26
rical measure that can be comparable across countries and over time.                 As we
have seen, the variety of capital account regulations that are used in practice
is broad, and countries dier strongly in the types of controls they implement
(for instance, some impose quantity limits whereas others use taxes on capital
ows) and the types of ows they impose controls on (such as debt or equity
ows) or except entirely (FDI). The enforcement of regulations also varies across
countries and may depend on what other prudential policies are used as well
as on the depth of the country's domestic nancial market. These problems in
constructing reliable measures that do not suer from systematic measurement
error have posed signicant limitations on empirical studies aiming to docu-
ment robust eects of capital controls. As we discuss below, the dierences in
measurement continue to play a major factor in explaining why studies reach
dierent conclusions for testing the eectiveness of capital controls. In recent
years, however, various new measures have been constructed with the goal of
better quantifying the restrictiveness of dierent capital control policies.
   Measures of capital controls can be classied into two categories: (i)             de jure
capital control measures, which are based on the formal rules regulating capital
ows that are implemented by central banks and dier based on coverage of
dierent asset classes (Chinn and Ito, 2006; Schindler, 2009; Ostry et al., 2011a,
2011b, 2012; Fernández et al., 2016), and (ii)       de facto   capital control measures,
which are derived from the nancial outcomes that result from the use of capital
controls  e.g. the deviation from covered interest rate parity, or sum of gross
foreign assets and liabilities as a share of domestic output (Hutchison, Pasricha,
and Singh, 2012; Rodrik and Subramanian, 2009). Since the               de facto   measures
of capital controls are an outcome of the interactions of policy changes with
market forces, most empirical studies employ         de jure   measures to capture policy
changes in a more exogenous manner.
   Figure 4 plots the evolution of capital account openness over the past half
century as measured by two widely-used indices developed by (a) Quinn (1997)
and (b) Chinn and Ito (2006, 2008), updated to cover the time period 19702015
for 187 and 182 countries respectively. Quinn used the summary information in
the pre-1996 volumes of the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements
and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) database to capture broad on/o usage
of capital controls, supplemented by descriptions of these policy measures to
capture their intensity. The updated index ranges from 0 to 100, with larger
values indicating more open capital accounts. The Chinn-Ito index shows the
rst principal component of the four sets of variables from the IMF's AREAER
database, capturing not only restrictions on the capital account but also on
current account transactions, the presence of multiple exchange rates, and the
requirements of surrendering export proceeds. Panels (a) and (b) of the gure
present the annual averages of the Quinn and Chinn-Ito indices for countries of
dierent income groups.
                            17

 17 We   classied countries into three categories: (i) advanced (or industrialized) countries
as the traditional OECD countries, (ii) emerging market economies, which were classied as
either emerging or frontier during the period of 19801997 by the International Financial
Corporation plus Hong Kong and Singapore, and (iii) developing countries, which are the




                                             27
                                             (a) Quinn Index
                100




                80




                60




                40

                      1970   1975   1980       1985      1990     1995    2000      2005    2010   2015

                                           Advanced countries            Emerging markets
                                           Developing countries



                                           (b) Chinn-Ito Index
                1.0




               0.8




               0.6




               0.4




               0.2
                      1970   1975   1980      1985      1990      1995    2000      2005    2010   2015

                                           Advanced countries            Emerging markets
                                           Developing countries




Figure 4: Indices of capital account openness, 1970  2015
Sources: Quinn (1997) and Chinn and Ito (2006) as well as updated data provided by

Dennis Quinn and from         http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn-Ito_website.htm




                                                            28
    On average, advanced countries steadily liberalized their capital controls,
particularly from the mid-1970s to the early 1990s, and continued to maintain
a high degree of capital account openness through 2015.           In contrast, capital
account liberalization was less widespread and slower in the emerging markets
and developing countries. Although a number of emerging and developing coun-
tries had taken steps to liberalize their restrictions on capital ows in the late
1970s, the experience of the Latin American debt crisis in the 1980s led to a
reversal in capital account openness as several countries reinforced their regu-
lations. Moreover, during the 1980s, emerging market economies were perhaps
less open to capital ows than the rest of the developing countries; however,
they liberalized at a rapid pace and clearly surpassed developing countries in
the 1990s. The increased capital account openness across the emerging and de-
veloping world continued until the 200809 Global Financial Crisis, after which
there has been a slowdown and reversal in some countriesparticularly in emer-
ging market economies that increased their restrictions on capital ows again.
Despite overall trends toward liberalization, there still remains a substantial
dierence in the degree to which advanced and emerging/developing countries
are open to cross-border capital ows. The Quinn and Chinn-Ito indices have
great coverage in terms of sample size and length, but they do not dierenti-
ate between measures of controls on capital inows and outows or regulations
based on foreign-exchange transactions.
    A number of authors, including Schindler (2009), Quinn, Martin, and Toyoda
(2011), Ostry et al. (2012) and Erten and Ocampo (2017) have subsequently
developed measures of regulations aimed at taking account of these dierences.
We follow this literature and build on Erten and Ocampo (2017) to distinguish
between four dierent types of capital account regulations, capturing some of
the varieties of capital controls discussed in section 2.1: (i) capital inow con-
trols; (ii) capital outow controls; (iii) nancial sector regulations, and (iv)
regulations on the domestic use of foreign exchange (FX-related regulations).
The rst and second are indices constructed by taking simple averages of binary
capital control measures across six asset categories: money market instruments,
bonds, equities, nancial credits, collective instruments, and direct investment.
The third is an index constructed by a simple average of binary measures of
nancial-sector specic capital controls, including the capacity of non-residents
to hold domestic accounts and limits on residents' capacity to borrow and hold
accounts abroad. Lastly, FX-related regulations is an index constructed by a
simple average of restrictions on the domestic use of foreign currencies, inclu-
ding lending locally in such currencies, the purchase of locally issued securities
denominated in foreign currencies, dierential treatment of deposit accounts in
such currencies, and limits on foreign exchange positions.          All of these mea-
sures range from 0 (no regulations in a given variety of capital controls) to 1
(regulations present in every subcategory of a given variety).
    Figure 5 plots the cross-country averages of these capital account regulations

remaining economies. Please refer to Appendix I in Chinn and Ito (2017) for the complete
list of countries.




                                          29
                0.8



                0.7



                0.6



                0.5



                0.4



                0.3



                0.2
                      1995    2000                      2005                 2010             2015

                              FX-related regulations           Capital outflow controls
                              Capital inflow controls          Financial sector regulations




Figure 5: Capital account regulations, 1995  2015
Source: Erten and Ocampo (2017) based on data from the IMF's Annual Report on

Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) database




across 51 emerging and developing economies from 1995 to 2015. We observe
that the most commonly used measures are FX-related regulations, followed by
capital outow controls, capital inow controls, and nancial sector regulations.
Over time, countries reduced FX-related and nancial sector regulations in the
run-up to the East Asian nancial crisis, and began to tighten these regulations
after the crisis. This was accompanied by relaxing capital controls on outows.
Moreover, emerging and developing countries generally increased their regulati-
ons during and after the 2008-09 Global Financial Crisis, with the exception of
nancial sector regulations.



2.4 Channels
The are several dierent channels through which capital controls aect the eco-
nomy and that are identied in empirical work.                                  The direct channel is that
capital controls change the cost of international capital or limit the quantities
of ows. This is the channel that was analyzed in the theoretical framework of
section (1.2). However, there are also several indirect channels through which
capital controls aect international capital ows and that are empirically rele-
vant, in particular the signaling channel and the expectations channel of capital
controls.
   The direct eects of capital controls are documented in a number of stu-
dies that focus on rm-level data and nd that inow controls achieve their
desired goal of increasing the cost of capital, and that this aects rm-specic
outcomes, such as equity returns, stock prices, and investment. For example,
Alfaro, Chari, and Kanczuk (2017) use quarterly data from 2006 to 2012 to
examine the eects of capital controls on Brazilian rms' stock returns and real
investment. Their ndings show that the greater cost of capital following capi-




                                                    30
tal control announcements results in a decline in cumulative abnormal returns
and a fall in real investment, and these eects are larger for smaller and more
external-nance dependent rms.        Similarly, Forbes (2007) nds that Chile's
reserve requirements on capital inows from 1991 to 1998 increased the cost
of nancing for smaller rms. This evidence supports theoretical insights that
predict cross-sectional variation in stock prices and declines in real investment
by rm-type (Chari and Henry, 2004 and 2008). This is reminiscent of the dis-
proportionate eects of monetary policy on smaller rms that are subject to
tighter nancial constraints (see e.g. Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994).
   The signalling channel observes that the capital control policy followed by
policymakers provides signals to foreign investors about the type of policymaker
imposing them. Foreign investors will accordingly respond by adjusting their
investment position. Bartolini and Drazen (1997a, b) and Drazen (1997) pro-
pose that investors may interpret capital controls as a signal that authorities
are reluctant to commit to appropriate scal and monetary policies for maintai-
ning stability. They may also interpret capital controls as a signal of a hostile
environment towards foreign investment, creating stigma eects that lead to
disproportionate capital outows as foreign investors reassess the desirability of
investing in a specic country. Conversely, costly signals such as freely allowing
for capital outows in adverse states of nature may allow policymakers to build a
reputation that they follow investor-friendly policies. Jinjarak, Noy, and Zheng
(2013) empirically examine the eects of Brazil's capital controls after the Glo-
bal Financial Crisis and nd that the relaxation of capital controls prevented
further declines in capital inows. They argue that the main channel at work
was the signal perceived by the market that authorities were more welcoming
to foreign investors.
   Signaling and the associated stigma and reputation eects may create a bias
among policymakers against the use of capital controls, even under conditions
when their use might otherwise be appropriate. Signaling eects may substan-
tially aect international capital ows, and may also explain why many central
banks perceive capital controls as a policy of last resort. In fact, the traditional
stigma associated with the term capital controls was one of the key reasons for
why the IMF has coined the phrase capital ow management measures, and
why others have referred to them as capital account regulations or capital
ow policies. The motivation is that if the word controls has been removed,
it would be perceived just as any other nancial regulation, and the negative
connotation would be alleviated.
   However, signaling eects depend by their very nature on the interpretation
assigned to the signal. In prior decades, capital controls have frequently been
associated with autocratic governments that expropriate international investors.
By contrast, going forward, if countries impose capital controls as prudential
regulation in accordance with state-of-the-art economic theory and as sanctioned
by international institutions like the IMF, this will in fact provide a positive
signal that policymakers possess state-of-the-art regulatory capabilities, which
will increase nancial and macroeconomic stability, and may make a country a
more desirable destination for foreign capital. For example, the use of capital



                                        31
controls by Chile in the late 1990s has been perceived as a signal that authorities
have a serious commitment to stabilize foreign exchange and nancial markets
(Eichengreen and Mussa, 1998).
   The expectations channel of capital controls arises because the imposition
of capital controls provides international investors with new information about
the economic environment rather than about the type or reputation of the po-
licymaker imposing the controls as would be captured by the signaling channel.
For example, in many cases, outow controls have been interpreted as indicating
that policymakers are desperate, and that nancial markets are on the brink of
collapse. Rossi (1999) nds that capital outow controls are associated with a
higher risk of currency and banking crises (although there may be some reverse
causality). Forbes et al. (2016) provide evidence that the signaling and expec-
tations channels played an important role in explaining the eects of Brazil's
tax on foreign investment in bonds on foreign investors' portfolio allocation.
They document expectational spillover eects by interviewing foreign investors
and nd that Brazil's imposition of capital controls signicantly aected inves-
tor expectations about future policies in both Brazil and other countries.      In
response, foreign investors increased their capital allocation to other countries
with large exposure to China while they reduced their allocations to countries
that were perceived as more likely to also impose capital controls in the future
in response to Brazil's move.



2.5 Eects of Capital Controls on Financial Fragility
Financial stability is one of the major concerns for why countries may want to
consider the use of capital controls, as we observed in the theory section 1.3. We
synthesize the empirical literature on capital controls and nancial fragility by
focusing on (i) studies using traditional annual data sources, (ii) studies using
higher frequency data, and (iii) mechanisms through which capital controls may
impact nancial outcomes.        In each section, we highlight the advantages and
limitations of each approach, and distinguish between the eects of dierent
types of capital controls on nancial fragility.
   A major concern in estimating the impact of capital controls on nancial
outcomes is that changes in capital controls are often introduced in response to
changes in foreign capital inows or uctuations in the exchange rate. Hence,
a credible identication strategy needs to properly account for the endogeneity
of capital controls to nancial fragility indicators. For example, countries that
impose a tax on capital inows (e.g. Brazil) generally increase the tax after in-
ows increase and reduce it when inows decline signicantly. If one estimates
the impact of such capital controls on capital inows without addressing the
endogeneity problem, the estimates would be downward biased and could even
go in the opposite direction, wrongly suggesting that the capital controls caused
the surge in inows. The fundamental issue is that nding a valid instrument
to exogenously predict the use of capital controls while satisfying the exclusion
restriction is extremely challenging. For this reason, many studies in this lite-
rature fail to be well-identied, and one should be cautious that the estimates



                                         32
might be severely downward biased.


Studies using traditional annual data sources                  A large body of empirical
work uses annual data sources, many of which are ultimately based on the IMF's
AREAER database. These studies typically examine whether the use of capital
controls reduces nancial fragility by regulating credit growth and lengthening
the maturity of foreign debt ows. They can be distinguished into whether they
focus on capital controls on inows or outows, and whether they dierentiate
between structural or cyclical capital controls.
   One of the consistent ndings that emerge from this strand of literature is
that capital controls have a robust impact on the composition of capital ows by
reducing relatively short-term and increasing long-term ows, without generally
having a signicant eect on the total volume of capital ows. Reviewing more
than 30 empirical studies, Magud, Reinhart, and Rogo (2018) nd that capital
inow controls tend to be more eective relative to outow controls in altering
the composition of capital ows toward longer-term ows and improving mo-
netary policy independence.
                                 18 However, they document mixed results in terms
of the eectiveness of capital controls in reducing the volume of capital ows.
Other multi-country studies conrm that capital controls aect the composition
of ows, without having a discernible eect on the volume of ows (Reinhart
and Smith, 2002; Montiel and Reinhart, 1999).
   The restrictiveness of the regulations may be a critical issue in determining
whether the volume of ows is aected. In a comparative study of the eects
of capital controls on inows in Chile, Colombia, and Malaysia in the 1990s,
Ocampo and Palma (2008) concluded that the more restrictive 1994 Malay-
sian regulations had a stronger eect than those of Chile or Colombia, and
that, among the latter, Colombia's were more eective because they were also
stronger, as measured by the tax equivalent of the unremunerated reserve re-
quirements (URRs). Similarly, the strong tax introduced by Malaysia in 1998
is generally considered to have been very eective in reducing outows (Kaplan
and Rodrik, 2002).
                      19
   In a related vein, Ostry et al. (2011a, 2011b, 2012) test whether capital in-
ow controls reduce indicators of nancial fragility, and nd that inow controls
are associated with a lower proportion of FX lending in total domestic bank cre-
dit, and with a lower proportion of portfolio debt in total external liabilities.
The results also indicate that domestic prudential policies (e.g.            loan-to-value
ratios and sector-specic credit policies) and FX-related regulations (e.g. limits
on banks' open FX positions or exposure to currency mismatch) complement ca-
pital controls on inows in reducing domestic credit booms and overall nancial

 18 The   empirical studies included in their review indicate that capital outow controls in
Malaysia reduced capital outows and tended to give room for more independent monetary
policy; however, the case of Malaysia seems to be an outlier compared to other countries'
experience with outow controls where the success has been more limited (Magud, Reinhart,
and Rogo, 2018).
 19 Examining   the eectiveness of capital controls in the 1990s, Ariyoshi et al. (2000) con-
cluded that regulations on outows were more eective than those on inows in this period.




                                             33
fragility (Ostry et al. 2012).
   Klein (2012) distinguishes between structural capital controls (i.e.      long-
standing controls, often more quantity-based) and cyclical capital controls (i.e.
episodic controls, often more price-based).     He nds that countries that use
structural capital controls have less growth in nancial fragility indicators than
countries that impose cyclical capital controls. However, one diculty in inter-
preting this result is the dualism between xed quantity controls and cyclical
price-based controls that we pointed out in section 2.1. Moreover, Klein (2012)
shows that controlling for the fact that countries with structural capital controls
have much lower GDP per capita, there is no evidence of a signicant impact
of either structural or cyclical controls on nancial fragility.


Empirical challenges       A general caveat of these studies is that the timing
of capital controls implemented at a monthly frequency may not be properly
captured by annual indices. The annual frequency data from the IMF's ARE-
AER database records in a binary fashion whether countries use any measure
of capital ow restrictions on specic asset categories, such as equities, bonds,
collective instruments, etc. The annual indicators take on values of zero or one,
depending on whether a restriction on international transactions for an asset
category is present or not, and hence tend to show little variation over time. If,
for example, a country increases the tax rate on cross-border equity inows from
one year to the next, it still continues to be assigned a value of one, masking any
cyclical adjustments. As we discuss more below, studies using higher frequency
data were able to capture these short-term changes better.
   Another reason to be cautious about estimates from studies using cross-
country annual data is that it is dicult to nd valid instruments to control
for endogeneity of capital controls. For instance, while Klein (2012) uses only
lagged values of capital controls to partially address this issue, Ostry et al.
(2012) use lagged values together with an instrumental variables strategy. In
particular, they use two instrumentsbilateral investment treaties with the
U.S. and the E.U. membership agreementsto predict whether countries use
capital controls. Since these international agreements prohibit the use of capital
controls, they generate some variation that is plausibly exogenous to outcome
variables of interest although the predictive power is generally low, resulting in
weak instruments.
   A related question in the empirical literature on nancial fragility is whet-
her capital controls have been adjusted at a business-cycle frequency by the
policy authorities.   Using annual indices from the IMF's AREAER database,
Fernández, Rebucci, and Uribe (2015) provide evidence that capital controls are
acyclical  that is, the use of capital controls is not associated with boom-bust
episodes in output, the current account, or the real exchange rate. Similarly,
Eichengreen and Rose (2014) and Gupta and Masetti (2018) show empirically
that controls on international capital ows have been highly stable over time
and argued that this fact poses a challenge to proposals of using capital controls
as instruments of macroprudential management given the little experience in




                                        34
using them as counter-cyclical instruments through the business cycle.
    There may be a number of reasons for why these studies have failed to
identify a systemic policy response to capital ows. First, both the economic
literature and international policy community have only recently proposed that
it may be desirable to use capital controls as cyclical policy tools.   This may
explain why little cyclical use is visible in data going back decades.     The se-
cond reason is sample composition. Some of the studies combine middle-income
emerging market economies together with high-income and low-income countries
over long periods of time, resulting in a heterogeneous sample. Given that the
challenges posed by capital ows vary by type of economy, systematic responses
are dicult to document in such large and heterogeneous samples. The third
reason is that these studies use slow-moving annual indices that capture whether
restrictions are present or not, instead of the cyclical variations of restrictions
over the business cycle. Because many countries only adjust the restrictiveness
of capital controls (for example, by reducing or increasing taxes on inows), the
indices focusing on the presence/absence of restrictions will not capture such
intensity changes. Finally, there is also selection bias. The countries that adjust
their capital controls and countries that have high levels of restrictions have
dierent characteristics than other countries.    For example, countries such as
Brazil, Chile, South Korea, Indonesia, and Thailand adjust their restrictions on
capital ows more frequently, and several emerging market economies in Asia
(notably, China and India) have signicantly tighter capital controls than other
regions. The selection problem poses a signicant empirical challenge for studies
that aim to generate causal estimates of the eects of capital controls. Given
the little within-country variation for annual indicators, most studies cannot
use country xed eects to isolate the impact of time-invariant country charac-
teristics on outcome variables. While some use region xed eects, given the
large and systematic dierences across countries within regions, this may not
be sucient to address the selection issue.


Studies using higher frequency data           In response to the empirical chal-
lenges of using annual data, a number of studies have used higher frequency
data (weekly, monthly, or quarterly) that better captures time variation, and
adopted alternative empirical strategies to address the selection problem. Using
quarterly data for a more coherent sample of 50 emerging market economies
over 20052013, Ghosh, Ostry, and Qureshi (2017a) analyze the set of policy
instruments that countries employ to respond to capital inow surges, ranging
from monetary and scal policy to exchange rate interventions and capital con-
trols.   They nd that central banks increase policy interest rates to reduce
ination and overheating, and controlling for these, they tend to reduce interest
rates in the face of currency appreciation pressures.    The majority of central
banks also intervene heavily in the foreign exchange market, purchasing close
to 30-40 percent of capital inows.    On the other hand, scal policy is either
acyclical or procyclical, without evidence of a tightening during inow surges.
Finally, macroprudential tools (such as reserve requirements and loan-to-value




                                        35
and debt-to-income ratios), controls on bond inows, and currency-based pru-
dential measures are used in response to large portfolio and other investment
ows rather than in response to FDI. This evidence implies that the overall po-
licy response in emerging markets has been far from being acyclical: countries
use a number of tools and respond more during inow surges than in normal
times.
   Using weekly frequency data for 60 countries from 2009 through 2011 and
employing a propensity-score matching method to address selection, Forbes,
Fratzscher, and Straub (2015) nd that capital ow measures have a robust ef-
fect on reducing nancial vulnerability. In particular, they nd that an increase
in these measures lead to a reduction in bank leverage, ination expectations,
bank credit growth, and exposure to portfolio liabilities. However, they nd no
evidence of a signicant impact on net capital inows or real exchange rates.
   This evidence is consistent with ndings from the earlier individual-country
studies using high frequency data. Focusing on the use of unremunerated reserve
requirements (URRs) in Chile in the 1990s, several studies have consistently
shown that the URRs have had a signicant impact on the composition of capital
inows, shifting the composition toward longer maturity (De Gregorio, Edwards,
and Valdes, 2000; Edwards, 1999; Gallego, Hernandez, and Schmidt-Hebbel,
2002; Laban, Larrain, and Chumacero, 1997; Laban and Larrain, 1998; Laurens
and Cardoso,1998; Le Fort and Budnevich, 1998; Reinhart and Smith, 1998; and
Valdes-Prieto and Soto, 1995). Similar eects have also been documented for the
experience of Colombia with URRs in the 1990s (Le Fort and Budnevich, 1998;
Ocampo and Tovar, 2003; Baba and Kokenyne, 2011), the use of capital inow
controls in the Czech Republic in the 1990s and in Malaysia in 1989 (Reinhart
and Smith 1998), and again the use of capital inow controls in Malaysia in
1994 (Ariyoshi et al. 2000).
   In contrast, using quarterly information from local press releases and news
bulletins for 19 emerging market economies from 2002Q12013Q2 and adopting
a xed-eects model, Ahmed and Zlate (2014) nd that capital controls have
a signicant negative impact on both total and portfolio net inows for the
period 2009Q32013Q2, during which a large number of countries tightened
their controls on portfolio inows.   Using the same data on capital controls,
Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey (2018) illustrate that domestic prudential policies
are usually adjusted in tandem with bank reserve requirements, capital ow
restrictions, and monetary policy. Their dynamic panel analysis of 57 countries
from 2000Q12013Q4 shows that macroprudential tightening is associated with
lower bank credit growth, housing credit growth, and house price appreciation.
   Using monthly data from January 2000 to August 2008 for Brazil, Colom-
bia, Korea, and Thailand, Baba and Kokenyne (2011) nd that capital controls
are associated with a decline in capital inows and a lengthening of maturi-
ties; however, the estimated eects are temporary.    In a similar vein, Jordà,
Schularick, and Taylor (2011) use long-run historical data from 1870 to 2008
for 14 developed countries to examine whether external imbalances increase the
risk of nancial crises.   Their ndings show that credit growth is the single
best predictor of nancial instability, and even though external imbalances have



                                      36
played an additional role, this was more the case in the pre-WWII era of low
nancialization than today.
   To summarize, empirical studies using annual data to capture restrictions
on international capital ows face more signicant constraints in measuring the
intensity of capital ows and distinguishing them from time-invariant country
characteristics. More recent studies that use higher-frequency data sources and
alternative empirical methodologies to address selection generally reach more
consistent conclusions.   In particular, their ndings show that a tightening in
capital controls reduces nancial fragility indicators such as bank leverage, bank
credit, and exposure to portfolio liabilities; and their increased intensity in the
post-crisis period has led to a decline in net capital inows, particularly net
portfolio ows.   In cases where domestic prudential regulations were used as
complements to capital ow restrictions, there is also evidence that this has
led to a decline in private credit growth and appreciation of housing prices,
improving overall nancial stability.    The mechanisms through which capital
controls aect capital ows range from the direct eects of increasing the cost
of borrowing from abroad to the signal sent to international nancial markets
about future government policies. The degree to which these channels may be
at work depends on the implied cost of capital control policies and the dierent
perceptions of the signals by the markets.



2.6 Eects of Capital Controls on Macroeconomic Outco-
    mes
The empirical literature has analyzed how a wide range of macroeconomic out-
comes is aected by capital controls, going beyond the theoretical literature that
we surveyed in section 1.4 above in a number of directions. In the following,
we synthesize the ndings of this literature on (i) long-term growth eects, (ii)
short-term growth and consumption volatility eects, (iii) real exchange rate
eects, and (iv) eects on monetary policy independence. We provide a review
of the ndings for each set of outcomes, and explain dierences in empirical
methodologies employed.


Long-term growth
Empirical studies that focus on the relationship between long-term economic
growth and restrictions on capital ows (or nancial openness more broadly)
generally begin with testing the hypothesis that capital account liberalization
would lead to ows of capital from capital-abundant economies to capital-scarce
economies due to higher returns to capital in the latter ones. However, as fa-
mously shown by Lucas (1990), the actual volumes of capital ows in fact follow
the opposite prediction, as capital-scarce countries nance the balance of pay-
ments decits of capital-abundant countries. Nevertheless, the key theoretical
prediction remained that foreign capital inows provide necessary funding for
saving-constrained economies, and by reducing the cost of capital, allow for




                                        37
higher levels of investment and long-term growth.
                                                           20
    In one of the most inuential and detailed surveys of this literature, Kose
et al. (2009) conclude that the cross-country evidence on the eects of capital
account liberalization on long-term economic growth is inconclusive and lacks
robustness. Their own analysis also shows no evidence of a positive association
between growth and nancial openness. Instead, they argue that the benets
of nancial openness do not come from enhanced access to nancing for domes-
tic investment, but rather result from indirect (or collateral) benets such as
improving nancial sector development and imposing discipline on public and
private borrowers.      In another paper, Kose, Prasad, and Taylor (2011) have
shown that these collateral benets are only realized after some thresholds in
institutional quality are reached. Rodrik and Subramanian (2009) also nd no
evidence of a robust relationship between long-term growth and nancial open-
ness. In contrast, in a seminal review of the empirical literature, Henry (2007)
has argued that most empirical studies fail to nd a positive eect of capital
account liberalization on growth because they search for permanent eects on
the growth rate whereas the Solow growth model predicts that a permanent de-
crease in the cost of capital and a resulting increase in the investment-to-GDP
ratio would shift the level of output, i.e. it would only have a temporary eect
on the growth rate. He also demonstrated the weaknesses in the measurement
of capital control indices, which make it harder to empirically investigate the
theoretical predictions. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) nd that equity
market liberalizations specically increase economic growth.
    However, as Rodrik and Subramanian (2009) argued, the Solow growth mo-
del is not the only theoretical framework that motivates growth regressions,
and endogenous growth models predict policies to have long-run eects, mo-
tivating a large literature on growth eects of trade policy, scal policy, and
other structural policies.     Regarding the collateral benets argument, Rodrik
and Subramanian (2009) argue that this is not self-evident since nancial open-
ness may also weaken discipline of domestic actors and undermine institutional
development.     One example of the latter mechanism could be that improved
access to foreign nance may enable proigate governments to function with
soft budget constraints for more extended periods than otherwise possible. Mo-
reover, given that other potentially long-term factors that aect growth (such
as education and undervalued exchange rates) have displayed strong correla-
tions with long-term growth, it is also problematic to claim that the eects
of nancial openness are inherently more dicult to detect in the long-run.
Instead, Rodrik and Subramanian (2009) argue that most developing countries
are not saving-constrained, but rather investment-constrained, and foreign capi-
tal inows during booms appreciate the real exchange rate leading to allocation
of resources into lower-productivity non-tradables, and hence reducing overall
growth potential. Moreover, Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian (2007) and Gou-
rinchas and Jeanne (2013) nd that fast-growing countries rely less on foreign

  20 Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) evaluate this prediction and show that the resulting welfare
gains are actually quite limited even in a purely neoclassical economy with perfect markets.




                                             38
capital, and that foreign capital generally ows into countries that experience
lower productivity growth. Overall, empirical studies in this strand of literature
frequently suer from an endogeneity problem: there can be reverse causality
from economic growth to nancial openness, and omitted variable bias such that
other factors may have an impact on both of these outcomes, both of which make
it very dicult to reach a conclusive result.


Output and consumption volatility
A related body of empirical studies focuses on whether there is a robust relati-
onship between nancial integration and output/consumption volatility. Theo-
retically, improved access to foreign nance has an ambiguous eect on output
volatility. On the one hand, it could enable countries to diversify their output,
which could result in less sector-specic shocks; on the other hand, it could lead
to greater specialization and magnify the eects of sector-specic shocks. Mo-
reover, an increase in external indebtedness can also lead to higher exposure to
world interest rate shocks, and thus, to greater volatility in output. In contrast,
most theoretical models predict that nancial openness would reduce consump-
tion volatility by allowing for consumption smoothing over the business cycle.
However, empirical studies nd no supporting evidence for this prediction. Kose
and Terrones (2005) nd that consumption volatility increased relative to out-
put volatility in emerging economies during the period of nancial integration.
As noted in Kose et al. (2009), this result exactly runs counter to the theoretical
benet of nancial openness that it would allow countries to share income risk
and smooth consumption. After the 2008-09 Global Financial Crisis, the empi-
rical literature began to shift towards analyzing more directly whether capital
inows may reduce short-term output uctuations by using more disaggrega-
ted measures of capital inow controls, and testing their eectiveness over the
boom and bust phases separately.      Several studies have documented that the
countries that increased the restrictiveness of capital inow controls prior to
the Global Financial Crisis exhibited more resilience during the crisis, and the
countries that used capital controls prior to the post-crisis period experienced
less overheating after the crisis (Ostry et al., 2011a, 2011b, 2012; Erten and
Ocampo, 2017). These ndings suggest that the counter-cyclical use of capital
controls help reduce boom-bust cycles in real output growth, which tend to be
exacerbated by the volatility of capital ows.


Real exchange rate eects
Another strand of the empirical literature focuses on whether capital controls
reduce real exchange rate appreciation, or result in undervalued real exchange
rates. Rodrik (2008) nds that countries with higher capital account openness
have less undervalued real exchange rates, or that they suer from overvaluation
pressures. In their review of the literature, Magud, Reinhart, and Rogo (2018)
nd that capital inow controls generally reduce real exchange rate apprecia-
tion. In contrast, Klein (2012) nds no evidence of a signicant eect of capital




                                        39
controls on real exchange rate changes. As in the case of other macroeconomic
outcomes, the key problem of endogeneity remains as one examines the relati-
onship between capital controls and real exchange rate uctuations. There may
be reverse causality as countries with greater appreciation may attract more
capital inows, which may trigger the use of more restrictive capital controls.
There may be also omitted variables that simultaneously have an impact on
both the use of capital controls and the uctuations in the real exchange rate.
In order to address the endogeneity concerns, following Ostry et al. (2012), Er-
ten and Ocampo (2017) use binary variables on whether countries have bilateral
investment treaties with the U.S. or whether they signed the E.U. membership
agreement, both of which prohibit the use of capital controls, as instruments
for whether countries use various capital control measures. The instrumental-
variables regression results indicate that capital control measures as well as
foreign-exchange related regulations result in a reduction in real exchange rate
appreciation.
   Furthermore, most papers look at the eects of regulations on capital inows
and exchange rates as separate eects, but they are in fact two manifestations
of the same eect. Erten and Ocampo (2017) took this into account by creating
an overall index of the `foreign exchange pressure' generated by capital ows,
which can be reected either in reserve accumulation or exchange rates with
the mix depending on other macroeconomic policies. Using this methodology,
regulations are found to reduce foreign exchange pressures. This in eect is true
of emerging and developing countries but not of developed countries.
   In a similar vein, Montecino (2018) examines the adjustment dynamics of
the real exchange rate under dierent intensity of restrictions on capital ows,
and shows that capital controls increase the persistence of real exchange rate
misalignments. In particular, it nds that the real exchange rate converges to
its long-run level at signicantly lower rates in countries with capital controls.
The evidence also shows that this persistence is stronger when the exchange
rate is undervalued, and is independent of the exchange rate regime and other
confounding factors.


Monetary policy independence
Finally, a related body of empirical work assesses whether capital controls make
monetary policy more independent.     The trilemma of open economies implies
that it is not possible to have a xed exchange rate, open capital markets,
and monetary policy independence.      If a country is open to capital ows, it
faces a dicult tradeo between keeping exchange rate stable and having an
independent monetary policy.     For example, during booms, monetary policy
authorities can raise interest rates to reduce excessive overheating, but only
at the cost of an exchange rate appreciation, which may increase the trade
decit and lead to Dutch disease. The use of capital controls on inows allows
authorities to raise interest rates without strong eects on the exchange rate.
Hence, regulating capital ows in a counter-cyclical fashion provides a wedge for
the eects of capital ows on interest and exchange rates, and thereby, reduces




                                       40
the tradeo between monetary policy independence and exchange rate stability.
   The evidence on the monetary policy eects indicates that in most countries
capital controls have been eective in improving monetary policy autonomy. In
particular, several studies document that capital controls allowed for a more in-
dependent monetary policy in Chile in the 1990s (Ariyoshi et al., 2000; Chamon
and Garcia, 2016; De Gregorio, Edwards, and Valdes, 2000; Edwards, 1999; Gal-
lego, Hernandez, and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2002; and Le Fort and Budnevich, 1998)
and again in the 2000s (Baba and Kokenyne, 2011), in Colombia in the 1990s
(Le Fort and Budnevich, 1998; Ariyoshi et al., 2000; Villar and Rincón, 2003)
and again in the 2000s (Baba and Kokenyne, 2011), in Malaysia in the 1990s
(Ariyoshi et al., 2000; Edison and Reinhart, 2001; Kaplan and Rodrik, 2002;
Tamirisia, 2004), and in Thailand in the 1990s (Ariyoshi et al., 2000) and again
in the 2000s (Baba and Kokenyne, 2011). Magud, Reinhart, and Rogo (2018)
also note that capital controls have in general been found to increase monetary
policy independence, with particularly strong eects in Chile and Malaysia.



2.7 International Spillover Eects of Capital Controls
An important question concerns whether capital controls implemented in one
country can result in movement of capital ows into or out of other countries.
Korinek (2016) shows that international spillover eects are a necessary conse-
quence of capital account policies, and that they do create a case for internati-
onal policy coordination if countries either engage in strategic capital account
manipulation, lack policy instruments to deal with the spillovers, or experience
the consequences of imperfections in international capital markets.
   Although there are not many empirical studies that focus on international
spillovers from capital controls, some papers do nd signicant spillover eects.
Based on a sample of Latin American countries, Lambert, Ramos-Tallada, and
Rebillard (2011) use high frequency data on bond and equity ows to analyze the
spillover eects of one country's use of capital controls on neighboring countries.
Their ndings show that an increase in Brazil's tax on portfolio bond inows
in the post-crisis period has led to a rise in portfolio inows invested in other
Latin American countries. Although they nd that the eects are temporary
and followed by reversals of ows, the initial impact has been documented to be
fairly large. In particular, they nd that the increase in Brazil's capital inow
tax accounts for the entire rise in bond inows to Mexico during September and
October of 2010.
   Forbes et al. (2016) also identify spillover eects of Brazil's capital inow
taxes from 2006 to 2013.    As observed in section 2.4, they show that many
of the eects on international investors were likely driven by changes in their
expectations about future policies rather than by the direct cost of Brazil's
inow taxes. Foreign investors reduced their allocations to countries that they
expected to be more likely to also impose capital controls in the future. Giordani
et al. (2017) provide evidence that capital controls deect capital ows to other
countries with similar economic characteristics.
   Using a novel, high-frequency data on capital controls for 16 emerging market



                                       41
economies from 2001 to 2012, Pasricha et al. (2018) nd that tightening capital
inow restrictions generated signicant spillovers, particularly in the post-2008
period of high global liquidity. They also document that domestic policy makers
respond to changes in foreign capital controls in countries that are aected by
these spillovers.   In particular, they show that countries respond to capital
controls in the BRICS by changing their own capital controls.



3 The Policy Debate
3.1 A Brief History of the Policy Debate
The intellectual fathers of the Bretton Woods Agreement, John Maynard Keynes
and Harry Dexter White, both shared the view that free capital movements were
major sources of nancial instability that had generated substantial problems
in the 1920s and had led to the collapse of the world economy in the 1930s.
This was reected, above all, in their view that international capital movements
should not be allowed to disrupt the policy space for countries to use monetary
policy in pursuit of their domestic priorities, particularly full employment, and
the possibility of adjusting exchange rates but within a framework of stable
rates to facilitate the reconstruction of international trade in the post-war years
(see e.g. Ocampo, 2017, ch. 4).
   As part of the commitment to rebuild international trade, the Bretton Woods
Agreement obliged countries to eliminate regulations aecting trade and, more
broadly, current account transactions  although in a gradual way, given the
major payments imbalances that many of them faced. However, it also inclu-
ded the provision that Members may exercise such controls as are necessary
to regulate international capital movements, but no member may exercise these
controls in a manner which will restrict payments for current transactions (Ar-
ticle VI-3 of the Agreement). It also set forth the principle that IMF funds could
be used to nance balance of payments decits associated with current account
decits, but not those originating in the capital account, which were supposed
to be managed by capital controls. Moreover, the Agreement suggested coope-
ration among countries to make capital controls more eective.        Whereas the
freedom to regulate capital ows has been extensively used by IMF members,
these provisions on cooperation have been little used in practice.
   The OECD Code of Liberalization of Capital Movements was adopted when
the organization was created in 1961, but allowed countries to lodge reservation
to liberalization of specic transactions when they joined the OECD, and they
were also allowed by Article 7 of the Code to apply temporary (12-18 months)
derogations of the commitments when facing economic and nancial distur-
bances that justied reversing the liberalization process, or when facing severe
balance of payments problems. Although the Code was expanded in later deca-
des, these provisions in practice allowed for a very gradual liberalization of the
capital account for the original (developed country) members as well as by the
new entrants to the OECD from Southern Europe (Grith-Jones, Gottschalk,




                                        42
and Ciara, 2003).
    The reconstruction of private global nance after World War II began to take
shape in the late 1950s in the Eurodollar market, which derived its name from
the fact that it was the rst market to trade US dollars o-shore in Europe, par-
ticularly in London. However, it came with the balance of payments pressures
generated by cross-border capital ows  either positive or negative, depending
on the individual country. These pressures led to the strengthening of capital
account regulations, which focused on either reducing inows (Germany was
the pioneer in this regard) or mitigating outows (including France and the UK
in Western Europe, but also the US in the early 1960s). This also demanded
new forms of balance of payments nancing, in particular swap arrangements
among the central banks of major developed countries, sometimes intermediated
by the Bank for International Settlements, and larger IMF packages  in the
latter case, violating in a sense the principle that such nancing should not be
available to nance capital outows.
    What this implied is that, although the development of the London-centred
oshore market since the late 1950s did lead to growing cross-border capital
ows, and the OECD Code of Liberalization was in place since 1961, the indus-
trial countries reacted by using the various mechanisms provided by the Code
and allowed by the IMF to moderate capital account movements. The broad-
based shift toward liberalizing capital ows only started with the US in 1974
and, as we have seen, then spread to the rest of the developed world in the se-
cond half of the 1970s and through the 1980s and, as we saw in Section 2.2, was
essentially completed by the early 1990s. The process was aided by the adoption
of stronger OECD principles on capital account liberalization in the late 1980s,
which forced most recent members to remove capital account regulations more
quickly, and by the full liberalization of capital ows in the European Union in
1990.
    As we also showed in Section 2.2, capital account liberalization was slower
and less widespread in the emerging and developing world. In the 1980s, there
were several prominent critics within the Bretton Woods institutions to this
trend. In particular, Sebastian Edwards at the World Bank and Jacob Frenkel
at the IMF argued that capital account liberalization should be well sequenced,
and that capital controls were needed through the transition to guarantee ma-
croeconomic stability (Edwards, 1989; Frenkel, 1983). Over the course of the
1990s, many emerging and developing countries nonetheless joined the trend
under the inuence of the neoliberal Washington Consensus of the 1990s.
                                                                                       21
    In the late 1990s the US Treasury explicitly promoted capital account libera-
lization in developing countries (Abdelal, 2007). As many developing countries
experienced slow growth and were looking for new policies to stimulate their eco-
nomies, opening up to foreign capital ows seemed like a new way of achieving

  21 The   term Washington Consensus was rst used by John Williamson in 1989 to describe
a set of policy reforms that were widely viewed as desirable within the IMF, the World Bank,
and the US Treasury at the time. Originally, these reforms only included the liberalization
of inward FDI. Later, the term came to be understood more broadly to encompass a wider
neoliberal reform agenda that included broad capital account liberalization.




                                             43
this goal (see, Reinhart and Rogo, 2009, for a discussion of these processes,
based on similar episodes in the Southern Cone of Latin America in the 1970s).
The peak of this process was a proposal presented by the IMF Managing Direc-
tor, no doubt supported by the US, to the Annual Meetings of the IMF in Hong
Kong in 1997 to include capital account convertibility (liberalization) alongside
current account convertibility, as an obligation of its members in the IMF Ar-
ticles of Agreement. However, this proposal was not accepted, no doubt under
the diculties generated by the East Asian Financial Crisis, which was already
under way at the time.



3.2 Recent Policy Debates and the IMF Institutional View
    of 2012
The East Asian Crisis was a turning point in the debate on capital account
liberalization and management. The literature on the risks of capital account
liberalization and the eects of capital controls proliferated, as we have seen
throughout this paper. Beginning in early 2000s, a research team at the IMF
led by the Chief Economist Kenneth Rogo, provided a review of the litera-
ture and argued that the evidence for the benets of greater capital account
liberalization on economic growth and stability was weak at best (Kose et al.,
2003, 2009). Moreover, the rst major research by the IMF on capital controls,
issued while the East Asian crisis was still blowing, indicated that controls on
inows and outows were being actively used by emerging and developing coun-
tries, and they were in many cases eective in reducing the risks associated with
liberalization (Ariyoshi et al, 2000).
      However, the most interesting policy debates on the issue have taken place
after the Global Financial Crisis. The most important multilateral eort to re-
think the role of these regulations was undertaken by the IMF in 2011 and 2012,
leading to what came to be called the IMF Institutional View on capital ac-
count liberalization and management (IMF, 2012).
                                                            22 This exercise was backed
by signicant research by IMF sta, which has been extensively quoted in this
paper (see, in particular, the summary of this research in Ghosh, Ostry, and
Qureshi, 2017b). The IMF recognized that, although capital ows bring bene-
ts, they carry risks and, therefore, under certain circumstances, they should be
regulated to moderate both surges and sudden stops in external nancing. In
broader terms, it concluded that there is no presumption that full liberalization
is an appropriate goal for all countries at all times (IMF, 2012, par. 18) and,
particularly, that this goal should only be adopted when nations reach a certain
threshold of nancial and institutional development.
      The major recommendation was that nations should use capital ow mana-

 22
The G-20 also adopted a set of coherent conclusions for the management of capital ows
  during its 2011 Summit (G-20, 2011). The Financial Stability Board, by contrast, which was
  given the responsibility to strengthen nancial regulation and supervision to reduce systemic
  risk in nancial markets, left out policies to reduce the risks of cross-border capital ows.




                                             44
gement measures (CFMs), as the IMF termed capital controls in this report,
alongside other macroeconomic policies:     counter-cyclical monetary and scal
policies, active foreign exchange reserve management, and macroprudential do-
mestic nancial regulations.    However, a major limitation of the institutional
view is that it tends to view capital account regulations as interventions of last
resort rather than as an integral part of counter-cyclical macroeconomic policy
(Gallagher and Ocampo, 2013). In this alternative view, macroprudential regu-
lations on the capital account should be seen as permanent regulations that are
strengthened or weakened in a counter-cyclical way, and dynamically modied
to respond to developments in global and local capital markets.
   The institutional view was also a restatement of the principle that there is
no obligation to adopt capital account convertibility under the IMF Articles of
Agreement, an issue that was settled after the 1997 debates. In the words of
the major grouping of developing countries in the Bretton Woods institution,
the G-24, when this debate was ongoing:      Policy makers of countries facing
large and volatile capital ows must have the exibility and discretion to adopt
policies that they consider appropriate and eective to mitigate risks (G-24,
2011, par. 8).
   An important recognition of the institutional view was that the freedom
that countries have to regulate capital ows may be at odds with other inter-
national commitments. It stated that: even where the proposed institutional
view recognizes the use of inow or outow CFMs as an appropriate policy re-
sponse, these measures could still violate a member's obligations under other
international agreements if those agreements do not have temporary safeguard
provisions compatible with the Fund's approach (IMF, 2012, par. 42). This is
true of commitments on nancial service liberalization made within the WTO
and OECD but, particularly, of regional and bilateral trade and investment tre-
aties notably those in which the US is involved that require that all forms of
capital must ow freely and without delay among trade and investment part-
ners. The IMF thus suggested that its institutional view could help guide future
trade treaties and that the IMF could serve as a forum for such discussions.
   The institutional view also indicated that source countries should pay atten-
tion to the potentially negative spillover eects of their macroeconomic policies.
This is line with the view in the academic literature on the fact that nancial
regulations generate spillovers that may call for policy coordination (Korinek,
2016). However, these recommendations on international cooperation have had
little eect in practice. It remains to be seen whether the ongoing discussions in
the IMF on this issue will lead to a more nuanced approach to controls, or per-
haps to the adoption of an international regime determining which regulations
are appropriate and which are not, as well as an IMF code of good practice for
capital account policies, as Jeanne, Subramanian, and Williamson (2012) have
proposed.
   For its part, the OECD Code of Liberalisation of Capital Movements, which
was revised in 2019 (OECD, 2019), agreed with the need to keep the space for
macroprudential policies to manage the nancial stability concerns associated
with capital account volatility.   It thus kept the possibility for countries to



                                       45
propose reservations and temporary derogations, so long as they maintain the
principles of transparency, accountability and proportionality.     Actually, the
new Code underscored the role of special policies to managing capital inow
surges, including temporary derogations of the Code, but stated the preference
for possible restrictions on inows rather than outows.



4 Conclusion
The recent theoretical and empirical literature on capital controls provides a
useful framework to guide academics and policymakers on how to regulate in-
ternational capital ows. We summarize the theoretical rationale for the use of
capital controls to induce private investors to internalize their contribution to
nancial instability and aggregate demand. We synthesize these insights with
recent ndings that capital controls do indeed lead to improvements in nancial
stability in the empirical literature, particularly when they are used counter-
cyclically. By combining these two elements, our article provides an integrated
account of the recently developed new literature on capital controls.



References
Abdelal, R. 2007.   Capital Rules: The Construction of Global Finance.     Cam-
   bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

                                The Bankers' New Clothes: What's Wrong
Admati, A., and M. Hellwig. 2013.
   with Banking and What to Do about It. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton
   University Press.

Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, and A. Banerjee. 2000. A Simple Model of Monetary
   Policy and Currency Crises.     European Economic Review     44 (46): 72838.

Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, and A. Banerjee. 2001 Currency Crises and Monetary
   Policy in an Economy with Credit Constraints.      European Economic Review
   45 (7): 112150.

Ahmed, S. and A. Zlate. 2014. Capital ows to emerging market economies:
   a brave new world?       Journal of International Money and Finance, 48, 221-
   248.

Akinci, O. and J. Olmstead-Rumsey. 2018. How eective are macroprudential
   policies? An empirical investigation.     Journal of Financial Intermediation,
   33, 33-57.

Alfaro, L., A. Chari, and F. Kanczuk. 2017. The real eects of capital controls:
   Firm-level evidence from a policy experiment.    Journal of International Eco-
   nomics   108: 191-210.

Ariyoshi, A., K. Habermeier, B. Laurens, I. Ötker-Robe, J.I. Canales-Kriljenko,
   and A. Kirilenko. 2000. Capital Controls: Country Experiences with Their




                                        46
   Use and Liberalization.   Occasional Paper,     No. 190, Washington, DC: In-
   ternational Monetary Fund.

Baba, C. and A. Kokenyne.       2011.    Eectiveness of Capital Controls in Se-
   lected Emerging Markets in the 2000's. IMF Working Paper No. 11/281,
   December.

Bartolini, L. and Drazen, A. 1997a. Capital account liberalization as a signal.
   American Economic Review      87(1): 138154.

Bartolini, L. and Drazen, A. 1997b.       When Liberal Policies Reect Shocks,
   What Do We Learn?      Journal of International Economics       42 (3-4): 249-73.

Bekaert, G., C.R. Harvey, and C. Lundblad. 2005. Does Financial Liberaliza-
   tion Spur Growth?     Journal of Financial Economics       77(1): 3-55.

Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E.R. Young. 2013. Financial
   Crises and Macro-Prudential Policies.       Journal of International Economics
   89 (2): 453-470.

Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E.R. Young. 2016. Capital
   Controls or Exchange Rate Policies? A Pecuniary Externality Perspective.
   Journal of Monetary Economics        84: 147-165.

Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E.R. Young. 2019. Optimal
   Policy for Macro-Financial Stability.      Manuscript, LSE.
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler. 1985. Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel
   of Monetary Policy Transmission.       Journal of Economic Perspectives     9 (4):
   27-48.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler. 1989. Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
   Fluctuations.    American Economic Review       79 (1): 1431.

Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist. 1999. The Financial Accelerator in a
   Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.        Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol.
   1C, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 1341-93. Amsterdam:
   Elsevier B.V.

Bhagwati, J. 1998. The Capital Myth: The Dierence between Trade in Wid-
   gets and Trade in Dollars.   Foreign Aairs      77: 712.

Bianchi, J. 2011.   Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business
   Cycle.   American Economic Review       101 (7): 3400-3426.

Bianchi, J., E. Boz, and E.G. Mendoza.         2012.   Macroprudential Policy in a
   Fisherian Model of Financial Innovation.      IMF Economic Review      60(2):223-
   269.

Boz, E. 2009. Can Miracles Lead to Crises? The Role of Optimism in Emerging
   Markets Crises.    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking        41(6):1189-1215.

Caballero, R.J. and A. Krishnamurthy. 2003. Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial
   Development and Underinsurance.        Journal of Finance     58 (2): 867-893.



                                         47
Caballero, R.J. and G. Lorenzoni. 2014. Persistent appreciations and overs-
   hooting: A normative analysis.       IMF Economic Review        62: 1-47.

Calvo, G. 1998. The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops.              Journal of Applied
   Economics   1: 3554.

Céspedes, L.F., R. Chang, and A. Velasco. 2004. Balance Sheets and Exchange
   Rate Policy.   American Economic Review         94 (4): 1183-1193.

Chamon, M. and M. Garcia.         2016.   Capital Controls in Brazil:         Eective?
   Journal of International Money and Finance          61:163-187.

Chang, R. and A. Velasco. 2000a. Financial Fragility and the Exchange Rate
   Regime.    Journal of Economic Theory        92 (1): 1-34.

Chang, R. and A. Velasco.       2000b.    Liquidity Crises in Emerging Markets:
   Theory and Policy.     NBER Macroeconomics Annual            14: 11-78.

Chang, R. and A. Velasco.      2001.    A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging
   Markets.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics           116 (2): 489-517.

Chari, A. and P.B. Henry. 2004. Risk sharing and asset prices: evidence from
   a natural experiment.     The Journal of Finance        59 (3): 1295-1324.

Chari, A. and P.B. Henry. 2008. Firm-specic information and the eciency
   of investment.     Journal of Financial Economics, 87(3):       636-655.

Cheng, I.H., S. Raina, and W. Xiong.           2014.   Wall Street and the Housing
   Bubble.    American Economic Review         2014, 104(9): 2797-2829.

Chinn, M.D. and H. Ito.      2006.     What Matters for Financial Development?
   Capital Controls, Institutions, and Interactions.         Journal of Development
   Economics   81 (1): 163-192.

Chinn, M.D. and H. Ito. 2008. A New Measure of Financial Openness.              Journal
   of Comparative Policy Analysis, 10 (3):       309-22.

Chinn, M.D. and H. Ito. 2017. Notes on The Chinn-Ito Financial Openness
   Index, 2015 Update. http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Readme_kaopen2016.pdf.

Dávila, E. and A. Korinek. 2018. Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with
   Financial Frictions.   Review of Economic Studies        85 (1): 352-395.

De Gregorio, J., S. Edwards, and R. Valdes. 2000. Controls on Capital Inows:
   Do They Work? J      ournal of Development Economics         3 (1): 59-83.

Dornbusch, R. 1998. Capital Controls: An Idea Whose Time Is Gone. Massa-
   chusetts Institute of Technology.

Drazen, A. 1997. Policy Signaling in the Open Economy: A Re-Examination.
   NBER Working Paper 5892.

Edison, H. and C.M. Reinhart. 2001. Stopping Hot Money: On the Use of Ca-
   pital Controls during Financial Crises.       Journal of Development Economics
   66 (2): 533-553.



                                          48
Edwards, S. 1989.     Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation and Adjustment.            Cam-
   bridge: The MIT Press.

Edwards, S. 1999. How Eective are Capital Controls?                 Journal of Economic
   Perspectives   13 (4): 65-84.

Eichengreen, B., and M. Mussa. 1998. Capital Account Liberalization: Theo-
   retical and Practical Aspects.    Occasional Paper, No.        172, Washington, DC:
   International Monetary Fund.

Eichengreen, B. and A. Rose.       2014.   Capital Controls in the 21st Century.
   Journal of International Money and Finance           48: 1-16.

Erten, B. and J.A. Ocampo. 2017. Macroeconomic Eects of Capital Account
   Regulations.    IMF Economic Review          65 (2): 193-240.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning. 2012. Dealing With the Trilemma: Optimal Capital
   Controls With Fixed Exchange Rates. NBER Working Paper No. 18199.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning.    2014.   Dilemma not Trilemma?             Capital Controls
   and Exchange Rates with Volatile Capital Flows.              IMF Economic Review
   62: 569-605.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning. 2016. A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the
   Presence of Nominal Rigidities.     Econometrica         84 (5): 1645-1704.

Fernández, A., Rebucci, A., & Uribe, M. 2015. Are capital controls countercy-
   clical?   Journal of Monetary Economics         76, 1-14.

Fernández, A., M.W. Klein, A. Rebucci, M. Schindler, and M. Uribe.                2016.
   Capital Control Measures:       A New Dataset.           IMF Economic Review     64:
   548-574.

Fisher, I. 1933. The Debt-Deation Theory of Great Depressions.                Econome-
   trica   1(4): 337-57.

Fischer, S. 2003. Globalization and Its Challenges.            American Economic Re-
   view: Papers and Proceedings      93(2): 1-30.

Forbes, K.J., 2007. One cost of the Chilean capital controls: Increased nancial
   constraints for smaller traded rms,           Journal of International Economics
   71(2): 294-323

Forbes, K.J., M. Fratzscher and R. Straub.          2015.    Capital-ow management
   measures: What are they good for?            Journal of International Economics,
   96: S76-S97.

Forbes, K.J., M. Fratzscher, T. Kostka, and R. Straub. 2016. Bubble Thy Neig-
   hbor: Portfolio Eects and Externalities from Capital Controls.            Journal of
   International Economics    99: 85-104.

Frenkel, J.A. 1983. Panel Discussion on the Southern Cone.             IMF Sta Papers
   30 (1): 164-173.




                                           49
G-20 (Group of Twenty). 2011. G-20 Coherent Conclusions for the Manage-
   ment of Capital Flows Drawing on Country Experiences. http://www.g20.org/

G-24 (Group of Twenty-Four).       2011.   Intergovernmental Group of Twenty-
   Four on International Monetary Aairs and Development Communiqué. 11
   April. Washington, DC: IMF and World Bank.

             Monetary policy, ination, and the business cycle: an introduction
Galí, J. 2015.
   to the New Keynesian framework and its applications. Princeton and Oxford:
   Princeton University Press.

Gallagher, K.P., S. Grith-Jones, and J.A. Ocampo. 2012.          Regulating Global
   Capital Flows for Long-Run Development.       Boston: Pardee Center.

Gallagher, K.P. and J.A. Ocampo. 2013. IMF's New View on Capital Con-
   trols.   Economic and Political Weekly    48 (12): 10-13.

Gallego, F., L. Hernandez, and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. 2002. Capital Controls in
   Chile: Were They Eective? in       Banking, Financial Integration, and Inter-
   national Crises.    edited by L. Hernandez and K. Schmidt-Hebbel, 361-412.
   Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile.

Geanakoplos, J.D., and H.M. Polemarchakis.         1986.   Existence, Regularity,
   and Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset
   Market is Incomplete. in    Essays in Honor of Kenneth Arrow, Vol.    3. edited
   by W. Heller, R. Starr, and D. Starrett, 65-95.         Cambridge:   Cambridge
   University Press.

Gertler, M., and S. Gilchrist. 1994. Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the
   Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms,        Quarterly Journal of Economics
   109 (2): 309-40.

Ghosh, A.R., J.D. Ostry and M.S. Qureshi. 2017a. Managing the tide: How
   do emerging markets respond to capital ows?          IMF Working Paper No.
   17/69.

Ghosh, A.R., J.D. Ostry and M.S. Qureshi. 2017b.      Taming the Tide of Capital
   Flows: A Policy Guide      Cambridge: MIT Press.

Giordani, P., M. Ruta, H, Weisfeld, and L. Zhu. 2017. Capital ow deection.
   Journal of International Economics      105(C): 102-118.

Gourinchas, P.O., and O. Jeanne. 2006. The Elusive Gains From International
   Financial Integration."    Review of Economic Studies    73(3): 715-741.

Gourinchas, P.O., and O. Jeanne. 2013. Capital Flows to Developing Coun-
   tries:   The Allocation Puzzle.    Review of Economic Studies      80(4):   1484-
   1515.

Greenwald, B.C., and J.E. Stiglitz.     1986.   Externalities in Economies with
   Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets.        Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics    90 (2): 22964.




                                        50
Grith-Jones, S., R. Gottschalk, and X. Ciara.          2003.    The OECD Expe-
   rience with Capital Account Liberalization. in United Nations Conference
   on Trade and Development,   Management of Capital Flows: Comparative Ex-
   periences and Implications for Africa, Part 2, New York and Geneva: United
   Nations, April.

Gupta, P., and O. Masetti. 2018. Capital ow measures: structural or cyclical
   policy tools? Policy Research Working Paper 8418, World Bank.

Hart, O. 1975. On the Optimality of Equilibrium When the Market Structure
   is Incomplete.    Journal of Economic Theory     11: 418-443.

Henry, P.B., 2007. Capital account liberalization: Theory, evidence, and spe-
   culation.   Journal of Economic Literature     45(4): 887-935.

Hutchison, M.M., G.K. Pasricha, and N. Singh. 2012. Eectiveness of Capital
   Controls in India: Evidence from the Oshore NDF Market.           IMF Economic
   Review   60 (3): 395-438.

IMF. 2012. The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An Insti-
   tutional View. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, November
   14th.

Jeanne, O., A. Subramanian, and J. Williamson. 2012. Who Needs to Open
   the Capital Account? Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International
   Economics.

Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek.       2010.   Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A
   Pigouvian Taxation Approach.          American Economic Review     100 (2): 403-
   407.

Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek. 2013. Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping
   Up After the Crash. NBER Working Paper No. 18675.

Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek. 2019. Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping
   Up After the Crash.       Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Jinjarak, Y., I. Noy, and H. Zheng. 2013. Capital controls in Brazil  Stemming
   a tide with a signal?     Journal of Banking and Finance     37: 2938-2952.

Jordà, Ò., M. Schularick, and A.M. Taylor.         2011.   Financial crises, credit
   booms, and external imbalances: 140 years of lessons.        IMF Economic Re-
   view, 59(2):   340-378.

Kaplan, E. and D. Rodrik. 2002. Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?
   in   Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets.        edited by S. Edwards
   and J.A. Frankel, 393-440.      Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the
   NBER.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore. 1997. Credit Cycles.     Journal of Political Economy
   105 (2): 211-48.

Klein, M.W. 2012. Capital Controls: Gates and Walls.           Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity    2012 (1): 317-367.



                                          51
Korinek, A. 2007. Dollar Borrowing in Emerging Markets.         Dissertation, Co-
   lumbia University.
Korinek, A. 2010. Regulating capital ows to emerging markets: An externality
   view.   SSRN Working Paper.
Korinek, A. 2011a.    Excessive Dollar Borrowing in Emerging Markets.        Ma-
   nuscript, University of Maryland.   http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.967524
Korinek, A. 2011b. The new economics of prudential capital controls: A rese-
   arch agenda.    IMF Economic Review      59 (3): 523-561.

Korinek, A. 2016.     Currency Wars or Ecient Spillovers? NBER Working
   Paper No. 23004.

Korinek, A. 2018. Regulating capital ows to emerging markets: An externality
   view.   Journal of International Economics    111: 61-80 .
Korinek, A. and D. Sandri. 2016. Capital Controls or Macroprudential Regu-
   lation?   Journal of International Economics     99(S1): S27-S42.

Korinek, A. and A. Simsek.    2016.   Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage.
   American Economic Review      106(3): 699-738.

Kose, M.A., E. Prasad, K.S. Rogo, and S.-J. Wei. 2003. Eects of Financial
   Globalization on Developing Countries:       Some Empirical Evidence.    IMF
   Occasional Paper    220. Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Kose, M.A. and M.E. Terrones.      2005.    Growth and Volatility in an Era of
   Globalization.    IMF Sta Papers    52: 31-63.

Kose, M.A., E.S. Prasad, K.S. Rogo, and S.-J. Wei. 2009. Financial Globali-
   zation: A Reappraisal.    IMF Sta Papers     56(1): 8-62

Kose, M.A., E.S. Prasad, and A.D. Taylor. 2011. Thresholds in the process
   of international nancial integration.    Journal of International Money and
   Finance   30: 147-179.

Krugman, P.R. 1979.      A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises.        Journal of
   Money, Credit and Banking    11(3): 311-325.

Krugman, P.R. 1999a. Balance Sheets, The Transfer Problem, and Financial
   Crises. in International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of
   Robert P. Flood Jr., edited by P. Isard, A. Razin and A. Rose. Washington,
   DC: International Monetary Fund: 31-44.

Krugman, P.R. 1999b.     What happened to Asia? In        Global competition and
   integration.   Ed. by R. Sato, R.V. Ramachandran and K. Mino: 315-327.

Laban, R.M. and F. Larrain. 1998. The Return of Private Capital to Chile in
   the 1990s: Causes, Eects, and Policy Reactions. Faculty Research Working
   Paper Series R98-02, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, John F. Kennedy
   School of Government.




                                       52
Laban, R.M., F. Larrain, and R. Chumacero. 1997. What Determines Capital
   Inows? An Empirical Analysis for Chile. Faculty Research Working Paper
   Series R97-09, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University John F. Kennedy School
   of Government.

Lahiri, A. and C.A. Végh.        2003.     Delaying The Inevitable:      Interest Rate
   Defense And Balance Of Payments Crises.            Journal of Political Economy
   111(2): 404-424.

Laibson, D. 1997. "Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting."         Quarterly Journal
   of Economics   112(2): 443-477.

Lambert, F.J., J. Ramos-Tallada, and C. Rebillard.         2011.    Capital Controls
   and Spillover Eects: Evidence from Latin-American Countries. Banque de
   France Working Paper No. 357.

Laurens, B. and L. Cardoso. 1998. Managing Capital Flows: Lessons from the
   Experience of Chile. IMF Working Paper 98/168.

Le Fort, G. and C. Budnevich. 1998. Capital Account Regulations and Ma-
   croeconomic Policy: Two Latin Experiences. in          Capital Account Regimes
   and the Developing Countries,         edited by G.K. Helleiner.    United Nations
   Conference on Trade and Development.

Lorenzoni, G. 2008.       Inecient Credit Booms.       Review of Economic Studies
   75(3): 809-833.

Lucas, R. 1990.    Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries.
   American Economic Review         80 (2): 926.

Ma, C. 2019. Financial stability, growth and macroprudential policy.          Journal
   of International Economics, forthcoming.
Magud, N.E., C.M. Reinhart, and K.S. Rogo. 2018. Capital controls: Myth
   and reality - A portfolio balance approach.        Annals of Economics and Fi-
   nance   19(1): 1-47.

McKinnon, R.I. and H. Pill.        1997.    Credible Economic Liberalizations and
   Overborrowing.     American Economic Review         87(2): 189-193.

McKinnon, R.I. and H. Pill. 1998. International Overborrowing: A Decompo-
   sition of Credit and Currency Risks.         World Development    26(7): 1267-1282.

Mendoza, E.G. 2005. Real Exchange Rate Volatility and the Price of Nontra-
   dables in Sudden-Stop-Prone Economies.           Economia   6 (1): 103-148.

Mendoza, E.G. 2010. Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage.            American
   Economic Review        100(5): 1941-1966.

Obstfeld, M., and K.S. Rogo. 1996.         Foundations of International Macrocono-
   mics.   Cambridge: MIT Press.

Montecino, J.A., 2018. Capital controls and the real exchange rate: Do controls
   promote disequilibria?      Journal of International Economics, 114, 80-95.

                                           53
Montiel, P. and C.M. Reinhart. 1999. Do capital controls and macroeconomic
   policies inuence the volume and composition of capital ows?             Evidence
   from the 1990s.     Journal of International Money and Finance, 18(4):       619-
   635.

Ocampo, J.A. 2008. A Broad View of Macroeconomic Stability. In              The Wa-
   shington Consensus Reconsidered, chapter 6:        63-94. Edited by N. Serra and
   J.E. Stiglitz. New York: Oxford University Press.

Ocampo, J.A. 2017.     Resetting the International Monetary (Non)System,         WI-
   DER Studies in Development Economics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ocampo, J.A., and C. Tovar. 2003. Colombia's Experience with Reserve Re-
   quirements on Capital Inows.     CEPAL Review         81: 7-31.

Ocampo, J.A. and J.G. Palma.       2008.       The role of preventative capital ac-
   count regulations.   The Initiative for Policy Dialogue Series, 170, Columbia
   University.

OECD. 2019. OECD Code of Liberalisation of Capital Movements.
   http://www.oecd.org/investment/codes.htm
Ostry, J.D., A.R. Ghosh, K. Habermeier, M. Chamon, M.S. Qureshi, and D.B.S.
   Reinhardt. 2010. Capital Inows: The Role of Controls.             IMF Sta Posi-
   tion Note   10/04. Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Ostry, J.D., A.R. Ghosh, K. Habermeier, L. Laeven, M. Chamon, M.S. Qureshi,
   and A. Kokenyne. 2011a. Managing Capital Inows: What Tools to Use?
   IMF Sta Discussion Note        11/6.        Washington:   International Monetary
   Fund.

Ostry, J.D., A.R. Ghosh, M. Chamon, M.S. Qureshi. 2011b. Capital Controls:
   When and Why?        IMF Economic Review        59(3): 562-580.

Ostry, J.D., A.R. Ghosh, M. Chamon, and M.S. Qureshi. 2012. Tools for ma-
   naging nancial stability risks from capital inows.        Journal of International
   Economics     88: 407-421.

Quinn, D. 1997. The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regula-
   tion.   American Political Science Review       91(3): 531-551.

Quinn, D., S. Martin, and A.M. Toyoda. 2011. Assessing Measures of Financial
   Openness and Integration.    IMF Economic Review          59(3): 488-522.

Pasricha, G.K., Falagiarda, M., Bijsterbosch, M. and Aizenman, J., 2018. Do-
   mestic and multilateral eects of capital controls in emerging markets.
   Journal of International Economics, 115, 48-58.
Prasad, E., R.G. Rajan, and A. Subramanian.             2007.   Foreign Capital and
   Economic Growth.      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity        1: 153-209.

Rebucci, A., and C. Ma. 2019. Capital Controls: A Brief Survey of the New
   Literature.    Manuscript, Johns Hopkins University.

                                          54
Reinhart, C.M., and K.S. Rogo. 2009.     This Time is Dierent: Eight Centuries
   of Financial Folly   Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Reinhart, C.M. and T. Smith, 1998.      Too Much of a Good Thing: The Ma-
   croeconomic Eects of Taxing Capital Inows. In R. Glick, editor.    Mana-
   ging Capital Flows and Exchange Rates: Perspectives from the Pacic Basin.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 436-464.

Reinhart, C.M. and T. Smith. 2002. Temporary Controls on Capital Inows.
   Journal of International Economics     57 (2): 327-351.

Rodrik, D. 1998. Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?              In Should the
   IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility?        edited by Stanley Fischer and
   others.    Essays in International Finance no.      207.    International Finance
   Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.

Rodrik, D. 2008. The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth.                Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity     39 (2): 365-439.

Rodrik, D. and A. Subramanian.        2009.     Why Did Financial Globalization
   Disappoint?    IMF Sta Papers     56 (1): 112-138.

Rossi, M. 1999. Financial Fragility and Economic Performance in Developing
   Economies; Do Capital Controls, Prudential Regulation and Supervision
   Matter? IMF Working Papers 99/66.

Saborowski, C., S. Sanya, H. Weisfeld, and J. Yepez.          2014.   Eectiveness of
   Capital Outow Restrictions. IMF Working Paper. WP/14/8.

Schindler, M. 2009.     Measuring nancial integration: A new data set.          IMF
   Sta Papers     56: 222-238.

Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe.      2016.    Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity,
   Currency Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment.             Journal of Political Eco-
   nomy   124(5): 1466-1514  .
Stiglitz, J.E. 1982. The Ineciency of the Stock Market Equilibrium.           Review
    of Economic Studies 49(2): 241-61.
Stiglitz, J.E. 2002. Globalization and Its Discontents.     New York: W. W. Norton.

Summers, L. 2000.     International Financial Crises:        Causes, Prevention, and
   Cures.    American Economic Review        90(2): 1-16.

Sunstein C.R. and R.H. Thaler.       2003.    "Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an
   Oxymoron."     University of Chicago Law Review      70(4): 1159-1202.

Tamirisia, N. 2004.     Do Macroeconomic Eects of Capital Controls Vary by
   Their Type? Evidence from Malaysia. IMF Working Paper 04/3.

Valdes-Prieto, S. and M. Soto. 1995. New Selective Capital Controls in Chile:
   Are They Eective? Universidad Catolica de Chile, Mimeo.

Weitzman, M. 1974. Prices vs. Quantities.        Review of Economic Studies 41(4):
   477-491.



                                        55
Woodford, M. 2004.     Interest and prices: Foundations of a theory of monetary
   policy.   Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Villar, L. and H. Rincón. 2003. The Colombian economy in the nineties: capital
   ows and foreign exchange regimes. in     Critical Issues in Financial Reform:
   A View from the South,     composed by A. Berry (comp.), New Brunswick,
   New Jersey: Transaction Publishers.




                                       56
