                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CROWDING IN WITH IMPURE ALTRUISM:
       THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM VOLUNTEERISM IN NATIONAL PARKS

                                       Matthew Kotchen
                                     Katherine R.H. Wagner

                                      Working Paper 26445
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26445


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We are grateful to Ted Bergstrom, Nathan Chan, Joshua Gottlieb, Catie Hausman, Grant
Jacobsen, Erin Mansur, Todd Sandler, Joe Shapiro, Lise Vesterlund, and Casey Wichman for
helpful comments and discussions, along with seminar participants who commented on earlier
versions of this research at Carnegie Mellon University, Columbia University, McGill University,
London School of Economics, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Barbara, University of Connecticut,
University of Pittsburgh, Yale University, and the 2019 NBER Summer Institute. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Matthew Kotchen and Katherine R.H. Wagner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Crowding In with Impure Altruism: Theory and Evidence from Volunteerism in National
Parks
Matthew Kotchen and Katherine R.H. Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 26445
November 2019
JEL No. H40,H50,Q26

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper makes three contributions to the literature on private provision of public goods. First,
we identify limitations of the frequently used specification test that distinguishes between the
standard models of pure and impure altruism based on the extent of crowding out. While the
literature takes as given the result that crowding out should be less with impure altruism
compared with pure altruism, we show that, in general, it can be either more or less. Second, we
propose a more general test based on the presence of crowding in, rather than the extent of
crowding out. Third, we provide empirical evidence. Using a unique panel data set on
volunteerism in U.S. National Parks, we estimate the causal effect of changes in public funding
within parks on the amount of within-park volunteerism. The overall finding is that each
additional dollar of public expenditure crowds in 27 cents worth of volunteerism on average. We
show how the estimates of crowding in, along with heterogeneity based on park and volunteer
hour types, are theoretically consistent with the mainstay model of impure altruism.


Matthew Kotchen
School of Forestry & Environmental Studies,
School of Management,
and Department of Economics
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu

Katherine R.H. Wagner
Department of Economics
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06511
katherine.wagner@yale.edu
1    Introduction

How does government provision of a public good affect private provision? The question
is central to public economics. Implementing the optimal supply of public goods through
government policy requires an understanding of the behavioral responses to public provi-
sion. If, for example, public supply crowds out private provision, then failing to account
for the behavioral response means that the intended level of the public good will come
up short. If, however, there is crowding in, then public provision can be used to lever-
age greater private contributions. Theoretical and empirical studies of crowding effects
also provide the basis for an extensive literature that seeks to identify the underlying mo-
tives of charitable behavior. In particular, the extent of crowding out is widely used as the
standard test between the models of pure and impure altruism, which provide different
explanations for why individuals engage in charitable activity.
    In this paper, we identify limitations of the theoretical foundation for using crowding
out as a specification test between pure and impure altruism. The literature takes as given
the result that crowding out should be less with impure altruism compared with pure
altruism, but we show that it can be more or less. Indeed, we show that the standard spec-
ification test is based on an implicitly assumed special case. We propose an alternative and
more general test based on the presence of crowding in, rather than the extent of crowd-
ing out. We then illustrate the test in an empirical setting that seeks to overcome many of
the challenges in previous studies that estimate crowding effects. We take advantage of a
unique panel data set on volunteerism in U.S. National Parks to estimate the causal effect
of changes in public funding to a park on the amount of within-park volunteerism, along
with heterogeneous effects by park and volunteer-hour type.
    The seminal theory on private provision of a public good establishes the basic frame-
work for crowding out (e.g., Warr 1982; Roberts 1984; Cornes and Sandler 1985; Bergstrom,
Blume and Varian 1986). With a pure public good, an individual's own provision and pub-
lic provision are perfect substitutes, and the private and public goods over which individ-
uals obtain utility are both assumed to be normal (i.e., not inferior). One consequence is
that public good provision financed through lump-sum taxation crowds out private pro-
vision one-for-one, assuming an interior solution. Despite the influence and theoretical
appeal of these models, many of the results, including the notion of complete crowding
out, are viewed as limited because of their empirical implausibility. Indeed, Andreoni
(2006) summarizes many of the implications associated with complete crowding out as a
classic reducto ad absurdum.1
   1 Specifically, Andreoni (2006) argues that, "If we are going to accept complete crowding out, we also need

to believe in near complete crowding of any government gifts to charity, that only the very richest are giving,
that redistributions of income are neutral as long as people are giving to charities, and that even `distortionary'
taxes may be non-distortionary" (p.1219).




                                                        1
    Other models of privately provided public goods seek to reconcile the apparent discon-
nect between theoretical predictions and empirical observations. In many cases, a broader
formulation of individual preferences is used to help explain why crowding out might be
less than complete. One of the most influential is Andreoni's (1989, 1990) model of impure
altruism. In addition to enjoying the benefits of a public good, individuals are assumed to
enjoy a private "warm-glow" benefit from the act of their own giving. This setup implies
that private and public provision are no longer perfect substitutes, and a foundational
result for much of the literature is that crowding out becomes incomplete (i.e., less than
one-for-one). A more general formulation is also found in Cornes and Sandler's (1984,
1994) model of an impure public good, which is based on joint production of private and
public characteristics.2
    There exists a substantial empirical literature on crowding out that tests between the
models of impure altruism and pure altruism (i.e., the pure public good model). As men-
tioned above, underlying much of this research is the theoretical prediction that crowding
out should be less with impure altruism than with pure altruism. In an early and influ-
ential contribution, Kingma (1989) estimates incomplete crowding out of private contribu-
tions to public radio stations, and because of this, the results are generally interpreted as
consistent with the model of impure altruism. Building on the same theoretical and empir-
ical approach, other papers estimate crowding out in a variety of contexts (e.g., Ribar and
Wilhelm 2002; Okten and Weisbrod 2011; Borgonovi 2006; Hungerman 2005; Payne 2009;
Andreoni and Payne 2003, 2011). Another strand of the literature uses controlled labora-
tory experiments to estimate crowding out and test between the models of pure and im-
pure altruism (e.g., Andreoni 1993; Eckel, Grossman and Johnston 2005; Ottoni-Wilhelm,
Vesterlund and Xie 2017).
    The majority of studies find evidence of crowding out, albeit less than complete. A
recent meta-analysis finds that crowding out is more likely to arise in experimental studies,
whereas observational studies are more clustered around the finding of no effect (de Wit
and Bekkers 2017). Figure 1 shows the probability density functions for the estimated
crowding effects separately for experimental and non-experimental studies. In total, 38
percent of the estimates have a finding of crowding in rather than crowding out. In these
cases, because the current interpretation of the standard model of impure altruism does
not admit crowding in, the results are typically described as outliers or interpreted in the
context of models that account for additional elements (e.g., Khanna and Sandler 2000;
Payne 2001; Andreoni and Payne 2011). With respect to individual contributions, these
explanations include the possibility that public provision signals quality in a way that
makes private contributions more attractive to donors, or perhaps increases the scale or
    2 Joint production is also consistent with other approaches for modeling charitable behavior based on repu-

tation (Hollander 1990; Harbaugh 1998), signaling about income (Glazer and Konrad 1986), and environmen-
tally friendly consumption (Kotchen 2005, 2006).


                                                      2
scope of fundraising.3
    In the first part of this paper, we reconsider the theoretical basis for crowding out in
the standard model of impure altruism, and we come to different conclusions. We show
that the standard normality assumptions with impure altruism are not directly compara-
ble to those for the pure public good model, because the constrained setup with impure
altruism creates a divergence between normality based on primitive preferences and the
income effect on demand functions.4 One consequence is that assuming normality in the
usual sense of preferences means that crowding in, along with crowding out, is a plausi-
ble consequence with impure altruism. Nevertheless, this possibility appears to be either
overlooked or implicitly assumed away, with important implications for interpretation of
the model.
    More important, we show that, in general, crowding out can be either more or less
with impure altruism compared to pure altruism, even under impure altruism's standard
set of assumptions. The relative magnitudes depends in large part on the degree of Hick-
sian complementarity or substitutability between the jointly produced private and public
characteristics (i.e., the public good, and warm glow or some other private benefit). This
means that the standard specification test in the literature for distinguishing between pure
and impure altruism does not hold in general, and we show how previous analyses are
based on an implicitly assumed special case of additive separability in the utility func-
tion. Finally, we propose an alternative and more general specification test based on the
presence of crowding in, which we show is consistent with impure altruism, but not pure
altruism.
    In the second part of the paper, we estimate the crowding effect in an empirical setting
that allows us to illustrate the new specification test. To do so, we exploit administrative
data from the Volunteers-In-Parks (VIP) program of the U.S. National Park Service (NPS)
from the years 1998 to 2013. The data set includes the total number of volunteer hours
in all NPS units, along with the type of activity associated with each hour (e.g., resource
conservation, indoor administration, etc.). We combine these 16 years of volunteer data
with other sources of data on annual park budgets and visitation. Our primary objective
is to estimate the causal effect of changes in federal funding within parks on within-park
volunteerism. A unique feature of the focus on volunteerism in national parks, rather than
monetary contributions, is that private provision of the public good is clearly associated
with a jointly produced private benefit. Volunteerism contributes to the public good of
conservation, while simultaneously creating opportunities for in situ park enjoyment. Un-
   3 We   focus here on the private provision of individuals. Another strand of the public finance literature
studies crowding in or out at different levels of government. In this context, crowding in is sometimes referred
to as the "flypaper effect" in recognition that public money tends to stick where it hits (Hines and Thaler 1995).
    4 This results emerges from a comparison of the analytical approaches of Andreoni (1989, 1990) and Cornes

and Sandler (1984, 1994).



                                                        3
like most other studies of crowding effects, our study therefore takes place in a setting
where impure altruism is the expected model ex ante, rather than the model deduced from
the estimates ex post.5 Hence a finding of crowding in is consistent with our new specifica-
tion test for distinguishing between the models of pure and impure altruism.
    The empirical setting also has a number of unique advantages that help to overcome
challenges that arise in existing studies of crowding effects. First, all of the park units in
our sample are managed in the same way through the NPS, and this adds a unique degree
of homogeneity across the units of analysis. Most other studies rely on cross-sections or
panels of charities that provide different public goods and operate in different ways.6 Sec-
ond, federal funding accounts for the vast majority of the operating budget within parks,
thereby reducing concerns about endogenous fundraising from outside sources and fund-
ing from other levels of government. Third, this is the first study we are aware of to exam-
ine crowding out or in of time rather than money. Fourth, because individuals generally
volunteer in only one park, our analysis is not subject to concerns about substitution be-
tween units of study masked by aggregate data. Fifth, the breadth and length of our panel
means that we can estimate within-unit crowding effects over a longer period of time than
most other studies. Finally, the detailed data on volunteer hours broken down by type
of activity enables a unique opportunity to examine heterogeneous effects informed by
theory.
    Our preferred estimates are based on a shift-share instrumental variables approach.
Specifically, we instrument for changes in park funding with a Bartik-style interaction be-
tween individual park budgets three years prior to our period of analysis and changes in
Congressional support for conservation issues, as measured by the League of Conserva-
tion Voters. We find that, on average, a $1,000 increase in a park's annual funding increases
volunteerism by 12.4 hours. Using a standard wage rate for conversion, this translates into
crowding in of 27 cents for every additional dollar of public expenditure. We show how
the overall results are theoretically consistent with the model of impure altruism, as are the
heterogeneous results that we find based on volunteer-hour and park types. In particular,
we find evidence of crowding in that is greater for volunteer hours and parks that are more
conservation and outdoors oriented--that is, in circumstances where the joint production
of public and private benefits are most likely to arise.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next three sections develop our
theoretical analysis. We begin with background on the standard model for impure altru-
ism. Sections 3 and 4 revisit the approach for analyzing crowding out, make direct com-
   5 Although the jointly produced private benefit of impure altruism is usually characterized as a warm glow,

the model is equivalent to that of an impure public good (Cornes and Sandler 1984, 1994) that can apply to
any private benefit, such as in situ park enjoyment in this case.
   6 While most studies in the literature on crowding effects focus on social services (Andreoni and Payne

2013), one distinguishing feature herein is a focus on behavior related to environmental and natural resource
conservation.


                                                      4
parisons to show why the new set of results differ, and put forth the new specification test
based on crowding in. Section 5 describes our empirical setting and data collection. Sec-
tion 6 outlines our empirical strategy. Section 7 reports the estimation results, considers
robustness checks, and discusses possible alternative explanations. Section 8 provides a
concluding discussion.


2      Impure Altruism: Preliminaries

This section begins with the setup and assumptions of Andreoni's (1989, 1990) seminal
model of impure altruism. We then reproduce the model's well-established results on
crowding out to provide points of reference for our alternative derivation and reconcilia-
tion of differing results in Sections 3 and 4.


2.1     Setup and Assumptions

Individual preferences are given by a strictly increasing and strictly quasiconcave utility
function of the form Ui ( xi , G, gi ), where xi is a private good, gi is the individual's own
contribution to the public good G = gi + G-i , and G-i is the exogenously given level of
the public good provided by all others. Letting wi denote the individual's wealth endow-
ment, and normalizing prices to unity, the individual's utility maximization problem can
be written as
                      max Ui ( xi , G, gi ) s.t. xi + gi = wi and G = gi + G-i .              (1)
                       x i , gi

The inclusion of gi as a separate argument in the utility function is the distinguishing
feature of this setup, compared with the pure public good model, where preferences are
given by Ui ( xi , G ). Utility from gi on its own is often interpreted as a "warm glow" or
"joy of giving" that one receives from voluntarily contributing to the public good. More
generally, it can represent any private benefit that arises through joint production of an
impure public good (Cornes and Sandler 1984, 1994). In our empirical context, which we
motivate in more detail below, the choice of gi represents time spent volunteering in a
National Park, where volunteerism provides an impure public good. The joint production
in this case comes from provision of a public good (e.g., conservation), along with a private
benefit of park enjoyment while volunteering in situ, a warm-glow, or both.
      Substituting the constraints in (1) into the utility function, the individual's problem can
be rewritten with a choice over the aggregate level of the public good:

                                  max Ui (wi + G-i - G, G, G - G-i ).                         (2)
                                  G  G-i


The standard approach in the literature is to then express the solution as a function of the


                                                  5
exogenous components of the maximand such that

                                         G  = f i (wi + G-i , G-i ).                                        (3)

One reason for writing the solution in this way is to make direct comparisons with the
pure public good model (Bergstrom, Blume and Varian 1986), in which case demand for G
is written more simply as hi (wi + G-i ), which includes only the first argument of f i in (3).7
Key results for the pure public good model then follow by assuming normality of both
the private and public goods, which is equivalent to assuming 0 < hi (wi + G-i ) < 1 for
interior solutions, which we assume here and throughout. These results include a unique
Nash equilibrium, neutrality of wealth redistributions, and crowding out.8
      With the impure public good model, however, there is no direct relationship between
standard notions about normality of goods based on preferences and the partial effects of
the different arguments in the demand function (3). This is a subject to which we will re-
turn in greater detail below, but for the moment, we reproduce the original arguments that
motivate comparable assumptions and pervade the literature on impure altruism.9 The
partial effects of f i are typically intuited as follows. Seeking to mirror the standard nor-
mality assumption for a pure public good, the claim is that normality of xi and G implies
0 < f i1 < 1. The intuition is that an increase in wi must be spent on both the private and
public goods. A further claim is that normality of xi and gi implies f i2 > 0. Here the intu-
ition follows from the thought experiment of simultaneously lowering G-i and increasing
wi by the same amount. The argument is that some of the increase in wi must be spent
on both xi and gi , so demand for G must fall and hence f i2 > 0. Finally, it is also stan-
dard to assume that 0 < f i1 + f i2 < 1, and this condition ensures uniqueness of the Nash
equilibrium.10


2.2    Crowding Out and Specification Tests

The preceding set of assumptions on the partial effects of the demand function has direct
implications for the model's predictions about crowding out, along with comparisons to
those for pure altruism (i.e., the pure public good model). By definition, an individual's
    7 The single argument of this function, w + G , is sometimes referred to as "full income" or "social income"
                                             i    -i
because it represents one's own wealth plus the value of public good spill-ins provided by others (Becker
1974). A key feature for many of the pure public good model's results is that for interior solutions,  hi /wi =
 hi / G-i .
    8 Neutrality refers to Warr's (1983) result showing that small redistributions of the endowments among

contributors to the public good will have no effect on the total level of equilibrium provision.
    9 Andreoni (1989, 1990) provides the original analysis, and more recent applications that work through the

same set of assumptions include Ribar and Wilhelm (2002) and Ottoni-Wilhelm, Vesterlund and Xie (2017).
  10 See Kotchen (2007) for a proof of equilibrium existence and uniqueness. Note that the conditions of f < 1
                                                                                                            i1
and f i1 + f i2 < 1 are written with a strict inequality because of the simplifying assumption of an interior
solution. Without this assumption, the inequalities would need to hold only weakly.



                                                       6
own contribution will satisfy

                                gi = f i (wi + G-i , G-i ) - G-i ,                         (4)

and there are two notions of crowding out to consider based on this expression. First is the
unfunded effect of an exogenous change in G-i :

                                      gi
                                          = f i1 + f i2 - 1.                               (5)
                                      G-i

Second is a funded effect, where lump-sum taxation is used to fund the change in exoge-
nous provision. In this case, we have

                                   gi
                                                      = f i2 - 1.                          (6)
                                   G-i   dG-i =-dwi


The assumption above that 0 < f i1 + f i2 < 1 means that both (5) and (6) are between
-1 and 0. This implies crowding out that is less than one-for-one in either the funded
or unfunded case, and the assumption rules out the possibility for crowding in. More
important, because f i2 > 0, a further prediction is that crowding out will always be less
with impure altruism than with pure altruism (because in the latter case f i2 = 0). In
particular, the standard theoretical result in the literature is that funded crowding out that
is less than one-for-one is consistent with impure altruism but not pure altruism.
   The preceding observations underlie an extensive empirical literature that tests be-
tween the motives of pure and impure altruism for private provision of public goods.
Nevertheless, we aim to show in what follows that the preceding specification test for
impure altruism is not a general result. In Section 3, we show that normality assump-
tions in the impure public good model differ from those in the pure public good model
because the former's constrained setup creates a difference between normality based on
primitive preferences and the income effect on demand functions. This means that assum-
ing normality based on preferences readily admits crowding in, along with crowding out,
as a plausible consequence. In Section 4, we show that the key condition underlying the
specification tests--that is, f i2 > 0--does not hold in general, and follows based on the
implicit assumption of additive separability of the utility function. More generally, we
show that crowding out with impure altruism can be greater than or less than that with
pure altruism. This renders the results of the current specification test based on the extent
of crowding out inconclusive. As an alternative specification test, we propose focusing on
the presence of crowding in, rather than the extent of crowding out, to help distinguish
between underlying motives consistent with pure or impure altruism.




                                                7
3      The Crowding Effects Revisited

In the model of impure altruism, the way that gi enters the utility function in two different
arguments implies joint production, whereby a unit of gi jointly produces a unit of the
public good and an associated private good (e.g., warm glow). Each individual's budget
frontier is therefore a ray in three-dimensional utility space, as shown by segment AB in
Figure 2. This feature of the model means that comparative static results, including those
related to crowding effects, are more constrained than previous analyses of the impure
public model indicate. In what follows, we employ an alternative approach for examining
crowding effects that yields results in terms of familiar price and income responses. In
particular, we use the method of comparative static analysis developed by Cornes and
Sandler (1994, 1996) for the more general model of an impure public good.
     The starting point is to recognize that the solution to (2) can be written alternatively
and simply as a function of the exogenous parameters such that G  = G  (wi , G-i ). This
identifies a point on the interior of segment AB in Figure 2 that is tangent to the indi-
vidual's strictly convex indifference surface.11 Now, for the moment, consider an alterna-
tive utility maximization problem where the individual has unconstrained choices among
( xi , G, gi ) and faces a standard budget constraint with "virtual" prices and income, which
can initially take on arbitrary values. The thought experiment is to decouple the linear
joint production between G and gi , such that the individual faces a standard, three-good
consumer problem of the form

                              max Ui ( xi , G, gi ) s.t. xi + G G +  g gi = mi ,                                 (7)
                              x i , G , gi


where the price of xi is normalized to unity, and  g , G , and mi are standard prices for
each of the goods and income, respectively. As noted, an key component of (7) is that the
constraint G = G-i + gi no longer applies. It follows that the unrestricted demand for each
of the goods can be written as a function of the virtual prices and income. For example,
demand for the public good can be written as G (G ,  g , mi ).12
     The bridge between utility maximization problems (1) and (7) is to set the virtual prices
    11 Comparative statics can, of course, be derived for G  (wi , G-i ) directly by differentiating the first-order
condition to (2). This yields expressions that depend on the second- and cross-partial derivatives of the util-
ity function, as shown, for example, in the proofs by Ottoni-Wilhelm, Vesterlund and Xie (2017). While the
approach is useful for illustrating some of the different possibilities, it is limited with respect to interpretation
based on the cross-partial derivatives. Indeed, standard consumer theory does not rely on super(sub)modular
definitions of complements (substitutes) because these are not necessarily preserved under monotonic trans-
formations of ordinal preferences. The Cobb-Douglas utility function used in previous studies provides an
example. The approach we employ here translates the constrained comparative static results for the model of
impure altruism in (1) into the familiar price and income effects of standard consumer theory.
   12 We focus on demand for G rather than g in order to facilitate comparisons with the standard results
                                                 i
discussed in the previous section. One could similarly focus on xi ( G ,  g , mi ) and gi ( G ,  g , mi ), where the
latter could be used to derive the same results that follow.



                                                         8
and income to define a plane in three-dimensional utility space that includes segment AB
in Figure 2 and is tangent to the individual's indifference surface at her chosen allocation
from (1). The plane CDE provides an illustration. Then, it follows by definition that

                                   G  (wi , G-i ) = G ( g , G , mi ),

where the virtual magnitudes themselves are a function of preferences and the exogenous
parameters wi and G-i . Note that the asterisk on G  indicates the choice constrained to the
budget ray AB, while G without the asterisk indicates the unrestricted demand function.
The general approach is then to recognize that

                          G    G  g    G G    G  mi
                            =   ·   +   ·  +   ·    ,                                              (8)
                               g      G      mi 

where  represents one of the exogenous parameters. The key insight of (8) is that com-
parative statics results for the constrained problem can be interpreted in terms of familiar
price and income effects in the unconstrained problem. The next step is to recognize that
we can solve for changes in the virtual magnitudes using Cramer's Rule with three con-
ditions that link virtual magnitudes to exogenous parameters. We provide these details in
the Appendix.
      Turning immediately to results, we begin with the effect of a change in the individual's
wealth:

                     G     g                                ¯  ) gm ] 1 .
                                                      ¯ g - G
                         = i = [( g
                                  ¯ G - g
                                        ¯ g ) Gmi + ( G                                            (9)
                      wi   wi                                 G    i
                                                                     
The first equality follows from (4). The terms Gmi and gmi , where subscripts denote par-
tial derivatives, represent the income effect on unrestricted demand for the public good
and the jointly produced private benefit, respectively. Assuming normality of both unre-
                                                                     ¯  , which arise after
                                                             ¯ g and G
stricted goods means that both terms are positive. The terms g                   G

substituting the Slutsky decomposition into (8), are the compensated own-price responses,
both of which are negative. The denominator  = g      ¯ + G ¯ g - g
                                                              G
                                                                       ¯  > 0.13 Finally,
                                                                  ¯g - G             G

¯ G
g      ¯ g is the compensated cross-price response, which is positive or negative depend-
      =G
ing on whether the two goods are net (Hicksian) substitutes or complements, respectively.
      Equation (9) begins to show how the impure altruism model can generate surprising
comparative static results. It shows that assuming normality of both goods in the typical,
unrestricted sense does not imply that  G  /wi is greater than zero. Whether G and gi are
substitutes or complements plays a role in determining the sign of (9). If they are substi-
tutes, the expression is unambiguously positive. If they are complements, the expression
  13 Negative semi-definiteness of the matrix of compensated price responses implies that   0, which we

assume holds strictly.



                                                   9
can take either sign.14
     The different possibilities reveal two notions of normality that should be distinguished
when analyzing impure altruism. Normality of goods based on primitive preferences is an
assumption about the locus of points consistent with a constant marginal rate of substitu-
tion. In a standard (unrestricted) utility maximization problem, this has clear implications
for the income effects on demand (i.e., Gmi , gmi > 0). With joint production, however, the
relationship between normality with respect to preferences is not the same as normality
with respect to income effects on demand, as shown in (9). The difference occurs in this
case because the individual's choice is restricted to the budget ray in Figure 2 rather than
any point on the corresponding plane. While the distinction does not arise in the pure
public good model, because it is unrestricted, the implication for impure altruism is con-
sequential: assuming normality in a comparable, unrestricted sense, does not imply that
an increase in wi will increase demand for one's own private provision.
     We now turn directly to the crowding effects, and we again provide the details in the
Appendix. Solving for the unfunded crowding effect yields

                             gi    G                     1     g
                                 =      - 1 = (g    ¯ G ) +  G i ,
                                               ¯g - g                                                      (10)
                             G-i    G-i                        wi
and the funded crowding effect is

                     gi                       gi    g              1     g
                                         =        - i = (g    ¯ G ) -  g i .
                                                         ¯g - g                                            (11)
                     G-i    dG-i =-dwi        G-i   wi                   wi

The first equality in (10) follows from (4). The second equality in (11) uses the condition
that G +  g = 1, which follows because the virtual prices of the jointly produced products
must sum to the price of joint product itself (see the Appendix). A general observation
about (10) and (11) is that both expressions have indeterminate signs under either of the
two normality assumptions described above. Importantly, this means that crowding out or
in is admissible if we assume that Gmi , gmi > 0, or even more restrictively that  G  /wi =
 gi /wi > 0. In fact, the only case where crowding out is assured occurs with the funded
effect and net complementarity between G and gi .15 The first two columns of Table 1
summarize these results and others based on (9), (10) and (11).16
  14 Itis straightforward to show that with complements,  > 0 requires that one of the two terms in paren-
theses in (9) must be positive and the other negative. The sign therefore depends on the respective differences
of these terms weighted by the corresponding income effects.
  15 In a study of military expenditures among NATO allies, Murdoch and Sandler (1984) point to the potential

importance of complementarity relationships for the study of crowding effects. In a companion paper, Mur-
doch and Sandler (1990) use the non-neutrality with joint production as part of a test between Nash-Cournot
and Lindahl behavior among NATO allies.
  16 As we discuss in the next section, the results included in the table related to  G  /  G follow immediately
                                                                                             -i
from adding one to both sides of (10) and rearranging terms.




                                                      10
4    Reconciliation and Specification Test

The previous section derives results that differ from those in the standard analysis of im-
pure altruism. In this section, we directly compare the two approaches and establish two
new results. The first is that contrary to conventional wisdom in the literature, crowding
out need not be less with impure altruism than with pure altruism. The second is that the
presence of crowding in (rather than crowding out) provides a more general specification
test between the two models.
    We first consider the effect of a change in an individual's exogenous wealth. Refer-
ring back to the notation in Sections 2 and 3, it holds by definition that f i1 =  G  /wi .
The standard assumption that 0 < f i1 < 1 is described as a consequence of normality
of the private and public goods. Our analysis shows how this is equivalent to assuming
bounds on equation (9). Nevertheless, we showed in the previous section that the sign
of this expression can be either positive or negative under a more conventional normality
assumption based on the primitive preferences of individuals. In this case, it is also true
that nothing rules out the possibility for f i1 > 1. As noted previously, the two normality
assumptions are equivalent in the pure public good model, but not with impure altruism.
Part of the contribution here, therefore, is to show that the standard normality assumption
for impure altruism is in fact more restrictive on preferences than a simple carryover of the
same assumption for pure altruism.
    Turning now to a change G-i , it holds by definition that f i1 + f i2 =  G  / G-i . To solve
for this, we need only add 1 to both sides of (10) and rearrange to find

                                          G        G            ¯ ) 1 .
                                                          ¯ g - G
                          f i1 + f i2 =        = G     + (G                                          (12)
                                           G-i      wi            G
                                                                    

The standard assumption is that 0 < f i1 + f i2 < 1, and as noted in Section 2, this ensures
crowding out that is less than one-for-one. While the normality assumption is sufficient to
establish this result with pure altruism, equation (12) shows that more is needed to obtain
the same bounds on  G  / G-i with impure altruism. In fact, neither of the two different
normality assumptions previously discussed is sufficient. The expression is positive if G
and gi are substitutes, can take either sign if they are complements, and nothing rules out
the possibility for f i1 + f i2 > 1. Note that (12) greater than 1 implies unfunded crowding
in, and (12) negative implies greater than one-for-one crowding out.17
    Finally, and more important, consider the term f i2 on its own, which we can solve for
explicitly as the difference between the effect of a change in G-i in (12) and a change in wi
  17 Ribar and Wilhelm (2002) also make this observation in their footnote 5, where they acknowledge how

Cornes and Sandler's (1994) analysis can be used to imply crowding in or greater than one-for-one crowding
out with impure altruism.




                                                   11
in (9):
                                     G      G                         
                                                         ¯  ) 1 - g G .
                                                   ¯ g - G
                            f i2 =        -     = (G                                                          (13)
                                      G-i    wi            G
                                                                     wi
In general, this expression can be positive or negative with either complements or substi-
tutes, and both signs are possible with either of the two normality assumptions. To see
how income effects need not determine the sign of this expression, consider the limiting
case of quasilinear preferences of the form xi + F ( G, gi ). Without any income effect, such
that  G  /wi = 0 or something sufficiently small, f i2 < 0 requires only net complements
with G¯ g < G
            ¯  , otherwise the expression will be positive.18
                   G

    Importantly, the possibility for f i2 < 0 is inconsistent with the foundation for empirical
specification tests between pure and impure altruism, as shown previously in the discus-
sion of (5) and (6). In particular, normality assumptions do not in fact imply f i2 > 0, and
hence crowding out need not be less with impure altruism than with pure altruism. The
standard analysis appears to rely on the implicit assumptions of additive separability and
strict concavity of the utility function, which is a special case where all of the standard
results hold.19 More generally, however, different possibilities emerge even under very
reasonable conditions. Indeed, we find that the relative magnitude of crowding out can be
the reverse of conventional wisdom even if f i2 > 0, because without additive separability,
nothing requires f i1 to remain constant when comparing impure altruism to the special
case of pure altruism. We include several numerical examples in the Appendix that show
different possibilities. In particular, we show cases where f i2 can take either sign while
maintaining 0 < f i1 + f i2 < 1, and in all of the cases shown, crowding out is greater with
impure altruism than pure altruism.
    Table 1 summarizes our general, theoretical results and their relation to the standard
assumptions in previous analyses of impure altruism. We find that very few of the stan-
dard conditions hold more generally. We have shown that a normality assumption based
on preferences, and comparable to that in the pure public good model, is not sufficient
to ensure crowding out, except when the crowding effect is funded and G and gi are net
substitutes. If they are net complements, not one of the results has a clear sign or bounded
magnitude.
    We further summarize our key findings as they relate to empirical work that seeks to
  18 An   intuition for f i2 < 0 begins by recognizing that an increase in G-i makes G less scarce. This implies a
decreases in the virtual price of G and an increase in the virtual price of gi (see the Appendix). The own-price
effect pushes for greater demand for G, while the cross-price effect pushes for less if they are complements. By
assumption, the cross-price effect is bigger (i.e., G ¯ < G  ¯  ), and demand for G declines despite the increase
                                                        g      G
in G-i . That is, we have greater than one-for-one crowding out with impure altruism even without income
effects.
   19 In this case, after differentiating the first order conditions to the utility maximization problem in (2), it

straightforward to verify that f i1 = Uxx / and f i2 = Ugg /, where  = Uxx + Ugg + UGG . Hence, with
strict concavity, it follows immediately that 0 < f i1 < 1, f i2 > 0, and 0 < f i1 + f i2 < 1. The numerical
examples used in previous studies satisfy these conditions (e.g., Andreoni 1990; Ribar and Wilhelm 2002; and
Ottoni-Wilhelm, Vesterlund and Xie 2017).


                                                        12
distinguish between pure and impure altruism as a motivation for private provision of a
public good. As noted previously, the sizable literature focused on this question assumes
that crowding out for impure altruism must be less than that for pure altruism. Neverthe-
less, we have shown the following:

Result 1 Both unfunded and funded crowding out with impure altruism can, in general, be more
or less than crowding out with pure altruism.

While this identifies a limitation with the standard specification test used in the literature,
our analysis is constructive in the sense that it points to an alternative:

Result 2 Assuming normality in the usual sense based on preferences means that evidence of
crowding in is consistent with impure altruism (i.e., provision of an impure public good), but not
with pure altruism.

The remainder of the paper focuses on empirically estimating the crowding effect in a
setting where it is plausible to assume ex ante that the model of impure altruism applies.
While a finding of either crowding out or in is consistent with impure altruism, a finding
of crowding in enables rejection of pure altruism.


5     Empirical Setting and Data Collection

This section begins with institutional background about the Volunteers-in-Parks (VIP) pro-
gram of the National Park Service (NPS). We then discuss how VIP participation is con-
sistent with the impure altruism motivation for private provision of a public good. This
establishes a basis for interpreting our subsequent estimates of a crowding effect, which
are based on how changes in budget appropriations to a national park affect the amount of
within-park volunteerism. In this section, we also describe our data and report summary
statistics.


5.1   The NPS and VIP Program

The NPS is an administrative branch of the U.S. Department of the Interior. The mission of
the NPS is to preserve natural and historical landmarks for the enjoyment and education
of current and future generations. The NPS system includes over 400 sites, comprises over
84 million acres, and hosts more than 330 million visitors per year. NPS sites include the
iconic National Parks that prioritize environmental conservation and outdoor recreation,
in addition to parks that emphasize the conservation and restoration of cultural heritage.
Examples of the former include Yellowstone and Yosemite National Parks, and examples
of the latter include the Statue of Liberty and the Booker T. Washington National Monu-
ments. Throughout the paper, we use the term national park in reference to any of the NPS

                                                13
managed sites.20 The NPS itself is divided into seven regional offices that manage parks
and programs within their geographic jurisdiction, including partial oversight of the VIP
program.21
      Initiated in 1970, the VIP program is a NPS-wide program that facilitates the active in-
volvement of volunteers in protecting and maintaining national parks. Volunteers through
the VIP program are an integral part of the NPS workforce, as exemplified by the fact that
nearly 340,000 volunteers contributed over eight million hours of service to the national
parks in 2016. Volunteer recruitment occurs mainly through word-of-mouth and staff re-
ferrals, as well as through online volunteer postings on NPS websites that solicit appli-
cations for openings that require specialized skills (NPS 2007). Volunteers are employed
across all parks and programs in positions that assist the NPS paid staff of approximately
22,000 employees, or that focus on tasks that could otherwise not be accomplished due to
funding shortfalls (NPS 2017a). Funding for the VIP program is separate from other park
operations and is regionally allocated before being distributed to individual parks.
      Federal appropriations constitute the primary source of funding for national parks. The
2018 NPS budget request exceeded $2.2 billion, while projected revenues from visitor fees
are roughly ten percent of this amount. Private donations to the NPS constitute only three
percent of the operational needs (U.S. DOI 2019). Throughout the process of formulat-
ing the annual NPS budget request, each park begins with a baseline operational budget
that is adjusted annually to reflect new projects, maintenance, and programmatic needs
(Turner and Walker 2006). Individual park funding requests are then aggregated into the
overall NPS budget, which is part of the overall Department of the Interior request. As
with funding for all federal agencies, the budget request requires Congressional approval,
and the enacted amounts typically differ from the agency requests. The budget appropria-
tions committees in the U.S. House and Senate are those that lead the reconciliation process
of the budget between the executive and legislative branches. The U.S. Government shut-
down at the end of 2018 and beginning of 2019 illustrates the importance of public funding
for park quality. When public funding for parks ceased during the shutdown, parks ex-
perienced widespread problems with vandalism, waste, litter, and damage to natural and
cultural resources due to unauthorized access of sensitive areas (NPCA 2019).


5.2     Volunteerism and Joint Production

Fundamental to the design of the VIP program is that volunteers can contribute to a public
good while simultaneously benefiting from time spent in national parks. The promotional
  20 NPS sites are technically classified into more than two dozen categories depending on their mandate and
the types of programs they undertake, including, for example, National Parks, National Monuments, National
Historic Sites, and National Battlefields (Comay, 2013).
  21 The seven NPS regions are Alaska, Intermountain, Midwest, National Capital, Northeast, Pacific West,

and Southeast.


                                                    14
materials make this explicit, as "the primary purpose of the VIP Program is to provide a
vehicle through which the NPS can accept and utilize voluntary help and services from the
public in such a way that is mutually beneficial to the NPS and the volunteer" (NPS 2017a).
The mutual benefits arise because participation in the VIP program is associated with joint
production of public and private goods: the promotion of conservation and opportunities
for in situ park enjoyment. Volunteerism in the NPS therefore closely matches the notion of
private provision of an impure public good (Cornes and Sandler 1994, 1996), which nests
the model of impure altruism.22
     To see how the decision to volunteer in a national park links directly to the model
of impure altruism, we need only modify the budget constraint. The composite private
good, with a normalized price, must satisfy xi = i +  ( - vi ), where i is the individual's
wealth endowment,  is the wage rate applied to a time budget  , and vi is the number of
hours spent volunteering. Then, letting wi = i +  and gi =  vi , we recover the original
budget constraint of xi + gi = wi , where gi represents the monetary equivalent of time
spent volunteering. Nothing else needs changing about the model other than a scaling for
crowding effects depending on the unit of measurement. Specifically, because  gi / G-i =
vi / G-i , the crowding effect on volunteer hours need only be multiplied by the wage
rate to have the standard interpretation. The NPS itself places a value on volunteer time
using the average, annual hourly wage of non-agricultural workers from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, plus an adjustment of 12 percent to account for fringe benefits. This is
the standard approach for estimating a dollar value on volunteer time.23 During the time
period of our study, the average annual value of volunteer time is estimated at $21.85,
reported in 2013 dollars.24
     In this empirical setting, where we study the effect of federal appropriations on vol-
unteerism, there is the question of whether the crowding effects should be interpreted as
funded or unfunded. We contend that either is possible because any expected difference
between them should be exceedingly small. While experimental studies are able to asso-
ciate changes in G-i with changes in lump-sum taxation, we examine the effect of changes
in G-i without explicit reference to its funding on the part of volunteers. While this per-
spective suggests an unfunded effect, it must also be recognized that domestic volunteers
are taxpayers, so changes in aggregate appropriations do not go unfunded. Moreover,
even for volunteers who are not taxpayers, we would argue that their own share of the
  22 If,for example, the private benefit were a warm glow from volunteerism rather than park enjoyment, the
impure public good reduces to impure altruism. Chan and Kotchen (2014) generalize the impure public good
framework to account for the joint production of multiple public and private goods, which could include, for
example, both park enjoyment and a warm glow from volunteerism. Having multiple private benefits does
not, however, affect the range of possible theoretical results presented here.
   23 The Independent Sector, a national membership organization of nonprofits, foundations, and corpora-

tions, provides an overview of the estimates and their use at https://independentsector.org/value-volunteer-
time-methodology/.
   24 All monetary values throughout the paper are reported in 2013 dollars unless otherwise indicated.




                                                    15
required funding would be exceedingly small. This means that any income effects would
be correspondingly small, in which case the unfunded and funded crowding effects con-
verge. This is readily seen in the limiting case of quasi-linear preferences, for which the
crowding effects in equations (5) and (6) are identical.


5.3     Data

Our primary source of data is a unique and detailed administrative data set from the NPS
on annual participation in the VIP program from 1998 through 2013.25 These data include
the annual total number of volunteer hours in each park broken down by the type of vol-
unteer activity. We also obtained data from the NPS on the annual number of full time
equivalent (FTE) paid staff in each park. We use publicly available, park-specific data on
annual park visitation (1998-2013) and the federal budget appropriation to each park in
each year (1995-2013).26 We collect the League of Conservation Voters (LCV) score for each
member of the U.S. House and Senate Appropriations Committees, along with the annual
average for both chambers of Congress. The LCV annually scores each voting member of
the House and Senate on a 0 to 100 scale based on the percent of pro-environmental and
conservation legislation that each member supports.27 We use the LCV scores to create an
instrumental variable for park funding, as we describe in the next section.
      Our final sample for analysis includes 326 parks among the 398 originally listed in the
VIP data set. The smaller number of parks is due primarily to the way that we include
only those that track annual visitation.28 Figure 3 shows the geographic distribution of
the national parks included in our analysis, along with an indicator for each park's NPS
administrative region. The first column of Table 2 reports summary statistics across all 326
parks and all years. On average, parks benefit from nearly 16,000 hours of volunteerism
per year with an annual value of approximately $346,000, which is roughly nine percent of
the average, annual park budget of approximately $3.85 million. Parks host an average of
822,000 visitors per year and employ 0.33 FTE per thousand visitors. The large standard
  25 Data from 2014 through 2018, which we obtained more recently through a Freedom of Information Act

request, were collected and categorized into volunteer activities through a different process and unfortunately
do not have continuity with the earlier period. We exclude these data from our analysis for this reason,
along with the fact that the NPS experienced unique circumstances related to visitation, volunteerism, and
management during and around its centennial celebrations in 2016.
  26 Annual park visitation is available online at https://irma.nps.gov/Stats/.              Annual park bud-
get appropriations are reported in the U.S. Department of the Interior Budget Justifications for
the National Park Service, referred to as the Greenbooks.             Selected years are available online at
https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/budget.htm.
  27 All LCV data is available online at https://www.lcv.org/. The website also provides a detailed description

of the methodology used to generate the scores for each voting member of the U.S. Congress.
  28 Visitation counts are not recorded at 64 smaller urban parks and scenic trails, where unpredictable flows of

pedestrian traffic and the existence of multiple access points make consistent counts infeasible. Additionally,
we exclude two parks that do not have volunteer data, three parks that do not have their own budgets, one
park that does not have information on the number of paid staff, and two parks for which we have only one
year of data.


                                                       16
deviations across variables indicate a large degree of heterogeneity among parks.
    During the time period of our study, there is significant variation in volunteer hours
and funding. Figure 4 shows the annual trends in volunteer hours and federal funding
aggregated across all parks. While the total number of volunteer hours has maintained an
upward trend, federal funding to the parks follows an upward trend until the recession
in 2009. The aggregate trends in Figure 4 do not show a clear pattern in the relationship
between park funding and volunteerism, yet our analysis focuses on estimating a causal
effect of funding on volunteerism within parks (i.e., not in aggregate). Because of the
substantial drop in post-recession funding, we conduct some of our analysis with and
without the post-recession years to test for robustness.
    One of the distinguishing features of the data set is that we can observe the specific type
of activities that volunteers undertake. Figure 5 shows the distribution of volunteer hours
across the different types of activities. The most common activity is interpretation, and
when combined with natural resource management and maintenance, the three categories
comprise over 75 percent of all volunteer hours. Other categories include camp hosting,
cultural resource management, and administration, among others.
    We use the natural resource management category for the additional purpose of cate-
gorizing parks as primarily environmental or non-environmental in some of our analyses
that examine heterogeneous effects. We conjecture that volunteering in parks and for activ-
ities with more of a natural resource focus are more likely associated with joint production
and therefore impure altruism. The rationale is that environmental parks and programs
typically focus on recreation, which provide different private benefits to volunteers than
parks that focus on curating, for example.29 We therefore distinguish between environ-
mental and non-environmental parks based on whether or not volunteer hours dedicated
to natural resource management are strictly positive for all years within a park. If yes, we
classify the park as environmental. This procedure yields 105 environmental parks, and
the last two columns of Table 2 report descriptive statistics separately for the two groups.
On average, environmental parks have more volunteer hours, greater funding, more visits,
and fewer paid FTE per visitor. Later in the paper, we also use an alternative, more general
classification based on official park mandates. We also categorize volunteer hours based
on whether they are predicted to occur outside or inside in order to examine heterogeneity
by volunteer hour type.
  29 For specific examples about how joint production through volunteerism is likely to be greater in environ-
mental parks and outdoor hours, and therefore more readily admit the possibility for crowding in, consider
the following: on-going restoration of the Mariposa Grove in Yosemite National Park provides volunteers with
additional hiking trails and boardwalks to enjoy while volunteering, whereas federally funded maintenance
of the copper skin of the Statue of Liberty is less likely to materially improve the recreational opportunities
available to volunteers that provide tours.




                                                      17
6      Empirical Strategy

We now turn to our econometric strategy for estimating the crowding effect and ultimately
illustrating our specification test. We focus on estimating the causal effect of changes in
federal appropriations to a national park on the amount of within-park volunteerism. We
have shown previously that impure altruism admits the possibility for either crowding out
or in, and an estimate of crowding in would enable rejection of pure altruism as the un-
derlying motivation for VIP participation. We first describe the benchmark specifications,
followed by tests for heterogeneous effects, and our preferred instrumental variables strat-
egy.


6.1     Benchmark Specifications

We begin with fixed effects models of the form

                          Hoursit =  Budgetit +  Xit + i + rt +  it ,                      (14)

where the dependent variable Hoursit is the total number of volunteer hours in park i and
year t; Budgetit is a park's annual budget appropriation in thousands of dollars; Xit is a
vector of time-varying and park-specific variables; i is a vector of park fixed effects; rt is
a set of year-specific intercepts for each of the NPS seven regions; and  it is an error term.
The variables included in Xit are annual park visitation and FTE per 1,000 visits. Standard
errors are clustered at the park level in all models to make statistical inference robust to
potential serial correlation within parks.
      The coefficient of interest is  because it provides an estimate of the crowding effect: a
positive estimate indicates crowding in, whereas a negative estimate indicates crowding
out. We use volunteer hours as the dependent variable rather than the value of volunteer
hours. The reasons are that hours are the original measure of volunteerism, that the con-
version to a dollar value requires additional assumptions, and that we can readily obtain
a dollar-for-dollar interpretation as an ex post adjustment to , as we will show.
      The identifying variation for the crowding effect comes from within-park fluctuations
in the annual budget. The park fixed effects capture time-invariant park characteristics,
such as popularity, location, type, and the scope of programs, which could affect both
funding and volunteer hours. Inclusion of annual visitation controls for changes in a park's
popularity over time, due perhaps to anniversary years and promotions that could simul-
taneously affect funding, volunteerism, and visitation. The inclusion of paid FTE per 1,000
visitors is intended to control for the way that changes in supervisory constraints within
a park could potentially affect volunteerism. A positive or negative sign of this effect is
also consistent with volunteer hours and permanent FTE serving as complements or sub-



                                               18
stitutes, respectively. The region-year fixed effects control for any annual shocks that are
common to all parks within each NPS region.


6.2     Heterogeneous Effects

We next examine heterogeneous effects. We begin by testing whether the crowding effect
differs between environmental and non-environmental parks. The estimating equation
differs only by the inclusion of an interaction term between Budgetit and an indicator vari-
able 1[ Envr ]i that takes the value of 1 for environmental parks. The full model is

              Hoursit =  Budgetit +  Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i +  Xit + i + rt +  it .                      (15)

In this case,  and  +  provide estimates of the crowding effect in non-environmental and
environmental parks, respectively. A test of whether  = 0 indicates whether the effect
differs between the two types of parks. Testing for the difference is of interest because of
the conjecture that volunteerism in an environmental park is more likely to be associated
with private provision of an impure public good. Empirical evidence of  = 0 would
therefore support the notion that individual behavior and therefore crowding effects differ
in the extent of impure altruism. A finding of crowding in, in either case, would also enable
rejection of pure altruism as the underlying motivation for volunteerism in either type of
park.
      We further examine heterogeneous effects in two ways. First, we examine how crowd-
ing effects differ between volunteer activities that are likely to occur outside or inside. Here
again the motivating assumption is that volunteer hours focused on outside activities are
more likely associated with joint production involving park enjoyment than those taking
place inside. For example, the experiences of volunteers who lead guided hiking tours is
different from those of volunteers who assist with office administration. Specifically, we
estimate the benchmark specification (14), but replace aggregate volunteer hours as the
dependent variable with volunteer hours that take place either outside or inside, and es-
timate the equations separately.30 Second, we estimate the heterogeneous effects specified
in equation (15) with outdoor or indoor hours separately as the dependent variable. This
combines the two previous approaches to examine whether the crowding effect differs
both by park type (environmental vs. non-environmental) and by hour type (outside vs.
inside).
  30 Outside hours consist of the categories archeology, campground hosting, interpretation, resource manage-

ment, and park protection. Inside hours consist of the categories general management, curating, administra-
tion, maintenance, training, and other.




                                                     19
6.3       IV Strategy

Even after including the park covariates and region-year fixed effects, one might be con-
cerned about potential endogeneity that would bias the crowding effect estimates in equa-
tions (14) and (15). The concern would be centered on scenarios where park funding and
volunteer hours might be correlated with some unobserved, time-varying park character-
istic. For example, a downward trend in park funding that increases the park's deferred
maintenance backlog might also increase the demand for park volunteers (NPS 2019b).
This would bias the estimates downward because unobserved maintenance needs are pos-
itively correlated with volunteerism and negatively correlated with funding. Other plau-
sible scenarios might bias estimates of the crowding effect in the other direction. For ex-
ample, the unobserved introduction of new park programs could simultaneously create
additional volunteer opportunities and funding requirements.
      Addressing concerns about endogeneity requires an instrument that is correlated with
the annual budget for each park, but uncorrelated with time-varying volunteerism within
each park, conditional on the model covariates. We construct an instrument that plau-
sibly meets these two requirements by combining cross-sectional variation in historical
budgetary needs with shifts to public funding in a manner that is commonly used in the
literature on trade and local labor markets (Bartik 1991; Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2013;
Notowidigdo 2019). We simulate annual park funding in each year with the interaction
between each park's funding levels three years prior to the start of our panel and changes
in the average LCV score for the U.S. Congressional Appropriations Committees, exclud-
ing members that represent the corresponding park. We use the House and Senate appro-
priation committees because their members have the most significant influence on federal
budget appropriations each year. For each park, we exclude any members of Congress rep-
resenting their district or state to avoid the possibility that factors affecting volunteerism
in a park might also affect the preferences of elected officials, and thereby violate the ex-
clusion restriction.
      Specifically, the instrument is defined as

                                                          LCV i,t-1
                                  Zit = Budgeti,1995 ×               ,                              (16)
                                                          LCV i,1995

where Budgeti,1995 is each park's federal budget appropriation in 1995, and LCV i,t is the
average of the LCV scores of the two committees in year t, excluding the elected official(s)
of park i.31 The Budgeti,1995 weights capture differences in each park's base budgetary
needs due to their size or historical program scope. The ratio LCV i,t-1 / LCV i,1995 captures
  31 In
      particular, we estimate the average among members in the House and Senate committees separately,
and then take the average of the two committees to estimate LCV i,t for each year. In any given year, the
appropriations committees consist of approximately 60 members in the House and 30 members in the Senate.



                                                   20
the year-to-year change in the extent to which the key congressional committees prioritize
environmental and conservation legislation.32 The IV strategy is therefore based on the
theory that appropriations committees more supportive of these objectives will allocate
higher levels of funding to the NPS. We lag the LCV score because the budget approved
in year t - 1 is for use in year t. Figure 6 shows the time series variation of the mean LCV
score, and referring back to Figure 4, the trend appears to roughly track the variation in
NPS funding.
    We use Zit to instrument for Budgetit in specifications (14) and (15), and Zit × 1[ Envr ]it
as an instrument for Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i in specification (15).33 Table 3 reports the first
stage results, and we find that the instrument is highly correlated with actual park fund-
ing.34 Column 1 shows that a 10 percent increase in LCV score increases park budgets by
2 percent relative to their budget in 1995.
    Note that the approach is strengthened by the way that all models include region-
year fixed effects. Controlling for these, the identifying variation comes from the way that
exogenous changes in aggregate LCV scores scale each individual park's budget, where
additional heterogeneity comes from differences in the level of each park's 1995 budget.
This means that, in any given year, the assumption of instrumental exogeneity would fail
only if volunteers systematically redirect their efforts to different parks within a region in
response to changes in the LCV score. While such a response seems unlikely to us, there
is also evidence that 78.4 percent of the NPS volunteers report their primary motivation as
interest in specific parks and projects, along with the overall NPS mission (NPS 2007).
    In the next section, as part of robustness checks, we discuss and use alternative instru-
ments to scale each park's initial funding by other variables that predict aggregate NPS
funding as in (16). These include LCV scores for the all members of the U.S. House and
Senate (rather than just the appropriation committees), annual funding for the Department
of the Interior's Fish and Wildlife Service, and the annual NPS funding for all regions ex-
cluding the region for each park.
  32 We choose the base year 1995 because it is three years before the start of our VIP data and is the earliest

year for which we observe funding. While the choice of other possible base years changes the coefficient
estimates in the first stage, it has no effect on the second stage IV estimates.
  33 There are 36 parks in our sample that do not exist in 1995, so there is no Budget
                                                                                       i,1995 for these observations.
In these cases, we use the first year of budget data available, and include observations beginning three years
after the designation of these parks. Excluding or including these observations does not change any of the
results.
  34 The cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-statistic for a weak instrument shows that while the instru-

ment is highly correlated with park funding across all parks, it is less correlated with the non-environmental
parks (column 2). Relative to the benchmark specification (14), this produces a lower test statistic for joint
identification in the two first-stage regressions for specification (15) ( F = 6.4). This means that the heteroge-
neous IV estimates of specification (15) may be more biased toward OLS.




                                                         21
7     Estimation Results

We now turn to our estimates of the effect of changes in park funding on within-park vol-
unteerism. We consider the overall, average estimates of the crowding effect, heterogene-
ity between park and volunteer hour types, a range of robustness checks, and alternative
explanations.


7.1     Crowding Out or In?

The estimates in Table 4 address the question of whether increases in park funding crowd
out or crowd in volunteerism on average across parks. The first three columns report the
OLS estimates of specification (14). Model (1) includes only Budgetit along with the park
and region-year fixed effects, model (2) includes the additional variables of annual visits
and FTE per 1,000 visits, and model (3) is the same though estimated excluding the post-
recession years 2011-2013. We find positive and statistically significant coefficients on park
budgets across all three models, and the estimated magnitudes are very similar. Recall
that the positive coefficients are consistent with crowding in, rather than crowding out.
The OLS estimates suggest that a $1,000 increase in a park's annual budget is associated
with an increase in volunteerism of approximately 2.5 hours on average.
      Our preferred estimates of the average crowding effect are the results of the IV estima-
tion in the last three columns of Table 4. These models correct for potential endogeneity
of park budgets using the IV strategy described above. The three models differ in parallel
fashion with those in the first three columns. Here again the results are consistent with
crowding in, and the magnitudes are larger and more precisely estimated. Focusing on
the results of model (5), which includes the covariates, we find that a $1,000 increase in
federal funding causes an average increase in volunteerism of approximately 12.4 hours.
We also find that the results are economically meaningful. To quantify the average value of
crowding in, we multiply the estimated change in hours by the average hourly valuation
of volunteerism over the years 1998 through 2013. As described previously, this estimate is
$21.85 per hour. Accordingly, based on our preferred model (5), a $1,000 increase a park's
federal appropriation crowds in volunteerism that is worth $271 per year on average. This
means that an additional dollar of federal funding within a park crowds in roughly 27
cents worth of volunteerism, where the benefit of crowding in occurs over and above the
direct benefit of the marginal dollar of park funding. As noted previously, one reason why
the magnitudes of the IV estimates might be larger than the OLS estimates is that lower
levels of funding add to the cumulative deferred maintenance in parks, and this increases
the set of potential tasks for volunteers.35
  35 In 2017, the deferred maintenance backlog in the NPS was estimated at $11.61 billion in current dollars

(NPS 2019b).



                                                    22
      The number of visits has no statistically significant effect on volunteerism, but the FTE
per 1,000 visits does. With greater paid staff per visitor, there is less volunteerism, and the
magnitude is such that one additional FTE is associated with roughly 50 fewer hours of
volunteerism. The sign of this effect is important because it suggests that paid staff and
volunteerism are substitutes rather than complements when it comes to park management.
This is a subject to which we return below, but it is worth noting here that the finding helps
to rule out an alternative explanation for crowding in, whereby greater budgets result in
more paid staff, who are then able to recruit and manage more volunteers.36
      In sum, we find evidence consistent with a mechanism whereby greater funding re-
sults in better parks that are more enjoyable places in which to volunteer. We have shown
how the presence of such joint production readily admits the possibility for crowding in,
whereas the model for private provision of a pure public good does not. We therefore
interpret the results of crowding in, along with the differences between the OLS and IV
estimates, as consistent with private provision of an impure public good (i.e., impure al-
truism), and we reject the model of a pure public good, which only admits crowding out.


7.2     Heterogeneous Effects

We now test for heterogeneous effects of our crowding estimates across park and hour
types. We begin with potential differences between parks designated as either environ-
mental or non-environmental. Recall our conjecture that the joint production of volun-
teerism is greater in the environmental parks, where individuals are more likely to expe-
rience in situ benefits of park enjoyment (i.e., recreating in a natural environment) while
contributing to the public good.
      Table 5 reports the estimates of specification (15), and we again show the OLS and IV
results. In all models, we find positive and statistically significant coefficient estimates on
the interaction Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i , which indicates more crowding in for environmental
parks than for non-environmental parks. Focusing on the IV estimates, particularly those
for model (5), the magnitude of the difference indicates that a $1,000 increase in park fund-
ing crowds in 11.6 more hours in the environmental parks on average. The overall effect
in environmental parks, which is the sum of the first two coefficients, is 12.9 hours, which
has an equivalent monetary value of $282. That is, each additional dollar of park funding
crowds in roughly 28 cents worth of volunteerism. In contrast, the crowding effect in non-
environmental parks is statistically indistinguishable from zero. Based on our theoretical
results for distinguishing between models based on a finding of crowding in, we conclude
that volunteerism in environmental parks is consistent with private provision of an impure
  36 The substitutability,
                         rather than complementarity, between paid staff and volunteers is also echoed in sur-
vey responses as part of the 2007 VIP Program Assessment Report, where one staff member states in response
to budget shortfalls that, "In my 16-plus years, I have seen the volunteer role evolve to replace many of the
functions that National Park Service staff previously performed" (NPS 2007).


                                                     23
public good, but not a pure public good. However, no distinction between the models is
possible for volunteerism in non-environmental parks.
      Turning now to heterogeneous effects by hour type, Table 6 reports estimates of specifi-
cation (14) separately for outside and inside hours in panels A and B, respectively.37 Focus-
ing on the IV estimates, we find evidence of crowding in for hours of both types, although
the magnitudes and precision are greater for outside hours. Based on the preferred models
in column (4), we find crowding in of 9.3 outside hours, compared to crowding in of 3.1 in-
side hours. These translate to monetary equivalent measures of 20 cents and 7 cents worth
of volunteerism per dollar of federal budgeting, respectively. The difference between the
two estimates--and the fact that both indicate crowding in--remains consistent with the
general notion that environmental parks and outdoor hours create circumstances where
and when joint production of volunteerism is likely to be greatest. A further difference
worth noting between outdoor and indoor hours is the extent of substitutability between
volunteerism and paid FTE. One additional full-time paid staff member per 1,000 visitors
is associated with 71 fewer volunteer hours outside, but has no statistically significant ef-
fect on volunteer hours inside.
      The final set of heterogeneous effects that we examine is a two-way analysis, where
we estimate the environmental versus non-environmental park effect separately for out-
side and inside hours. Table 7 reports estimates of specification (15) for outside and inside
hours separately in panels A and B, respectively. Focusing on the preferred estimates in
column (4), we find evidence that environmental parks differ from non-environmental
in the direction of more crowding in for both outside and inside hours. Moreover, as
expected, the magnitudes of the point estimates suggest greater crowding in for outside
hours than for inside hours, at 7.7 versus 3.9 hours per $1,000 of funding. Nevertheless,
among the four different cases of the two-way analysis, the overall estimate of crowding
in is statistically significant at conventional levels in only one case: outside hours in en-
vironmental parks, with crowding in of 9.6 hours per $1,000 of funding, and a 95 percent
confidence interval that ranges between 1.6 and 17.7 hours.


7.3     Robustness Checks

We estimate a series of alternative models to demonstrate robustness of our results on
crowding in and heterogeneity. In particular, we consider lags on selected explanatory
variables, the addition of a linear time trend that differs between large and small parks,
a broader definition of environmental parks, and alternative instruments in our IV strat-
egy.38 We report the full set of results in Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3 and summarize the
  37 We no longer report estimates that exclude the post-recession years for two reasons: the results do not
change in any meaningful way, and we prefer to focus on results that take advantage of the full data set.
  38 Note that the results reported earlier where we exclude the post-recession years (2011-2013) should also

be considered robustness checks. We found that dropping these years had no meaningful affect on the results.


                                                     24
key findings here.
   We first consider a one-year lag of the instrumented annual park budgets. Central to
our analysis is the idea that greater funding improves parks in ways that may affect volun-
teerism, but many funded initiatives take time to complete. Accordingly, one could argue
that funding in previous years is a preferable measure of improvements in park quality,
and we therefore estimate specifications (14) and (15) using an instrumented version of
the lagged budget, Budgeti,t-1 , on the right-hand side rather than the contemporaneous
year's budget. One consequence of using the lagged variable is having fewer observations
upon which to estimate the model. Nevertheless, we again find statistically significant
crowding in, and the magnitudes are greater than those estimated previously (Table A.2
columns 1 and 2). For the overall effect across parks, we find crowding in of 13.9 hours
per $1,000 of funding on average, or equivalently 30 cents worth of volunteerism for an
additional dollar of funding. The estimated effect for environmental parks is quite similar
in sign, magnitude and precision to the overall estimate of crowding in, and we again find
no statistically significant crowding effect in non-environmental parks.
   We also estimate models that include the additional controls of one- and two-year lags
of park visitation. Contemporaneous visitation is indicative of a park's popularity in a
given year, but visitation from prior years is the only information available to Congress
when the NPS budget must be approved. Accounting for the popularity of parks in prior
years might also capture how popularity affects volunteerism, which in many cases may
require planning far in advance. It turns out that the visitation variables themselves have
statistically insignificant effects, and we find that the estimates of crowding in remain very
similar to those reported earlier for specifications (see Table A.2, columns 3 and 4).
   A further robustness check is to include separate linear time trends for parks with bud-
gets above and below the median in 1995. This accounts for the possibility that volun-
teerism might be affected by different trends over time in large and small parks. Here
again we find that the results are very similar to those already reported (see Table A.2
columns 5 and 6).
   Our tests for heterogeneous effects based on park type relied on a particular definition
for environmental parks (i.e., whether the park engages volunteers in natural resource
management every year). This definition yields 105 environmental parks that, on average,
had more volunteers, larger budgets, greater visitation, and fewer FTE per visitor (see Ta-
ble 2). As a robustness check, we consider an alternative definition of an environmental
park based on each park's official mandate. We reviewed the descriptions of each park's
activities on its official webpage and classified parks as environmental if they list natural
resource management as part of their mission, regardless of whether conservation is a pri-
mary or secondary objective.39 The result is a broader definition of environmental parks,
 39 For example, National Battlefields, such as Antietam National Battlefield, are established with the primary




                                                     25
accounting for 233 of all 326 parks, and nesting 99 of the 105 included in the previous
definition. Table A.1 includes the descriptive statistics for parks of both types based on
this alternative definition. We find that testing for heterogeneous effects using this defini-
tion of environmental parks in specification (15) results in a similar estimate of crowding
in for environmental parks, at 12.5 hours compared to 11.6 hours previously, and still no
statistically significant effect in non-environmental parks (Table A.2 column 5).
      Finally, we consider alternative instruments, while still using the basic shift-share ap-
proach in equation (16). All results are reported in Table A.3, though we note that our
preferred instrument in a better predictor of funding in the heterogeneous effects models.
In each case, we scale each park's base year funding with the change in a variable that pre-
dicts aggregate changes in NPS funding. First, we use the annual shift in the LCV score for
the entire U.S. Congress, averaged across the whole House and Senate, rather than only the
appropriations committees. In this case, we continue to exclude the members representing
the corresponding park. We find very similar estimates of crowding in for both specifica-
tions (14) and (15). Second, in place of LCV scores, we use the shift in the annual budget of
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which is another Bureau within the U.S. Department of
the Interior with a similar environmental orientation as the NPS.40 This approach is based
on actual funding decisions that are plausibly related to funding levels in the NPS, and we
again find results that are similar in sign, magnitude, and precision. Finally, for each park
i, we use the total NPS budget in each year, exclusive of funding for the region in which
park i is located. With this approach, the scaling of each park's budget differs among the
seven NPS regions, and the magnitude of the crowding in estimates are somewhat smaller
but have the same qualitative interpretation.


7.4     Alternative Explanations

Might there be alternative explanations for crowding in of volunteerism in the NPS? One
possibility for crowding in that has been raised in the literature more broadly is a signal-
ing explanation. For example, Payne (2001) finds that greater public funding can signal
greater governmental approval of a recipient organization, which, in turn, promotes an
increase in private contributions. In a related finding, Khanna and Sandler (2000) show
how private contributions might be greater for institutions perceived as subject to more
stringent governmental oversight. We argue that a signaling explanation is unlikely to
explain the crowding in of volunteerism in national parks for several reasons. First, the
goal of commemorating specific historic events. However, Antietam National Battlefield is classified as an
environmental park based on its mandate because it additionally records and preserves local wildlife and
vegetation, monitors invasive species and other pests, and reforests the land on which it is established (NPS
2019a).
  40 Data for the total budgets for all Bureaus within the Department of the Interior are available in the annual

Greenbooks. In this case, the ratio in equation (16) does not differ by park.



                                                       26
inclusion of park visitation in our regression models, both contemporaneous and lagged,
controls for quality signaling that would plausibly affect visitors and volunteers in the
same way. Second, the park fixed effects control for any persistent quality signal among
parks, which is likely to be more relevant given the opacity of annual budgeting. We find
it easier to argue that volunteers are more likely to observe park or program quality than
annual fluctuations in a park's budget. Finally, all of the parks in our analysis are subject to
NPS authority and thereby face a similar set of oversight standards for management and
accountability. Indeed, it is the relative homogeneity across our units of analysis that pro-
vides a distinct advantage compared to other studies in the literature that seek to estimate
crowding effects across a range of heterogeneous charitable organizations.
    Another candidate explanation, relates to the possibility of endogenous fundraising,
whereby changes in public funding can affect the incentives of charitable organizations to
independently solicit donations (Andreoni and Payne 2001, 2003). While fundraising plays
a relatively small role in the NPS, concerns might arise in our setting about the ability of
park staff to recruit and manage volunteers. In particular, might the estimated crowding
in be the result of greater funding relaxing a binding constraint on the ability of park man-
agers to recruit and supervise volunteers? Here again, there are several reasons why we
believe this mechanism is not explaining our results. First, we include the paid FTE per
visitor as an explanatory variable in the preferred regression models, which controls for
annual park-specific variation in staff availability to manage volunteers. In fact, we find
robust evidence that more FTE per visitor is negatively associated with the number of vol-
unteer hours within a park. Second, an evaluation of the VIP program provides broad sur-
vey evidence that supervisory capacity is not generally a binding constraint (NPS 2007).41
Third, the VIP program is regionally funded before allocations are made to individuals
parks, and this means that the region-year fixed effects would control for any common,
regional funding constraints (NPS 2005).42 Fourth, even the largest parks employ only a
handful of designated VIP program administrators, and this suggests that increases in op-
erational funding are unlikely to be used for expanding the VIP program staff within parks
(NPS 2017b). Finally, our estimates of heterogeneous effects would mean that supervi-
sory constraints would need to apply differently to environmental and non-environmental
parks, along with outside and inside hours within the same park. While possible, we see
no compelling reason why such differences would arise.
  41 In particular, the survey finds that 88 percent of the volunteers "do not need more of their supervisor's
time" and 89 percent are at least moderately "satisfied with the leadership, management, and support that
[they] receive as volunteers," with 77 percent reporting strong satisfaction. Moreover, only 16 percent of the
staff agree with the statement that "volunteers are not given the necessary attention and direction throughout
their assignments" (NPS 2007).
   42 We have sought to obtain detailed data on park-level VIP budgets in each year, but unfortunately the NPS

does not keep track of these data in regional offices.




                                                     27
8   Discussion and Conclusion

This paper makes theoretical and empirical contributions to the literature on private pro-
vision of public goods. Understanding the ways in which public provision affects private
provision--through either crowding in or crowding out--is fundamental for evaluating
the positive and normative consequences of policies that affect the supply of public goods.
Moreover, within the literature on privately provided public goods, estimates of the extent
of crowding out are frequently used to test between the candidate models of underlying
behavior based on pure or impure altruism. This paper identifies limitations of the gen-
erality of the standard specification test based on crowding out, proposes a more general
alternative test based on crowding in, and provides empirical evidence consistent with
the new test in a setting where impure altruism appears to apply ex ante, because of joint
production of private and public benefits.
    Our theoretical analysis revisits the crowding out conditions in Andreoni's (1989, 1990)
seminal model of impure altruism. We show that the typically asserted normality assump-
tions are less straightforward than they might appear. The subtlety arises because of how
the model's constrained setup creates a difference between the normality of goods based
on primitive preferences and the income effects that shift demand functions. In contrast
with the pure public good model, we show that crowding out with impure altruism is
an assumed result, rather than a consequence of well-understood properties of individual
utility functions. Applying a more general insight of Cornes and Sandler (1984, 1994) to
the particular setting of impure altruism, we show how assuming normality in the usual
sense based on preferences readily admits possibilities that are implicitly assumed away:
crowding in and greater than one-for-one crowding out.
    More novel and potentially important results relate to the specification tests between
pure and impure altruism. Contrary to the conventional wisdom in the literature that
crowding out must be less for impure altruism than for pure altruism, we show that this
need not be the case. The standard results will always hold under the assumptions of ad-
ditive separability and strict concavity of utility functions, but more generally crowding
out with impure altruism can be greater than or less than with pure altruism. We show
that the different cases depend in part on the degree of substitutability or complementar-
ity between the public good and the private benefit associated with one's own provision.
Furthermore, these results do not hinge on different normality assumptions. Indeed, we
show examples that illustrate the different possibilities under either version of the normal-
ity assumption and even without any income effects. As an alternative, we propose a more
general specification test based on crowding in: evidence of crowding in is consistent with
impure altruism but not with pure altruism assuming normality of preferences.
    The empirical portion of the paper focuses on estimating the causal effect of changes in



                                             28
public funding within U.S. national parks on within-park volunteerism. We find robust ev-
idence of crowding in across a range of specifications and identification strategies, relying
on OLS and IV estimates, and heterogeneous effects. The overall finding is that each addi-
tional dollar of public expenditure within a park crowds in 27 cents worth of volunteerism
on average. Our empirical setting and data set also have unique advantages for estimating
crowding effects because of the relatively long panel of homogeneously managed units,
volunteers that tend to donate their time at only one site, and federal funds that account
for the vast majority of park budgets. From a policy perspective, our findings also suggest
that greater budgets for the NPS will meaningfully leverage greater private contributions,
and this may be an important consideration for a government agency that suffers from
perennial budgetary shortfalls and a growing backlog of deferred maintenance.
   Finally, we have argued that volunteerism in national parks, which involves giving
time in parks rather than money, is consistent with private provision of an impure public
good and therefore the model of impure altruism. The argument is based on how vol-
unteerism jointly contributes to park conservation and management (a public good) and
in situ park enjoyment (a private benefit). In the context of our theoretical results and
new specification test, the findings of crowding in support the notion that volunteerism
is driven by the underlying model of impure altruism rather than pure altruism. The em-
pirical findings thus provide well-identified, quasi-experimental evidence of crowding in
that is theoretically consistent with a generalized interpretation of the standard model for
private provision of a public good.




                                             29
Appendix

Derivation of Equations (9), (10), and (11)

We follow Cornes and Sandler's (1984, 1994) more general approach for deriving compara-
tive static properties of the impure public good model. There are three conditions that link
the virtual magnitudes ( g , G , mi ) to changes in the exogenous parameters. First is the
relationship between an individual's own provision and the level of aggregate provision:

                            gi ( g , G , mi ) = G ( g , G , mi ) - G-i .                    (17)

This is simply a restatement of the identity in (4). Second is that the virtual prices of the
jointly produced products must sum to the price of the joint product:

                                            g + G = 1.                                      (18)

The third comes from substituting (17) and (18) into the virtual budget constraint, xi +
G G +  g gi = mi , along with the actual budget constraint xi + gi = wi , and solving for

                                       mi = wi + G G-i ,                                    (19)

which is simply the virtual "full income." Recognizing that each of the virtual magnitudes
is a function of the vector of exogenous parameters (wi , G-i ), we can differentiate (17), (18),
and (19) with respect to either parameter, denoted by  , and use Cramer's rule to solve for
 g / , G / , and mi / . In particular, following this procedure for a change in wi
yields

                                 g       gmi - Gmi
                                       =           ,
                                 wi          
                                G        Gmi - gmi
                                       =           ,
                                 wi          
                                 mi          G ( Gmi - gmi )
                                       = 1 + -i              ,
                                 wi                  

where as defined in the main text  = g     ¯ g - g
                                     ¯ G + G          ¯  . The parallel results for a
                                                 ¯g - G G

change in G-i are

                          g        G ( gmi - Gmi ) + 1
                                 =                     ,
                          G-i              
                         G         G ( Gmi - gmi ) - 1
                                 =                      ,
                          G-i              
                          mi            G ( ( Gmi - gmi ) - 1)
                                 =  G + -i G                   .
                          G-i                        


                                                30
Finally, substituting these expressions into equation (8), along with the Slutsky equation
to decompose the uncompensated prices responses, and rearranging immediately yields
equations (9), (10), and (11).


Numerical Examples

We construct numerical examples to show the key result that crowding out can be greater
with impure altruism than with pure altruism. Our examples use different variants of the
quadratic utility function. In each case, pure altruism is a special case of impure altruism.
The exogenous variables are always normalized so that wi = G-i = 1. The parameters are
also set to ensure that the quadratic utility function is strictly increasing locally around the
optimal solution. For alternative (i.e., higher) numerical values of the exogenous variables,
a rescaling of the utility function might be required to ensure the utility function is well-
behaved.
   We use the superscript alt to denote results for pure altruism, and the superscript imp
                                                                                                                imp    imp
to denote results for impure altruism. Specifically, we are comparing f ialt
                                                                         1 with f i1     + f i2
at the chosen consumption bundle, noting that by definition f ialt     2 = 0 and paying special
                          imp                                  alt              imp    imp
attention the sign of f i2 . It holds in all cases that 0 < f i1 < 1 and 0 < f i1 + f i2 < 1,
                                                                   imp    imp
which implies crowding out. In all three examples f ialt  1 > f i1 + f i2 , which means that
crowding out is greater with impure altruism, and we show how this is possible regardless
                      imp               imp
of whether f ialt
              1    f i1 , or whether f i2  0.

                                                                        imp             imp
Example 1 This example shows a case where f ialt
                                             1 = f i1                            and f i2     < 0. Preferences for pure and
impure altruism are

                                            23         x2
                                 U ( xi , G ) =xi - i + 4 G - G 2 + xi G
                                            8           2
                                                                        5
                         U ( xi , G, gi ) = U ( xi , G ) - gi2 - xi gi + gi G,
                                                                        4

                              4         imp       imp       4            1         3
and it follows that f ialt
                       1 =   10   and f i1    + f i2    =   10   -      10   =    10   < f ialt
                                                                                            1 .

                                                                        imp             imp
Example 2 This example shows a case where f ialt
                                             1 > f i1                            and f i2     < 0. Preferences for pure and
impure altruism are

                                  U ( xi , G ) = 3xi - xi2 + 4G - G2 + 4xi G
                         U ( xi , G, gi ) = U ( xi , G ) + 4 gi - gi2 - 3xi gi ,

                             1         imp        imp       3       1        1
and it follows that f ialt
                       1 =   2   and f i1    + f i2     =   8   -   8   =    4   < f ialt
                                                                                      1 .

                                                                        imp             imp
Example 3 This example shows a case where f ialt
                                             1 > f i1                            and f i2     > 0. Preferences for pure and


                                                            31
impure altruism are

                            U ( xi , G ) = 3xi - xi2 + 4G - G2 + 4xi G
                                                                       3
                         U ( xi , G, gi ) = U ( xi , G ) + 4 gi - gi2 - xi gi ,
                                                                       2

                             1         imp       imp       9         1       5
and it follows that f ialt
                       1 =   2   and f i1    + f i2    =   22   +   22   =   11   < f ialt
                                                                                       1 .




                                                           32
References

Andreoni, James. 1989. "Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ri-
   cardian Equivalence." Journal of Political Economy 97 (6): 1447-1458.

Andreoni, James. 1990. "Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of
   Warm-Glow Giving." Economic Journal, 100 (401): 464-477.

Andreoni, James. 1993. "An Experimental Test of the Public Goods Crowding-Out Hy-
   pothesis." American Economic Review 83 (5): 1317-1327.

Andreoni, James. 2006. "Philanthropy." In Handbook of Giving, Reciprocity and Altruism, Vol.
   2, edited by Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier. North-Holland: Elsevier.

Andreoni, James and A. Abigail Payne. 2003. "Do Government Grants to Private Charities
   Crowd Out Giving or Fund-raising?" American Economic Review 93 (3): 792-812.

Andreoni, James and A. Abigail Payne. 2011. "Is Crowding Out Due Entirely to Fundrais-
   ing? Evidence from a Panel of Charities." Journal of Public Economics 95 (5-6): 334-343.

Andreoni, James and A. Abigail Payne. 2013. "Charitable Giving." In Handbook of Public
   Economics, Vol. 5, edited by Alan J. Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein,and Em-
   manuel Saez. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome: Local
   Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic
   Review 103(6): 2121-2168.

Bartik, Timothy. 1991. "Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Poli-
   cies?" W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research: Kalamazoo, MI.

Becker, Gary S. 1974. "A Theory of Social Interaction." Journal of Political Economy 82 (6):
   1063-1093.

Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian. 1986. "On the Private Provision
   of Public Goods." Journal of Public Economics 29 (1): 25-49.

Borgonovi, Francesca. 2006. "Do Public Grants to American Theaters Crowd-out Private
   Donations?" Public Choice 126 (3/4): 429-451.

Chan, Nathan W. and Matthew J. Kotchen. 2014. "A Generalized Impure Public Good and
   Linear Characteristics Model of Green Consumption." Resource and Energy Economics
   37: 1-16.




                                             33
Comay, Laura B. 2013. "National Parks System: What Do the Different Park Titles Sig-
  nify?" Report 41816. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service.

Cornes, Richard and Todd Sandler. 1984. "Easy Riders, Joint Production, and Public
  Goods." Economic Journal 94 (375): 580-598.

Cornes, Richard and Todd Sandler. 1985. "The Simple Analytics of Pure Public Good Pro-
  vision," Economica 52(205): 103-116.

Cornes, Richard and Todd Sandler. 1994. "The Comparative Static Properties of the Im-
  pure Public Good Model." Journal of Public Economics 54 (3): 403-421.

de Wit, Arjen and Rene Bekkers. 2017. "Government Support and Charitable Donations:
  A Meta-Analysis of the Crowding-out Hypothesis." Journal of Public Administration Re-
  search and Theory 27 (2): 301-319.

Eckel, Catherine C., Philip J. Grossman, and Rachel M. Johnston. 2005. "An Experimental
  Test of the Crowding Out Hypothesis." Journal of Public Economics 89 (8): 1543-1560.

Glazer, Amihai and Kai A. Konrad. 1996. "A Signaling Explanation for Charity." American
  Economic Review 86 (4): 1019-1028.

Harbaugh, William T. 1998. "The Prestige Motive for Making Charitable Transfers." Amer-
  ican Economic Review 88 (2): 277-282.

Hines, James R. and Richard H. Thaler. 1995. "The Flypaper Effect." Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 9 (4): 217-226.

Hollander, Heinz. 1990. "A Social Exchange Approach to Voluntary Cooperation." Ameri-
  can Economic Review 80 (5): 1157-1167.

Hungerman, Daniel M. 2005. "Are Church and State Substitutes? Evidence from the 1996
  Welfare Reform." Journal of Public Economics 89 (11-12): 2245-2267.

Independent       Sector.        2019.    "The    Value       of     Volunteer      Time."
  https://www.independentsector.org         /resource/the-value-of-volunteer-time/      (ac-
  cessed February 25, 2019).

Khanna, Jyoti and Todd Sandler. 2000. "Partners in Giving: The Crowding in Effects of
  U.K. Government Grants." European Economic Review 44 (8): 1543-1556.

Kingma, Bruce R. 1989. "An Accurate Measurement of the Crowd-out Effect, Income Ef-
  fect, and Price Effect for Charitable Contributions." Journal of Political Economy 97 (5):
  1197-1207.


                                            34
Kotchen, Matthew J. 2005. "Impure Public Goods and the Comparative Statics of Environ-
  mentally Friendly Consumption." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
  49 (2): 281-300.

Kotchen, Matthew J. 2006. "Green Markets and the Private Provision of Public Goods."
  Journal of Political Economy 144 (4): 816-834.

Kotchen, Matthew J. 2007. "Equilibrium Existence and Uniqueness in Impure Public Good
  Models." Economic Letters 97: 91-96.

League of Conservation Voters (LCV). 2019. "National Environmental Scorecard Method-
  ology." http://scorecard.lcv.org/methodology/ (accessed January 16, 2019).

Murdoch, James C. and Todd Sandler. 1984. "Complementarity, Free Riding, and the Mil-
  itary Expenditures of NATO Allies," Journal of Public Economics. 25(1-2) 83-101.

Murdoch, James C. and Todd Sandler. 1990. "Nash-Cournot or Lindahl Behavior? An
  Empirical Test for the NATO Allies," Quarterly Journal of Economics. 105(4) 875-894.

National Park Service (NPS). 2005. "Director's Order #7:            Volunteers-In-Parks."
  https://www.nps.gov/policy/DOrders/DO-7.htm/ (accessed May 5, 2017).

National Park Service (NPS). 2007. "VIP Program Assessment Report." United States De-
  partment of the Interior, Washington, DC.

National         Park       Service       (NPS).      2017a.       "NPS          Essentials."
  https://www.nps.gov/training/essentials /html/volunteers.html (accessed May
  6, 2017).

National Park Service (NPS). 2017b. "Yosemite National Park Volunteers in Parks Hand-
  book." https://www.nps.gov/yose/getinvolved/supportyourpark/upload/viphandbook.pdf
  (accessed May 4, 2017).

National      Park   Service   (NPS).    2019a.    "Antietam    Nature     and     Science,"
  https://www.nps.gov/anti/learn/nature/index.htm/ (accessed February 26, 2019).

National      Park   Service   (NPS).    2019b.    "What   is   Deferred   Maintenance?"
  https://www.nps.gov/subjects/infrastructure/deferred-maintenance.htm/              (Febru-
  ary 28, 2019).

National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA). 2019. "How Is the Partial Gov-
  ernment Shutdown Affecting National Parks?" (accessed on March 11, 2019).
  https://www.npca.org/articles/2029-how-is-the-partial-government-shutdown-
  affecting-national-parks


                                             35
Notowidigdo, Matthew. 2019. "The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks." Forthcom-
   ing, Journal of Labor Economics.

Okten, Cagla and Weisbrod, Burton A. 2000. "Determinants of Donations in Private Non-
   Profit Markets." Journal of Public Economics 75 (2): 255-272.

Ottoni-Wilhelm, Mark, Lise Vesterlund, and Huan Xie. 2017. "Why Do People Give? Test-
   ing Pure and Impure Altruism." American Economic Review 107 (11): 3617-3633.

Payne, A. Abigail. 2001. "Measuring the Effect of Federal Research Funding on Private
   Donations at Research Universities: Is Federal Research Funding More Than a Substi-
   tute for Private Donations?" International Tax and Public Finance 8 (5-6): 731-51.

Payne, A. Abigail. 2009. "Does Government Funding Change Behavior? An Empirical
   Analysis of Crowding Out." In Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 23, edited by Jeffrey R.
   Brown and James M. Poterba. University of Chicago Press.

Ribar, David C. and Mark Ottoni-Wilhelm. 2002. "Altruistic and Joy-of-Giving Motiva-
   tions in Charitable Behavior." Journal of Political Economy 110 (2): 425-457.

Roberts, Russell D. 1984. "A Positive Model of Private Charity and Public Transfers." Jour-
   nal of Political Economy 92 (1): 136-148.

Turner, Robert W. and Reed Walker. (2006). "Explaining the Determinants of Operating
   Budgets at U.S. National Parks." Public Finance Review 34 (5): 551-573.

United States Department of the Interior (US DOI). 2019. "Budget Justifica-
   tions and Performance Information for Fiscal Year 2018:              National Park Ser-
   vice." https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/upload/fy-2018-nps-greenbook.pdf/ (accessed
   February 26, 2019).

Warr, Peter G. 1982. "Pareto Optimal Redistribution and Private Charity." Journal of Public
   Economics 19: 131-138.




                                               36
Figures and Tables




Figure 1: Kernel density function of crowding effect estimates (negative is crowding out,
positive is crowding in) from the literature, shown separately for experimental and non-
experimental studies, and based on 325 estimates from 54 studies collected by de Wit and
Bekkers (2017).




                                           37
Figure 2: The budget frontier, along with virtual magnitudes, for impure altruism in three-
dimensional utility space.




                                            38
Figure 3: Geographic distribution of the 326 parks used in the analysis and managed by
the National Park Service, by administrative region, excluding 5 parks in American Samoa,
the Mariana Islands, and Puerto Rico.




                                           39
Figure 4: Trend in annual National Park Service volunteer hours and funding to parks




                                        40
Figure 5: Breakdown of volunteer hours by type for all parks, 1998-2013




                                  41
Figure 6: Time series of the average annual LCV score based on all members of the U.S.
House and Senate Appropriations Committees




                                         42
Table 1: Summary of the qualitative sign of comparative static results compared with stan-
dard assumptions for impure altruism

           Comparative                     General                          Standard
             Statics             Substitutes Complements                   Assumptions

         G
          wi                          >0                  ?                  0 < f i1 < 1
         G
          G-i                         >0                  ?               0 < f i1 + f i2 < 1
         G          G
          G-i   -    wi                ?                  ?                     f i2 > 0

         Crowding effects
          gi
          G-i                      ? ( > -1)              ?           -1 < f i1 + f i2 - 1 < 0
           gi
           G-i dG =-dw                <0                  ?              -1 < f i2 - 1 < 0
                 -i    i


    Notes: Substitutes and complements refer to cases where G and gi are net (Hicksian) substitutes or
    complements in an unrestricted utility maximization problem. Standard assumptions refers to the
    conditions assumed in the existing literature on the theory of impure altruism.




                                                    43
                                 Table 2: Summary statistics

                                                            All Parks     Environmental Parks

                                                                             Yes            No
Hoursit : Volunteer Hours per Year                            15,686       29,606         8,454
                                                             (30,236)     (46,110)       (11,497)

Value of Annual Volunteer Hours ($ 1,000s)                      346          656            186
                                                               (674)       (1,029)         (256)

Budgetit : Annual Budget ($ 1,000s)                           3,844         6,395          2,520
                                                             (4,999)       (6,513)        (3,288)

Visitsit : Annual Visits (1,000s)                              822          1,355           547
                                                             (1,776)       (2,116)        (1,501)

FTEit : Annual Paid Staff FTE (per 1,000 visits)              0.334         0.280          0.361
                                                             (1.734)       (0.757)        (2.067)
Number of parks                                                326           105            221
Observations                                                  4,808         1,644          3,164
Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Parks are classified as environmental ac-
cording to our primary definition of whether volunteerism in the category of natural resource man-
agement is strictly positive for every year. The value of volunteer hours is calculated using the an-
nual value of volunteer time from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (see text). The value of volunteer
hours and the annual budget are reported in 2013 dollars.




                                                 44
                       Table 3: First stage results for IV estimation

                                                         (1)           (2)            (3)
           Zit                                        0.215        0.187             -0.034
                                                       (0.059)      (0.071)         (0.034)

           Zit × 1[ Envr ]i                                          0.034          0.288
                                                                    (0.078)          (0.054)

           Visitsit                                    -0.038       -0.047           -0.029
                                                       (0.264)      (0.258)         (0.167)

           FTEit                                        2.075        2.061           0.419
                                                       (2.412)      (2.402)         (0.913)
           Park FE
           Region-Year FE
           F-stat on excluded instruments               13.25         6.93           15.26
           Observations                                 4,808        4,808           4,808
              p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Notes: Column 1 is the first stage regression of specification (14); the dependent variable is annual
park funding in thousands of 2013 dollars. Columns 2 and 3 are the first stage regressions of
specification (15); the dependent variable is, respectively, annual park budget in thousands of 2013
dollars, and the interaction of budget with the indicator variable for an environmental park. Zit is
the instrumental variable described in equation (16). Robust standard errors clustered by park are
reported in parentheses, and we report cluster-robust F-statistics on the excluded instruments. The
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-statistic is 6.4 for the joint test in columns 2 and 3.




                                                 45
                   Table 4: Overall estimates of the average crowding effect

                                             OLS                               IV

                               (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
Budgetit                     2.509         2.511     2.445       12.731     12.410      9.092
                             (1.500)       (1.494)   (1.152)      (4.779)    (4.826)    (3.566)

Visitsit                                    0.231      2.220                  1.024       1.101
                                           (2.202)    (1.433)                (3.552)     (1.782)

FTEit                                  -50.055       -53.943                -77.237     -56.159
                                        (24.416)      (22.487)               (33.669)    (22.134)
Park FE
Region-Year FE
Observations                 4,808         4,808      3,868       4,808      4,808       3,868
   p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Notes: The dependent variable is total volunteer hours by park-year. Columns 1-3 are estimated
with OLS, and columns 4-6 are estimated using the IV approach described in the main text.
Columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 include the full sample; columns 3 and 6 are estimated on the 1998-2010
time period, excluding the post-recession years. Robust standard errors clustered by park are re-
ported in parentheses.




                                                      46
Table 5: Heterogeneous crowding effects by environmental and non-environmental parks

                                              OLS                                      IV

                                    (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)            (6)
 Budgetit                         -0.177      -0.177          0.732     3.511       1.348          0.684
                                 (0.437)     (0.440)         (0.554)   (4.001)     (3.666)        (2.976)

 Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i           4.435      4.435            2.321     9.732     11.554          8.816
                                  (1.560)    (1.572)         (1.362)   (4.116)    (4.417)        (3.731)

 Visitsit                                    -0.025           2.321                 0.032          1.793
                                             (1.977)         (1.445)               (2.306)        (1.699)

 FTEit                                      -47.915      -56.772                 -60.520        -62.470
                                             (23.534)     (23.245)                (22.002)       (23.720)
 Park FE
 Region-Year FE
 Observations                     4,808      4,808           3,868     4,808       4,808           3,868
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

     Notes: The dependent variable is total volunteer hours by park-year. Columns 1-3 are estimated
     with OLS, and columns 4-6 are estimated using the IV approach described in the main text.
     Columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 include the full sample; columns 3 and 6 are estimated on the 1998-2010
     time period, excluding the post-recession years. 1[ Envr ]i is an indicator variable for an environ-
     mental park. Robust standard errors clustered by park are reported in parentheses.




                                                        47
   Table 6: Crowding effects separately for outside and inside volunteer hours

                                                           OLS                       IV

                                                    (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)
         Panel A: Outside Hours
         Budgetit                              1.742             1.740     9.235          9.270
                                              (1.161)           (1.151)    (3.980)        (4.054)

         Visitsit                                                -0.300                    0.304
                                                                (1.880)                   (2.723)

         FTEit                                                 -49.856                -70.534
                                                                (19.178)               (28.230)
         Panel B: Inside Hours
         Budgetit                              0.766             0.771     3.066          3.140
                                              (0.748)           (0.744)    (1.783)        (1.810)

         Visitsit                                                0.531                     0.721
                                                                (1.439)                   (1.653)

         FTEit                                                   -0.199                    -6.703
                                                                (9.647)                   (9.972)
         Park FE
         Region-Year FE
         Observations                          4,808            4,808      4,808          4,808
            p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Notes: The dependent variable is volunteer hours devoted to outside tasks in Panel A and inside
tasks in Panel B. Outside hours include archeology, campground hosting, interpretation, resource
management, and park protection. Inside hours include general management, curating, adminis-
tration, maintenance, training, and other. Columns 1-2 are estimated with OLS, and columns 3-4
are estimated using the IV approach described in the main text. Robust standard errors clustered
by park are reported in parentheses.




                                                          48
           Table 7: Heterogeneous crowding effects by park and hour types

                                                          OLS                       IV

                                                   (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)
        Panel A: Outside Hours
        Budgetit                              -0.153           -0.163      2.111          1.935
                                              (0.365)          (0.376)    (3.282)        (3.503)

        Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i                3.129             3.139      7.505          7.662
                                             (1.431)           (1.450)    (3.737)        (3.580)

        Visitsit                                                -0.481                    -0.354
                                                               (1.825)                   (2.026)

        FTEit                                                 -48.341               -59.447
                                                               (18.187)              (19.447)
        Panel B: Inside Hours
        Budgetit                              -0.024           -0.014     -0.788         -0.586
                                              (0.178)          (0.185)    (1.335)        (1.388)

        Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i                  1.306            1.296     4.064          3.892
                                              (0.994)          (0.977)    (1.790)        (1.799)

        Visitsit                                                0.455                     0.387
                                                               (1.371)                   (1.400)

        FTEit                                                   0.426                    -1.072
                                                               (9.747)                   (9.432)
        Park FE
        Region-Year FE
        Observations                           4,808            4,808     4,808          4,808
           p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

Notes: The dependent variable is volunteer hours devoted to outside tasks in Panel A and inside
tasks in Panel B. Outside hours include archeology, campground hosting, interpretation, resource
management, and park protection. Inside hours include general management, curating, adminis-
tration, maintenance, training, and other. Columns 1-2 are estimated with OLS, and columns 3-4
are estimated using the IV approach described in the main text. 1[ Envr ]i is an indicator variable
for an environmental park. Robust standard errors clustered by park are reported in parentheses.




                                                         49
Appendix Tables


 Table A.1: Summary statistics with the alternative definition of an environmental park

                                                              All Parks      Environmental Parks

                                                                               Yes            No
   Hoursit : Volunteer Hours per Year                           15,686        18,187        8,669
                                                               (30,236)      (34,062)      (12,546)

   Value of Annual Volunteer Hours ($ 1,000s)                     346          400            190
                                                                 (674)        (752)          (277)

   Budgetit : Annual Budget ($ 1,000s)                           3,844        4,223          2,783
                                                                (4,999)      (5,158)        (4,352)

   Visitsit : Annual Visits (1,000s)                              822          890            632
                                                                (1,776)      (1,910)        (1,314)

   FTEit : Annual Paid Staff FTE (per 1,000 visits)              0.334        0.314          0.388
                                                                (1.734)      (1.835)        (1.415)
   Number of parks                                                326          233             93
   Observations                                                  4,808        3,545          1,263
   Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Parks are classified as environmental ac-
   cording to our secondary definition of whether a park's official mandate includes activities related
   to environmental conservation. The value of volunteer hours is calculated using the annual value
   of volunteer time from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (see text). The value of volunteer hours and
   the annual budget are reported in 2013 dollars.




                                                     50
                           Table A.2: Alternative specifications to test for robustness

                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
Budgeti,t-1                                 13.860        3.548
                                             (5.411)     (3.971)

Budgeti,t-1 × 1[ Envr ]i                                10.604
                                                         (4.524)

Budgetit                                                            11.629        -1.217    10.513        -0.799      1.538
                                                                     (4.903)     (3.957)     (4.712)     (3.769)     (3.745)

Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i                                                           13.226                  12.157      12.506
                                                                                 (4.642)                 (4.113)     (5.590)

Visitsit                                     -1.894      -1.100       2.218       0.108       1.148       0.083      -0.320
                                             (2.641)     (2.653)     (3.601)     (1.722)     (3.166)     (2.069)     (2.473)

FTEit                                       -53.714     -56.936      -304.209     -3.628    -84.550     -65.702     -69.362
                                             (23.866)    (20.236)   (245.550)   (230.726)    (33.038)    (21.881)    (25.854)

Park FE
Region-Year FE
Lagged Budget
Include Lagged Visits
Include Time Trends for Large/Small Parks
More General Definition of Envr. Parks
K-P F-stat                                   15.32        6.73       14.03        7.44       13.34        7.36        6.47
Observations                                 4,529        4,529      4,109       4,109       4,808        4,808       4,808
   p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

       Notes: The dependent variable is total volunteer hours by park-year. All specifications are estimated
       using the IV approach described in the main text. Models (1) and (2) include the park budgets
       lagged one year. Models (3) and (4) include two years of lagged visitation. Models (5) and (6)
       include separate linear time trends for parks with above and below median 1995 budgets. Model (7)
       estimates the heterogeneous park effects with our secondary definition of an environmental park
       based on its stated mandate. Robust standard errors clustered by park are reported in parentheses.
       We report the cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-statistic in the first stage.




                                                           51
                                   Table A.3: Alternative instruments

                                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Budgetit                                 11.119        -4.685    12.516        3.483     8.059         1.796
                                          (4.684)     (4.545)     (4.025)     (3.691)     (1.945)     (2.435)

Budgetit × 1[ Envr ]i                                16.140                  9.708                   6.858
                                                      (4.666)                (3.876)                  (2.529)

Visitsit                                   0.921       -0.493      1.033       0.220       0.675       0.111
                                          (3.327)     (2.182)     (3.582)     (2.456)     (2.778)     (2.112)

FTEit                                   -73.691      -49.373     -77.527     -64.199     -65.288     -56.197
                                         (31.559)     (20.469)    (34.200)    (25.237)    (29.612)    (24.558)
Park FE
Region-Year FE

All Congressional LCV Scores IV
Fish and Wildlife Service IV
NPS Budget For Other Regions IV
K-P F-stat                                14.04        4.98       10.07        1.81       16.05        1.49
Observations                              4,808        4,808      4,808       4,808       4,808       4,808
   p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

     Notes: The dependent variable is total volunteer hours by park-year. All specifications are esti-
     mated using the IV approach described in the main text. Models (1) and (2) are estimated using the
     instrumental variable based on the LCV scores for all U.S. Congressional members, excluding those
     representing each park. Models (3) and (4) are estimated using the instrumental variable based on
     the budget for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Models (5) and (6) are estimated using the instru-
     mental variable based on the total NPS budget, exclusive of the region where each park is located.
     Robust standard errors clustered by park are reported in parentheses. We report the cluster-robust
     Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-statistic in the first stage.




                                                      52
