                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 A THEORY OF FALLING GROWTH AND RISING RENTS

                                       Philippe Aghion
                                      Antonin Bergeaud
                                        Timo Boppart
                                       Peter J. Klenow
                                          Huiyu Li

                                      Working Paper 26448
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26448


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Federal Reserve System, the Bank of France, the Eurosystem, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Sina Ates, Paco Buera, Sam Kortum,
and Gilles St. Paul for very helpful discussions.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Philippe Aghion, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J. Klenow, and Huiyu Li.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Falling Growth and Rising Rents
Philippe Aghion, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J. Klenow, and Huiyu Li
NBER Working Paper No. 26448
November 2019
JEL No. O31,O47,O51

                                          ABSTRACT

Growth has fallen in the U.S., while firm concentration and profits have risen. Meanwhile, labor's
share of national income is down, mostly due to the rising market share of low labor share firms.
We propose a theory for these trends in which the driving force is falling firm-level costs of
spanning multiple markets, perhaps due to accelerating IT advances. In response, the most
efficient firms (with higher markups) spread into new markets, thereby generating a temporary
burst of growth. Because their efficiency is difficult to imitate, less efficient firms find markets
more difficult to enter profitably and therefore innovate less. Eventually, due to greater
competition from efficient firms, within-firm markups actually fall. Despite the increase in the
aggregate markup and rents, firm incentives to innovate decline--lowering the long run growth
rate.

Philippe Aghion                                       Peter J. Klenow
College de France                                     Department of Economics
3 Rue D'Ulm                                           579 Serra Mall
75005 Paris                                           Stanford University
FRANCE                                                Stanford, CA 94305-6072
paghion@fas.harvard.edu                               and NBER
                                                      Klenow@Stanford.edu
Antonin Bergeaud
Banque de France                                      Huiyu Li
31 rue croix des petits champs                        101 Market Street, MS 1130
Paris, France                                         Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
antonin.bergeaud@gmail.com                            San Francisco, CA 94105
                                                      United States
Timo Boppart                                          tohuiyu@gmail.com
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm
Sweden
timo.boppart@iies.su.se




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26448
2


1        Introduction
Recent studies have documented the following patterns in the U.S. economy
over the past several decades:1

    1. Falling "long run" growth (interrupted by a temporary burst of growth)

    2. Falling labor share due to rising revenue shares of low labor share firms

    3. Rising firm concentration within industries at the national level

    In this paper we construct a theory of endogenous growth with
heterogeneous firms which potentially speaks to these facts. There are two
main sources of heterogeneity in our model. The first is product quality, which
differs across the product lines of a firm and improves endogenously through
innovation and creative destruction. The second is process efficiency, which is
time-invariant, differs across firms, and is common to all products lines of a
firm.       High process efficiency firms command a higher markup than low
productivity firms, conditional on having the same product quality advantage
over their competitors.
    A possible source of persistent heterogeneity in process efficiency across
firms is their organizational capital. Firms such as Walmart and Amazon have
established successful business models and logistics that are evidently hard to
copy. Both firms experienced considerable expansion into new geographic
and/or product markets over the past two decades. Similarly, Amazon and
Microsoft have acquired dominant positions in cloud storage and computing
due to their logistical advantage over potential competitors. Such firms have
achieved a level of process efficiency which is arguably harder to reverse
engineer and build upon than quality, which may be more observable.
    Our story is that the IT (Information Technology) wave in the 1990s has
allowed high productivity firms to extend their boundaries -- to expand over a

    1
        We discuss papers presenting evidence on these patterns in the next section.
                                                                              3


wider set of product lines. We model the IT wave as a downward shift in the
overhead cost c(n) of running n product lines. This cost is assumed to be
convex in n, which puts a brake on the quality innovation (creative
destruction) efforts of high process efficiency firms. The downward shift in the
overhead cost schedule will allow high productivity firms to expand to a higher
fraction of lines. The expansion of high productivity firms fuels a temporary
surge in aggregate productivity growth -- both because they innovate to take
over more markets (bringing quality improvements) and because they apply
their superior process efficiency to those additional markets.
   Since high productivity firms have higher markups and lower labor shares
on average across their product lines, their expansion into more markets
results in an increase in the aggregate markup and a reduction of the aggregate
labor share. This is entirely driven by firm composition rather than within-firm
changes. Within-firm markups can actually fall, as the quality leader on a
product line is more likely to face a high process efficiency competitor.
Competition from an efficient follower can limit the leader's markup whether
the leader is a high or low process efficiency firm.
   Thus, while the IT wave induces a burst of growth in the short run, in the
long run the fall in overhead cost may lead to a slowdown in productivity
growth. The expansion of high productivity firms into more lines eventually
deters innovation because innovating on a line where the incumbent firm has
high productivity yields lower profits. Both high and low productivity firms
eventually curtail their efforts at creative destruction, knowing they will face
stiffer competition. This can outweigh the positive direct effect of a downward
shift in the overhead cost on R&D incentives, such that long run innovation
and productivity growth may fall. A drop in long run growth leads to a lower
pace of job reallocation, which is tied to creative destruction.
   Under reasonable parameters, our story can explain a significant portion of
the growth slowdown. More specifically, we choose parameter values to fit the
pre-IT revolution period (1949­1995) on the level of concentration, productivity
4


growth, aggregate markup, the real interest rate, the intangible investment rate
and the correlation across firms between their labor share and sales share. We
then scale down the overhead cost to match the decline in the relative price of
IT goods over 1996­2005. With such a decline in overhead costs, the model can
generate half of the growth slowdown seen in recent years.
    Most directly related to our paper are Akcigit and Ates (2019), Liu, Mian and
Sufi (2019), and De Ridder (2019), who also study declining growth and rising
concentration. Akcigit and Ates emphasize declining imitation rates, whereas
Liu et al. consider the effect of declining interest rates as driving forces behind
the productivity slowdown. In De Ridder the productivity slowdown arises
when some firms become particularly efficient at reducing their marginal costs
through intangible inputs, which discourages other firms from innovating. Our
contribution is to develop a growth model with persistent firm heterogeneity
which generates opposite trends for labor share and markups within versus
across firms when IT improvements reduce overhead costs for all firms.
    Our paper also relates to Hopenhayn, Neira and Singhania (2018) and
Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2019), who study rising concentration; to recent
papers on declining labor share such as Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013,
2018), Barkai (2016), Koh, Santaeullia-Llopis and Zheng (2016), Eggertsson,
Mehrotra, Singh and Summers (2016), Martinez (2018), Farhi and Gourio
(2018), and Kaymak and Schott (2018).
    Kehrig and Vincent (2018) and Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson and Van Reenen
(2019) look at labor share in U.S. Census data, while Baqaee and Farhi (2019)
and De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) estimate markups in Compustat firms.
These papers decompose the evolution of the aggregate labor share (or
markup) into within-firm and between-firm components.              They find the
dominant contributor to be the rising market share of low labor share (high
markup) firms. We contribute to this literature by linking these trends to the
slowdown in U.S. growth in recent decades.
                                                                                                    5


    The rest of the paper is organized as follows.                    Section 2 describes the
empirical patterns documented by other studies that motivate our modeling
effort. Section 3 lays out our model. In Section 4, we perform a steady state
comparison to show that the model could explain a significant portion of the
decline in long run growth. In Section 5, we solve for transition dynamics to
demonstrate that a lower overhead cost can lead to a short run boost in
productivity growth followed by a long run slowdown. Section 6 discusses
extensions to the model and Section 7 concludes.



2       Stylized facts
Fact 1: Falling "long run" growth (after a burst of growth)                    Figure 1 presents
U.S. annual TFP growth from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The BLS
attempts to net out the contribution of both physical and human capital
growth to output growth. The BLS sometimes subtracts contributions from
R&D and other intellectually property investments; we consistently included
this portion in residual TFP growth as part of what we are trying to explain.
    The Figure shows growth accelerating from its 1949­1995 average of 1.8%
per year to 2.9% per year from 1996­2005, before falling to just 1.1% per year
from 2006­2018. Fernald, Hall, Stock and Watson (2017) and Bergeaud, Cette
and Lecat (2016) argue that the recent slowdown is statistically significant and
predates the Great Recession. Syverson (2017) and Aghion, Bergeaud, Boppart,
Klenow and Li (2019) contend that the slowdown is real and unlikely to be fully
attributable to growing measurement errors.

Fact 2: Falling labor share (mostly due to composition)                        According to the
BLS, the aggregate U.S. labor share of output in the nonfarm business sector
fell about 6 percentage points in the last two decades (see Figure OA-1 in
Online Appendix OA-A).2 Autor et al. (2019) find a declining labor share in sales
    2
    As this is the business sector, it is not affected by the Rognlie (2016) critique that the rise of
housing is exaggerating the decline in labor share. See also Cette, Koehl and Philippon (2019).
6


                        Figure 1: U.S. productivity growth rate

                                          2.88%


                1.82%

                                                                     1.10%



             1949 - 1995                1996 - 2005               2006 - 2018
    Source: BLS multifactor productivity series. We calculate yearly productivity growth rate
    by adding R&D and IP contribution to BLS MFP and then converting the sum to labor
    augmenting form. The figure plots the average productivity growth within each subperiod.
    The unit is percentage points.


in a number of Census sectors, but most sharply in manufacturing. Table 1
reproduces their statistics on the cumulative change in labor share for six
Census sectors in recent decades. Finance is the exception, with rising labor
share. In all six sectors the sales shares shifted to low labor share firms, so that
the "between" firm component pushed labor share downward notably.
Within-firm labor shares actually rose in all sectors but manufacturing. A
complementary fact which Autor et al. (2019) document is that larger firms
tend to have lower labor shares.                  Within four-digit industries, the
semi-elasticity of firm labor share with respect to firm sales averages -1.10
across their six Census sectors. The relationship is negative within each sector.
    In the business cycle literature, labor share is often used as an inverse
measure of price-cost markups. See Karabarbounis (2014) and Bils, Klenow
and Malin (2018).        Thus one interpretation of falling labor share due to
composition effects is that market share is shifting toward high markup firms.
                                                                                         7

                Table 1: Cumulative change in labor share (ppt)

                                        1982­2012                     1992­2012

                              MFG       RET     WHO       SRV         FIN     UTL
            Payroll
                              -6.73    -0.85    -0.08     0.23        3.25    -1.83
             Sales

         Within firm          -1.71     4.39     4.66     1.73        4.92     0.37
         Between              -4.54    -5.44    -4.59    -0.76       -0.75    -3.25
        Source: Table 5 in Autor et al. (2019). This is a Melitz-Polanec decomposition
       of the change in the labor share. The entry and exit margin is not reported.
       The unit is percentage points. MFG, RET, WHO, SRV, FIN and UTL stand for
       the manufacturing, retail, wholesale, service, finance and utility sectors.


De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) and Baqaee and Farhi (2019) argue for this
interpretation, based on a broader measure of variable inputs that adds
intermediates to labor costs for Compustat firms. A competing interpretation
is that the elasticity of output with respect to capital has risen, in the aggregate,
due to rising market share of high capital elasticity firms.                 Barkai (2016),
Gutierrez and Philippon (2016, 2017), and Farhi and Gourio (2018) al argue
against this interpretation and in favor of rising markups on the grounds that
the investment rate and capital-output ratio have not risen.
   Koh, Santaeullia-Llopis and Zheng (2016) and Traina (2018) argue that labor
share has not fallen and markups have not increased if one adds intangibles
investments such as R&D and marketing. These expenditures are arguably not
part of variable costs, in which case their rise may be compatible with rising
markups. Moreover, Autor et al. (2019) document falling payroll relative to sales;
sales, unlike value added, should not be affected by whether intangibles are
expensed or treated as part of value added.


Fact 3: Rising concentration          Table 2, which is also based on Autor et al.
(2019), presents the average cumulative change in top 4 or top 20 firm
concentration measures in 4-digit NAICS. These results are, again, from
8


firm-level data in U.S. Census years. Across the six sectors, the top 4 firm
shares increase from 0.8 to 2.3 percentage points per five-year period, while
the top 20 firm shares increase between 0.9 and 3.3 percentage points per
five-year period.     Concentration increased the most rapidly in retail and
finance, and slower in manufacturing and services.
    The rise in concentration in Table 2 is at the national level. In contrast,
Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte and Trachter (2018) and Rinz (2018) find that local
concentration declined. One explanation for the diverging trends is that the
largest firms grew by adding establishments in new locations.3 Figure 2 shows
cumulative growth of the number of establishments per firm, by firm size bins,
in the Business Dynamic Statistics from the Census Bureau. The red line is the
growth of establishments for the largest firms. It shows that, between 1990 and
2014, the largest firms expanded by adding establishments.                  The average
number of establishments rose for smaller firms too but not as quickly as for
the largest firms. Cao, Sager, Hyatt and Mukoyama (2019) document a similar
pattern in the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages data, and Rinz
(2018) documents increasing number of markets with at least one
establishment belonging to a top 5 firm. To the extent that growth in the
number of establishments is connected to growth in the number of products
or markets, this evidence suggests that the rise in national concentration may
not reflect an increase in market power of the largest firms.4
    The rate at which large firms add establishment, moreover, may reflect the
pace of their product innovation. Figure 3 shows the rate at which large firms
increased employment through adding new establishments.                     This can be
thought of as an employment-weighted entry rate.                     The largest firms
experienced a burst of establishment entry precisely in the period when U.S.
productivity growth accelerated. They experienced a decline in entry just as

    3
      Hsieh and Rossi-Hansberg (2019) document the expansion of large U.S. firms into more
locations in services, retail trade, and wholesale trade. Like us, they emphasize IT as the
potential driving force.
    4
      See Syverson (2019) for why concentration can be negatively related to market power.
                                                                                           9

                 Table 2: Cumulative change in concentration (ppt)

                                                 1982­2012                1992­2012

                                        MFG     RET     WHO        SRV    FIN     UTL

      Top 4 firms sales share           6.0     14.0      4.7      4.5    7.2       4.6
      Top 20 firms sales share          5.2     16.3     10.1      6.1    13.3      4.7
    Source: Table 1 of Autor et al. (2019). Averages across 4-digit industries, with the
   industries weighted by industry sales shares.


U.S. productivity growth declined. In what follows, we offer the IT revolution
as a driver of this comovement between aggregate productivity growth and
establishments entry rate of the largest firms.

                     Figure 2: Establishments per firm by firm size

          1990 = 1

    1.8

    1.6

    1.4                                              10,000 plus

    1.2                                                            1,000 to 9,999

    1.0
                                                                    Below 1,000
    0.8
              1980      1985     1990         1995      2000       2005    2010
   Source: U.S. Census Bureau Business Dynamic Statistics. The graph plots the number of
   establishments per firm relative to 1990 within employment bins.




IT as a driving force      We focus on changes in IT as a possible driver of the
patterns described above for four reasons. First, price declines for IT goods
accelerated sharply for a decade from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s. See
10


         Figure 3: Employment weighted establishment entry rate by firm size

               1990 = 1
         1.2
                                                                   10,000 plus
         1.1
         1.0                                            1,000
                                                       to 9,999
         0.9
                                                    Below 1,000
         0.8
         0.7
         0.6
               1980       1985   1990        1995        2000        2005        2010
     Source: U.S. Census Bureau's Business Dynamics Statistics. The figure shows job creation
     by establishment birth over total employment for different firm size bins. The lines
     represent 5-year centered moving average, relative to 1990.


Figure 4. This is in the middle of the period of rising concentration.
     Second, Figure 5 displays the growth rate of multi-factor productivity for IT-
producing, IT-intensive and non-IT- intensive industries, adapted from Fernald
(2015).5 The figure shows a burst of growth for the IT-intensive sectors in early
2000s after a burst of growth for IT-producing sectors in the second half of 1990.
In contrast, the non-IT-intensive sectors did not experience a burst of growth.
When comparing the beginning and the end the series the overall productivity
slowdown is also more pronounced for the IT-intensive sectors.
     Third, using the same classification of sectors, we plot the average labor
share respectively for IT producing, IT intensive and non-IT intensive sectors

     5
     Industries called "IT producing" are computer and electronic, computer system design and
publishing industries. All other industries are ranked based on the average value of their IT
capital relative to value added over the years 1987 to 2016 and then split into two categories:
IT intensive and non IT intensive such that the share of total value added in the two groups is
roughly the same. We consider 3 digit sectors spanning the entire non-farm business sectors
excluding finance and aggregate the MFP growth rates using value added weights.
                                                                                      11


in Figure 6. Except for a short spike in the early 2000s, we see that the labor
share is declining in all cases, but the magnitude of this decline is particularly
large for IT producing and IT intensive sectors.
    Finally, Crouzet and Eberly (2019) and Lashkari, Bauer and Boussard (2019)
document that bigger firms invest a higher share of their sales in intangibles and
IT, respectively. Lower costs of IT seems to benefit larger firms more. The former
evidence is for U.S. firms and the latter for French firms. Furthermore, Bessen
(2019) provides evidence that industries with higher IT intensity experienced
higher growth in the sales share of the largest firms.

                                Figure 4: Relative price of IT

       0




                   -4.56%                                              -4.96%


                                             -8.92%

      12          1949 - 1995               1996 - 2005               2006 - 2018
    Source: BEA. % Change per year in the price of IT relative to the GDP deflator.




3     Model
The above evidence on the opposite trends in between vs. within firm labor
share as well as national vs. local concentration, asks for a model with
persistent firm heterogeneity. Moreover, accounting for the observed burst
and then slowdown in productivity growth requires an endogenous growth
12


                           Figure 5: Productivity growth by IT intensity

        %                                                                           %
       4                                                                             14
              IT producing                                     IT intensive           12
       3       (right axis)
                                                                                      10
       2
                                                                                      8
       1
                                                                                      6
       0                                       Others
                                                                                      4
       1
             1990            1995         2000          2005            2010       2015
     Source: Adapted from Fernald (2015) Figure 6A. % per year, 5-year centered moving
     average. MFP data come from the BLS multifactor productivity series. See Online Appendix
     OA-B for details and robustness.

                               Figure 6: Labor share by IT intensity

            1987 = 1
      1.1

                               IT producing
      1.0

                     IT intensive                                         Others
      0.9



                    1990         1995         2000       2005            2010      2015
     Source: Labor share is taken from the BLS production tables. IT groups are the same as in
     Figure 5. Labor share is normalized to 1 for each group in 1987. See Online Appendix OA-B
     for details and robustness.
                                                                             13


theory. In this section we lay out a model which combines these two elements
to speak to the facts in Section 2. The goal is to construct a parsimonious
theory which has quantitative bite, can be generalized in various ways and
ultimately can be used for policy analysis.


3.1   Preferences

Time is discrete and the economy is populated by a representative household
who chooses a path of consumption C and wealth a to maximize

                                      
                               U0 =            t log (Ct ) ,
                                      t=0


subject to
                           at+1 = (1 + rt )at + wt L - Ct ,                  (1)

a standard no-Ponzi game condition and a given initial wealth level a0 > 0. Here
r is the interest rate, w the wage rate and L denotes the labor endowment that
is inelastically supplied to the labor market.
   The Euler equation resulting from household's optimization is given by

                                Ct+1
                                     =  (1 + rt+1 ).                         (2)
                                 Ct


3.2   Production of final output

A final output good is produced competitively out of a unit interval of
intermediate inputs according to the following Cobb-Douglas technology

                                          1
                         Y = exp              log [q (i)y (i)]di .           (3)
                                      0
14


Here y (i) denotes the quantity and q (i) the quality of product i. This structure
yields demand for each product i as

                                                  YP
                                     y (i) =           ,                          (4)
                                                  p(i)

where we defined the aggregate price index

                                           1
                         P  exp                log [p(i)/q (i)] di ,              (5)
                                       0


which we will in the following normalize to one in each period. We will next
describe the market structure of the intermediate inputs.


3.3     Production and market structure for intermediate inputs

There are J firms indexed by j . We assume that J is "large" such that firms
take the aggregate price index in the economy as given. Each firm j has the
knowledge to produce quality q (i, j )  0 in a specific market i  [0, 1]. There are
two sources of heterogeneity across firms: (i) heterogeneity in the firm-market
specific quality q (i, j ) which evolves endogenously as a result of innovation; (ii)
permanent heterogeneity in firm-specific process efficiency.
     We first describe the heterogeneity in the process efficiency. There is a
firm-specific level of process efficiency denoted by (j ). A firm with process
efficiency (j ) can produce in any line i with the following linear technology


                               y (i, j ) = (j ) · l(i, j ),                       (6)


where l(i, j ) is labor used by firm j to produce output y (i, j ) in product line i.
We assume that the heterogeneity in process efficiency is persistent over time
reflecting, e.g., differences in organizational capital that is hard to copy. This
heterogeneity in process efficiency will translate into persistent differences in
revenue TFP, labor income shares, and markups across firms.
                                                                                        15


   The linear technology in (6) applies irrespective of the specific quality q (i, j )
at which firm j produces in line i. In addition to the heterogeneity in process
efficiency, firms differ in their product quality. We will explain below how the
firm and line specific quality changes endogenously due to innovations. But for
the static firm problem here we regard the line-specific quality q (i, j ) of a firm in
a period t as given. Labor is fully mobile such that the wage rate equalizes across
firms. Hence, the marginal cost of firm j per unit of output in line i is given by
w/(j ), or the marginal cost per quality-adjusted output in line i, q (i, j )y (i, j ), is
                 w
equal to   q (i,j )(j )
                        .


3.4    Pricing

In each market all J firms engage in Bertrand competition. This implies that
only the firm with the highest quality-adjusted productivity q (i, j ) · (j ) will be
active in equilibrium in a given market. We denote the index of this leading
firm in line i by j (i) and the one of the second-highest quality-adjusted
producer by j (i). Hence, the quality-adjusted productivity of the "leader" in
line i is given by q (i, j (i)) · (j (i)) whereas it is q (i, j (i)) · (j (i)) for the
second-best firm. Under Bertrand competition price setting of the leading firm
is constrained by the second-best producer.                         The leader will set its
quality-adjusted price equal to the quality-adjusted marginal cost of the
second-best firm. Formally, we then have

                            p(i, j (i), j (i))              w
                                               =                        .               (7)
                               q (i, j (i))      q (i, j (i)) · (j (i))

Note that the equilibrium price in line i depends on the process efficiency of
both the leader and the second-best firm as well as the quality difference
between them.
   We define the markup in line i, µ(i, j (i), j (i)), as the price of a unit divided
16


by the marginal cost of the producer, which yields

                                      p(i, j (i), j (i))    q (i, j (i)) · (j (i))
                µ(i, j (i), j (i))                       =                         .                     (8)
                                        w/(j (i))          q (i, j (i)) · (j (i))

                                                                         q (i,j (i))
     The markup of a product increases in the quality gap                q (i,j (i))
                                                                                       as well as in the
                          (j (i))
process efficiency gap    (j (i))
                                    between the leading and the second-best firm. All
else equal, the product level markup is increasing with the process efficiency of
the leading firm (j (i)) and decreasing in the process efficiency of the second-
best firm (j (i)). Within a firm the markup differs across product lines but a
firm with a higher process efficiency will charge on average a higher markup.
                                                                                                  1
Operating profits (before overhead) of the leader in line i are Y 1 -                      µ(i,j (i),j (i))
                                                                                                              .
This follows from the demand function (4) with P normalized to one.


3.5     Innovation and productivity growth

The quality distribution evolves endogenously over time as a result of
innovation. Any firm j can engage in R&D activity to acquire a patent to
produce in a new randomly drawn line at higher quality. More specifically, by
investing xt (j ) · r Yt units of final output in R&D in period t, xt (j ) product lines
are randomly drawn among the lines in which firm j is currently not actively
producing. In such a randomly drawn line i the highest existing quality is
multiplied by a factor  > 1 and the innovating firm j obtains a perpetual
patent to produce at this higher quality level from the next period t + 1 onward.
     In each line the firm with the highest quality will face competition by a firm
with lower quality by a factor  . The initial distribution of quality levels across
lines and firms is exogenously given.
     We assume that a period is short enough such that no two innovations arrive
in the same line in a given period. If we denote the innovation rate of firm j in
                                                                                  17


period t by xt (j ) the aggregate rate of creative destruction is given by

                                            J
                                  zt+1 =          xt (j ),                        (9)
                                           j =1


i.e., for any given line an innovation arrives in t + 1 with probability zt+1 . These
quality improvements due to creative destruction are the source of long-run
growth in this model.


3.6   Boundary of the firm

Given the constant cost of acquiring a line through innovation and the fact that
firms with higher process efficiency make higher expected operating profits in
an additional line, more productive firms have a stronger incentive to invest in
R&D. To prevent the firm with the highest productivity from taking over all lines
we assume that firms have to pay a per-period overhead cost which is a convex
function of the number of markets they span. More specifically, we assume a
quadratic per-period overhead cost

                                    1
                                      o n(j )2 Y,                               (10)
                                    2

with o > 0, where n(j ) denotes the number of lines in which firm j owns the
highest quality patent. The convexity of the overhead cost in n(j ), gives rise to
a natural boundary of the firm. High productivity firms will typically operate
more lines than low productivity firms, but no firm (type) will operate all lines.
   It may be worthwhile to briefly compare our model to Klette and Kortum
(2004) which serves as a benchmark in this literature. Here we assume a linear
cost of innovating on a new line and convex overhead cost. Consequently, the
(expected) marginal value of an additional line in a firm is decreasing in the
number of lines, n(j ), and this diminishing marginal value defines a natural
boundary of the firm. By contrast, Klette and Kortum (2004) assumes a convex
cost of acquiring extra product lines through creative destruction, and a
18


non-diminishing value of additional lines. Our model shares some features
with Luttmer (2011), in which more efficient firms endogenously expand into
more products.
     Our model allows us to do comparative statics with respect to the scalar o ,
which affects the boundary of firms without altering the technology for
undertaking innovations.                  With IT improvements in mind, we lower o
permanently (for all firms) and study its effect on concentration, labor share
and growth during the transition as well as in the new steady state. Another
difference with Klette and Kortum (2004), is that we assume that firms operate
on a continuum of lines, so that the law of large numbers applies.                                   One
consequence is that there is no firm exit in our baseline model.6


3.7         Markups with binary process efficiency levels

For simplicity we assume in the following two types of firms. A fraction  of all
firms are of high process efficiency type H whereas the remaining fraction 1 - 
is of low process efficiency type L . We denote the productivity differential by
  H /L > 1. We further assume  >  so that the firm with the highest
quality is the active leader irrespective of whether this firm is of high or low
process efficiency.
     Then, given the two process efficiency levels (high and low) there are four
potential cases of markups and operating profits in a given line:7

     1. A high productivity leader (j (i)) = H facing a high productivity second-
          best firm (j (i)) = H in line i. In this case we have


                                                     µ(i) = ,                                        (11)

                                             1
          and the profits are Y 1 -          
                                                 .


     6
         We consider entry and exit in a model extension.
     7
         To ease the notation we denote in the following the markup in line i, µ(i, j (i), j (i)), by µ(i).
                                                                                19


  2. A high productivity leader (j (i)) = H facing a low productivity second-
      best firm (j (i)) = L in line i. In this case we have


                                      µ(i) = ,                                (12)

                             1
      and profits of Y 1 -   
                                  .

  3. A low productivity leader (j (i)) = L facing a high productivity second-
      best firm (j (i)) = H in line i. In this case we have

                                                
                                       µ(i) =    ,                            (13)
                                                

                                                       
      and operating profits in this line i are Y 1 -   
                                                          .

  4. A low productivity leader (j (i)) = L facing a low productivity second-
      best firm (j (i)) = L in line i. In this case we have


                                       µ(i) = ,                               (14)

                              1
      and profits are Y 1 -   
                                  .


3.8   Labor income shares

This simple version of the model abstracts from physical capital and therefore
labor is the only factor in variable production.          Furthermore, both R&D
expenditure and overhead costs are denominated in final output and are
treated as investment as opposed to intermediate inputs.          These last two
assumptions are made to avoid a mechanical effect of the firm size
distribution (and overhead cost) and the overall level of R&D activity on the
labor income share. Hence in this framework the aggregate labor income share
is simply determined by the distribution of markups across lines.
   Because of the Cobb-Douglas technology in final output production, the
revenue from each product is equal to Y . Then, the total variable cost in a line i
20

                       Y
is equal to wl(i) =   µ(i)
                           .   Integrating both sides of the above equation over all i
                 1 1
yields wL = Y   0 µ(i)
                       di.     Dividing the last two equations by each other we get for
the cost (or employment) share of product line i

                                      l(i)    1             1
                                           =              1 1    .                         (15)
                                       L     µ(i)              d
                                                         0 µ()


The relative cost per line, l(i)/L, is inversely proportional to the markup factor
per line. This comes from revenue being equalized across lines due to the Cobb-
Douglas technology.
     Finally, the aggregate labor income share  is given by the inverse of the
average cost-weighted markup factor

                                                                        1
                               wL                1
                                  =     1                       =           µ(i)-1 di.     (16)
                               Y            µ(i)l(i)/L di           0
                                       0


Because there is no physical capital in the model the profit share and the labor
income share add up to one. However, the aggregate labor share depends non-
trivially upon the full distribution of markups across lines. This distribution is
determined by the types of the leader and second-best firm across lines.
     What about the labor income share at the firm level? A firm's labor income
                                               1
share in a line i is simply given by          µ(i)
                                                   .   Now consider firm j with n(j ) lines that
faces in a fraction h(j ) of these lines a high type second-best firm and in the
remaining fraction 1 - h(j ) a low productivity second-best firm. If firm j is itself
of high type, its overall labor income share is given by

                                            1              1
                           H (h(j )) = h(j ) + (1 - h(j ))   .                             (17)
                                                           

In contrast, if firm j is low type its overall labor income share is given by

                                                                     1
                               L (h(j )) = h(j )        + (1 - h(j )) .                    (18)
                                                                     

Faced by the same share of high type competitors h(j ), high productivity firms
                                                                                               21


have a lower labor income share (as they can on average charge a higher
markup). Hence the model will generate persistent differences in the labor
income share across firms.8 However, since the composition of competitors
h(j ) is endogenous the model is flexible enough to also generate changes in
the labor share within firms over time.


3.9    Dynamic firm problem

There are two individual state variables in the firm problem: the number of
lines firm j operates, n(j ), and the fraction of high productivity second-best
producers, h(j ), firm j faces in these lines. Each firm then chooses how many
new lines to innovate upon, xt , to maximize the net present value of future
profits. Let us denote the per-period profits after overhead of a high and low
type firm relative to total output Y by H and L . Formally, we have

                                              n(j )h(j ) n(j ) (1 - h(j )) 1
         H (n(j ), h(j )) = n(j ) -                     -                 - o n(j )2 ,        (19)
                                                                           2

and
                                             n(j )h(j ) n(j ) (1 - h(j )) 1
        L (n(j ), h(j )) = n(j ) -                     -                 - o n(j )2 .         (20)
                                                                          2
These are profits divided by output Yt , i.e., they only depend on the individual
states n(j ) and h(j ) and are otherwise time invariant. Letting St denote the
aggregate fraction of lines operated by high productivity firms, the problem of
a firm of type k = H, L can be written as

                                                                                t
                                                                                       1
             V0,k =         max                    Yt [k (nt , ht ) - xt r ]                  (21)
                      {xt ,nt+1 ,ht+1 }t=0
                                             t=0                               s=0
                                                                                     1 + rs

subject to
                                     nt+1 = nt (1 - zt+1 ) + xt ,                             (22)


   8
     See Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and David and Venkateswaran (2019) for evidence on
persistent difference in revenue per worker.
22


                          ht+1 nt+1 = ht nt (1 - zt+1 ) + St xt ,                       (23)

and a given initial n0 and h0 . For completeness there are also non-negativity
constraints xt  0. The constraint (22) states that the number of product lines
of a firm tomorrow is equal to the newly added lines x plus the number of lines
today times one minus the rate of creative destruction in the economy, z . The
second constraint (23) states that the number of lines in which the firm faces
tomorrow a high type second-best firm is equal to the number of such lines
today times 1 - z plus the number of newly added lines times the aggregate
fraction of lines currently operated by high type firms S . The firm takes the
path of output Yt , the interest rate rt , the rate of creative destruction zt+1 , and
the aggregate fraction of lines operated by high productivity firms St as given.


3.10     Market clearing and resource constraints

We close the model with the following market clearing conditions that hold
each period. First, final output will be used for consumption, C , total overhead
cost, O, and total R&D expenditure, Z , or formally


                                         Y = C + O + Z,                                 (24)


where
                           J                                          J
                                   1
                     O=              o n(j )2 Y and Z =                     x(j )r Y.
                          j =1
                                   2                                 j =1

Labor is used as a variable input by the producer of different intermediate
inputs. Labor and asset market clearing conditions imply

                               J         1                     J
                      L=                     l(j, i) di and          Vt (j ) = at ,
                           j =1      0                        j =1


where l(j, i) denotes labor used by firm j that operates line i.
     In addition, we have the equations defining the aggregate share of lines
                                                                                                   23


operated by high types and an accounting equation that states that all lines are
operated by some firm, namely:9

                                         J                            J
                                  St =          nt (j ) and 1 =             nt (j ).             (25)
                                         j =1                        j =1


Finally, there is an equation that relates output to the distribution of process
efficiency, quality levels and markups

                                                              1
                                        L St exp -           0
                                                                  log (µt (i)) di
                             Yt = Q t                1                                 L,        (26)
                                                    0
                                                         (µt (i))-1 di

                         1
where Qt = exp          0
                             log (qt (i, j )) di denotes the "average" quality level.
   An equilibrium in this economy is then a path of allocations and prices that
jointly solve the household's problem, the firms' problems, and is consistent
with the market clearing and accounting equations stated above.
   There is no free entry and the number of firms is fixed. Hence firms' profits
from selling at a markup over marginal cost may exceed the total investments
in R&D and overhead cost. We call such profits after R&D investment and
overhead cost "rents".
   Since output is a function of the full distribution of markups across product
lines the equilibrium path is in general a function of the initial joint
distribution of product lines n(j ) and level of competition h(j ) across firms. We
can assume that all firms of the same type k = H, L start out with the same
level of n0 (j ) and h0 (j ).10 Since the law of large number applies firms of the
same type will then be identical along the entire equilibrium path and
therefore only two firm problems -- one for a high type and one for a low type
-- need to be solved. The aggregate state vector can then be summarized by S ,
and the shares of high second-best firms hH and hL in lines operated by high
and low productivity firms.
   9
       Here we assume that the high productivity type firms are indexed by j = 1, 2, . . . , J .
  10
       This assumption will automatically be fulfilled if the economy starts initially in steady state.
24


         With the two "representative" types of firms, output can be expressed in
terms of these aggregate state variables (S, hL , hH ) and the level of average
quality Q. We have

                                         1
                          exp -              log (µt (i)) di = (1-St )hLt -St (1-hHt ) /
                                     0


and for the aggregate labor share

         1
                               1                                            1
             (µt (i))-1 di =     St hHt + (1 - St )(1 - hLt ) + St (1 - hH ) + (1 - St )hLt  .
     0                                                                      

As a consequence, aggregate productivity can be expressed as

     Yt                                         (1-St )hLt -St (1-hHt )
        = Qt · L St ·                                                   1
     L                     St hHt + (1 - St )(1 - hLt ) + St (1 - hHt )   + (1 - St )hLt 
          Qt y (St , hHt , hLt )
        =                        .                                                       (27)
                    L

Aggregate labor productivity is the product of three terms. The first term Qt
captures the effect of "average quality". The second term captures the aggregate
level of process efficiency. If St = 0 the productivity is all determined by the low
type L , in contrast if St = 1 the productivity is all determined by H = L .
Finally, the third term, which we call allocative efficiency, captures the average
distortion due to markup dispersion. If St = hHt = 1 or St = hLt = 0 this term
is equal to 1 (no dispersion of markups since all markups are equal to  in all
lines). In all other cases this third term is smaller than one.
         In Section 5 we characterize and numerically solve for the transition path of
the economy. However, before that we focus on the steady state this economy
converges to as time goes to infinity. We will show below that this steady state
takes a very tractable functional form and can be solved analytically. We then
discuss how a permanent drop in o (triggered by improvements in IT) affects
market concentration, labor income shares (within firms as well as aggregate),
and productivity growth in the long run.
                                                                              25


3.11     Steady state definition

We define a steady state equilibrium in the following way:

Definition 1 A steady state is an equilibrium path along which the interest rate
and the gross growth rate of output remain constant, equal to r and g , and
along which a constant fraction of lines, S , is provided by high productivity
producers.

   In a steady state all high productivity firms have the same constant number
of products n(j )     = nH whereas all low productivity firms have a different
number of products n(j ) = nL . For the number of lines within firm to be
constant, the R&D activity of each firm must be proportional to its number of
products, i.e., x(j )     = n(j ) z , where z is the aggregate rate of creative
destruction in steady state. Since all firms draw new lines from a stationary
distribution, they all face the same share of high productivity second-best
firms in their lines, i.e.,
                                   h(j ) = S , j.                           (28)

As the markup distribution is stationary in steady state, aggregate output Yt is
proportional to average quality Qt (see (26)). Consequently, we have

                               Yt+1   Qt+1
                                    =      = z  g .                         (29)
                                Yt     Qt

Finally, since total overhead, O, total R&D expenditure, Z , all grow at the same
gross rate g also consumption has to grow at this rate g (see (24)). Then, the
Euler equation determines the steady state interest rate as

                                          g
                                    r =     - 1.                            (30)
                                          

Next, we show that solving for the steady state boils down to solving for the
quadruple S , nL , nH , and z .
26


3.12     Steady state characterization

Let us denote by v the value of a firm relative to total output, i.e., v  V /Y . With
h(j ) = S , (19) and (20) yield for the period profits of high and low type firms
(relative to total output)

                                             S   1-S         1
                       H (n, S ) = n 1 -       -            - o n2 ,            (31)
                                                             2

and
                                            S  1-S           1
                    L (n, S ) = n 1 -         -             -  o n2 .           (32)
                                                             2
The number of products per firm n becomes the only individual state variable
in the firm problem so that we can write vk = vk (n), k = H, L. The high
productivity firms then solve the Bellman equation


           vH (n) =      max       {H (n, S ) - (n - n(1 - z ))r + vH (n )},    (33)
                       n n(1-z )


where we denote its solution as n = fH (n).
     Similarly, all low productivity firms solve


            vL (n) =     max       {L (n, S ) - (n - n(1 - z ))r + vL (n )},    (34)
                       n n(1-z )


and we denote the solution as n = fL (n).
     The two accounting equations (25) become in steady state


                                         S = nH J,                              (35)


and
                                   nH J + nL (1 - )J = 1.                       (36)

Finally, we must have


                               nH = fH (nH ),   nL = fL (nL ).                  (37)
                                                                                                     27


These equations fully characterize the steady state.                           The two dynamic
programming problems (33) and (34) are very simple since H and L are
quadratic functions of n (see (31) and (32)).
    In the following we will focus on an interior steady state where S  (0, 1) and
z  (0, 1). When such a steady state exists, the policy and value functions can
even be characterized in closed form.11 Next we impose parameter restrictions
that ensure the existence of an interior steady state solution.

Assumption 1 To ensure an interior steady state where both firm types are active
and long-run growth is positive, we assume

                                            -1   o
                                               <   ,                                               (38)
                                                 J

and
                                           o   1
                         1   1-   1         J
                                              +
                      0<   -    -                                            < 1.                  (39)
                         r        r 1 - (1 - ) (-1)2                     J
                                                                         o

    The parameter restriction (38) ensures that the low type firms are active in
steady state, i.e., it ensures S < 1.12 This restriction is fulfilled as long as the
productivity differential  or the number of high productivity firms J are not
"too" large.
    The second parameter restriction (39) ensures the existence of an interior
solution where 0 < z < 1. It is fulfilled as long as r relative to  is neither too
small nor too large.           Note that the parameters r and  that affect this
intertemporal trade-off do not enter restriction (38).
    The next two propositions characterize the interior steady state solution and
   11
      Let us denote the marginal steady state profits per line before overhead cost of H and L
firms by  H = 1 - S / - (1 - S )/( ) and  L = 1 - S / - (1 - S )/ . Then, for any n 
                     ¯ k   k + (1 - z )r - 
¯ k /(1 - z ), where n
n                                           
                                             r
                                                /o we have the policy function fk (n) = n
                                                                                        ¯ k and
the value function vk (n) =  k n - 1     2
                                    2 o n - r (¯                        ¯k - 1
                                                 nk - (1 - z )n) +  ( k n        ¯2
                                                                             2 o n k - r z n
                                                                                           ¯ k )/(1 -  ),
for k = H, L. See Appendix A for details.
   12        -1     o
      With        J    there exists a trivial steady state with nL = 0, nH = 1/(J ), S = 1, and
z = (1 - 1/ - o /(J )) /r + 1 - 1/ , where 0 < (1 - 1/ - o /(J )) /r + 1 - 1/ < 1 needs
to be imposed to ensure that the high type firms invest strictly positive amounts and that the
rate of creative destruction is less than 100%, i.e., z  (0, 1).
28


prove that Assumption 1 is sufficient for the existence of such a steady state.

Proposition 1 If an interior steady state exists, it is given by a quadruple
(nH , nL , S , z ) that fulfills


                        JnH = S and (1 - )JnL + JnH = 1,                      (40)


as well as the following research arbitrage equations for high and low
productivity firms respectively

                              1 - S / - (1 - S )/( ) - o nH
                       r =                                  ;                 (41)
                                       1/ - 1 + z
                              1 - S / - (1 - S )/ - o nL
                       r    =                             .                   (42)
                                      1/ - 1 + z

Proof.     We have by definition S       (0, 1) in an interior steady state. This
implies that nk and xk are positive for k = H, L. Therefore, both firm types'
policy function satisfy the first-order condition. For the high type Bellman
equation the first-order condition is simply

                                           vH (n )
                                    r =            .                          (43)
                                            n

Using the envelope theorem we have

              vH (n )
                      = 1 - S / - (1 - S )/( ) - o n + (1 - z )r .
               n

Then using the fact that in steady state n = nH yields the research arbitrage
equation of the high type firm. The research arbitrage equation of the low type
firm is derived in an analogous way.

     The intuition for the two research arbitrage equations is straightforward: the
optimality condition states that the marginal cost of innovating in a line, r is in
steady state equal to the marginal (expected) value of having an additional line.
This marginal value consists in the case of the high type firm of the marginal
                                                                                 29


profit 1 - S / - (1 - S )/( ) minus the marginal overhead cost o nH . This
marginal value is divided by the denominator 1/ - 1 + z because there is time
discounting and because there is a probability z of loosing the additional line
again in each future period.
   Equations (40)­(42) are four equations in the four unknowns (nH , nL , S , z )
that can be solved explicitly. We use them to derive conditions that guarantee
interiority and solve for all the other endogenous variables.

Proposition 2 Assumption 1 implies that the steady state is interior and is
characterized by Proposition 1. Furthermore, this interior steady state has the
following properties:

  (i) The share of lines operated by high productivity firms is equal to

                                         1       -1 J
                                        1-
                                             +      o
                                S =      1       (-1)2 J
                                                           ,                    (44)
                                      (1-)
                                             -       o



     and the rate of creative destruction is given by

                                              o   1
                            1   1-   1         J
                                                 +
                        z =   -    -                                  .         (45)
                            r        r 1 - (1 - ) (-1)2           J
                                                                  o



 (ii) High productivity firms operate more lines than low productivity firms, i.e.,


                                        nH > nL .                               (46)


(iii) The labor income share of a high type firm is given by

                                        1            1
                               H = S      + (1 - S )   ,                        (47)
                                                     

     which is strictly smaller than the labor income share of a low type firm

                                                   1
                                L = S    + (1 - S ) .                           (48)
                                                   
30


         Finally, the aggregate labor income share is given by


                                      = S H + (1 - S )L .                            (49)


Proof.      Replacing nH and nL in (41) and (42) by S /(J ) and (1 - S )/(J (1 -
)), respectively and solving the two equations for S and z yields the unique
solution in part (i). Note that restriction (38) ensures S < 1 and restriction (39)
ensures 0 < z < 1. Finally, note that S > 0 is always guaranteed since (38)
            o       -1       -1 -1                 -1
implies     J
                >   
                         >      
                                   (1    - ), as   
                                                      (1   - ) < 1, i.e., Assumption 1 is
indeed sufficient to ensures the existence of an interior steady state.
     For part (ii), by combining (41) and (42), the difference in the number of
products can be expressed as

                                         S ( - 1)2  - 1
                             nH - nL =            +     > 0.
                                            o        o

     The labor income shares follow from (17), (18) and (28). This proves part
(iii).

     In steady state S         can be viewed as a summary statistic of market
concentration whereas z pins down the long-run growth rate of the economy.
It is worthwhile to note that all the endogenous steady state values only
                          o
depend on the ratio       J
                              and not on the individual level of o or J .
     The intuition for property (ii) of Proposition 2 is that high process efficiency
firms can (on average) charge higher markups. Consequently their incentive to
undertake R&D is higher and they run into a steeper area of the convex
overhead cost, i.e., operate in steady state more line than low process
efficiency firms.        A corollary of this is that we have S          >  since high
productivity firms have larger sales than low productivity firms.
     High productivity firm will also differ in employment, but the employment
difference is smaller than the sales difference because high productivity firms
charge higher markups (see part (iii) of Proposition 2).
                                                                                31


3.13     Steady state effects as o decreases

In this section we consider how the steady state changes following a
permanent reduction in the overhead cost o . We are particularly interested in
the changes in the following endogenous variables: (i) market concentration,
S , (ii) the labor income share at the aggregate level as well as within firms, and
(iii) the long-run growth rate.

Proposition 3 Concentration S increases monotonically as o decreases.

Proof. Taking derivatives of (44) with respect to o yields

                                             -1     J
                      S    [1 + ( - 1)]   2 (1-)
                        =-                     o
                                                 2 < 0.
                      o            1  ( - 1) 2
                                               J
                                (1-)
                                     -   o



   The intuition that a fall in o increases S is the following: with a lower o a
larger size gap nH - nL is needed to yield the same difference in the marginal
overhead cost between high and low productivity firms. Consequently, high
process efficiency firms will operate more lines as o decreases whereas low
productivity firms shrink in size; therefore market concentration goes up.
   In the next proposition we turn to the labor income shares.

Proposition 4 As o decreases (i) the labor income share within firms increases,
(ii) the reallocation of market shares goes in the opposite direction, (iii) the
aggregate labor income share increases (decreases) in o if initial S is larger
(smaller) than 1/2.

Proof.    For the within part note that both (47) and (48) are monotonically
increasing in S (and S increases as o falls as demonstrated in Proposition 3).
The reallocation effect is simply that, as S increases, sales share of high
productivity firms goes up and these firms charge on average higher markups
and have a lower labor income share than low productivity firms (see (49)). For
32


the overall effect we obtain from (49)

                             -1                -1
                     = H + S    - L + (1 - S )    .
                   S                           

Replacing the expression for H and L by (47) and (48) and simplifying gives

                          S    ( - 1)2           S
                       =     =         (1 - 2S )   .
                     o   S o                     o

Since S is decreasing in o (see Proposition 3) this implies that the aggregate
labor income share decreases as o falls if and only if S > 1/2.

     The model thus makes very sharp predictions about the labor income
shares at the aggregate vs. micro level. As S increases due to the drop in o , all
firms are more likely to face a high productivity firm as second-best
competitor on any given line. As a consequence within firm the labor income
share increases (see (47) and (48)) and the markup decreases. However, there is
sales reallocation across firms that goes the opposite direction. As S increases
the high productive firms with a lower labor income share expand and the low
productivity firms contract. This between firm effect pushes the aggregate
labor income share downwards. As emphasized in Section 2 these within and
between firm effects that go in opposite directions are a very salient feature of
the U.S. micro data.
     Whether the within or between firm effect on the labor share dominates
depends on the initial level of S . In this simple model the aggregate labor
income share falls as o decreases if and only if S > 1/2.
     Finally, we analyze the impact of lower o on the long-run growth rate.
                                                                                            33


Proposition 5 We have z /o > 0 such that long-run growth decreases as o
falls if and only if
                           J ( - 1)2      J                 1
                                            +2       >          .                         (50)
                               o          o              (1 - )

Proof. Taking derivatives of (45) with respect to o gives

                                 -1)        2   -1)             2
                   z   2(1 - ) ( o
                                     + (1 - ) ( o                   o
                                                                      J
                                                                          -   1
                                                                              J
                     =                                              2             .       (51)
                   o                         1)2 J
                            r 1 - (1 - ) (-  o


This expression is positive if and only if (50) holds.

   The long-run growth rate is affected by a drop in o in two ways. First, there
is a direct positive effect on growth: at a given S , a lower overhead cost raises
the marginal value of operating an additional line and therefore stimulate R&D
investment and growth. However, there is a second general equilibrium effect
that goes in the opposite direction. As o decreases S rises. This reduces the
expected markup in an additional line (as the probability of facing a high
productivity second-best firm went up).                This general equilibrium effect
decreases the incentive to undertake R&D and consequently long-run growth
can potentially fall as o decreases.            Whether the direct or indirect effect
dominates depends on the precise parameter values. Proposition 5 also states
the parameter space that guarantees that long-run growth falls as o decreases.
                                                        o
The restriction is basically fulfilled as long as      (-1)J
                                                               is not too large.13 We show
that this restriction tends to be fulfilled for simple calibrations of our model.
   Overall, qualitatively our theory can generate a productivity slowdown,
rising concentration, and opposite changes in the labor income shares within
firms and between firms as the outcome of a drop in o . The next step is to
gauge the quantitative size of these effects in a simple calibration. This we will
undertake in Section 4.


  13
     Restriction (50) is consistent with Assumption 1 for a non-empty set of parameters as long
as 1/ + 2( - 1) > /(1 - ).
34


4          Calibration
In this section, we confirm that the theory in Section 3 indeed predicts a
significant productivity slowdown for plausible parameter values.                       Such a
productivity slowdown should be accompanied by a decreasing rate of creative
destruction and consequently by less churning in the labor market as well as a
fall in the interest rate.
      While the Cobb-Douglas model is useful for illustration, it predicts that all
products have the same market share regardless of quality and productivity.
Hence to be a bit more quantitative we calibrate a more general model with
CES production and CRRA utility function. We lay out the general model in
Appendix B. With a constant elasticity of substitution  > 1, products with
higher quality or productivity have higher market shares. Also, the price setting
of a high productivity firm facing a low productivity second-best firm may no
longer be constrained and such a firm instead may simply charge the
                             
monopoly markup              -1
                                .   In this event, the labor share within high productivity
firms will decrease less as o decreases.
      We assess the quantitative importance of the overhead cost mechanism by
comparing steady states where the only difference is the parameter o . We
define the initial steady state period as 1949­1995 and the new steady state
period as 2006­2018. We calibrate six parameter values in the model to match
six moments (in the initial period or the subset with available data, where
possible). We then vary o to match the decline in the relative price of IT
goods. We evaluate the fit of the model by comparing the model to untargeted
data moments on changes in concentration, productivity growth, aggregate
labor share, and the intangible investment share.14
      The six moments that we target in our calibration are:                      1) top 10%
concentration (share of sales going to the largest 10% of firms) within
industries over 1987­1992 from Autor et al. (2019); 2) the average annual rate of

     14
          We map R&D plus overhead costs in the model to intangible investment in the data.
                                                                                            35


productivity growth over 1949­1995 from the BLS MFP dataset; 3) the
employment-weighted average of industry markups Hall (2018) estimated over
1988­2015; 4) the real interest rate from Farhi and Gourio (2018) for 1980­1995;
5) the intangible investment share of output from Corrado et al. (2012) for
1995; and 6) the semi-elasticity of firm labor share with respect to firm sales
within four-digit industries from Autor et al. (2019)15 .
   We match the initial steady state growth rate and the level of the aggregate
markup exactly, but give equal weights to all other moments since we do not fit
them perfectly. The calibrated parameters are: 1) the initial overhead parameter
0
o ; 2) the share of high productivity firms ; 3) the quality stepsize  ; 4) the R&D
cost parameter r ; 5) the discount factor  ; and 6) the process efficiency gap 
between high-type and low-type firms. We set the elasticity of substitution  to
4 (Redding and Weinstein, 2019) and the CRRA parameter  to 2 (Hall, 2009).
   Table 3 displays the calibrated parameter values. First, the concentration
level is sensitive to the share of high productivity firms . If  is close to 1, the
top 10% share is close to 10%. Lower , combined with a sufficiently high 
and low o , help to match the top 10% concentration in the data. We obtain 
= 0.6%, that is, the high productivity firms are the very top firms. These high
efficiency firms enjoy an oversized market share because they have about 20%
higher process efficiency ( = 1.194). Next, the quality step  is sensitive to the
growth target, with a higher growth target leading to a higher  estimate. We
calibrate it to 1.335. For a given growth rate of the economy, the real interest
rate decreases with the discount factor  . We calibrate  to 0.976. o affects the
aggregate markup through the share of products produced by high productivity
firms. We calibrate it to 0.002. Finally, the intangible share, which includes R&D
investment, helps to pin down r , which scales the cost of R&D.
   Table 4 presents the targets and model fit under the calibrated parameters

  15
    We aggregate concentration and labor share moments from Autor et al. (2019) for
manufacturing, retail, services and wholesale sectors. We exclude finance and utilities because
these sectors do not have data before 1992. We aggregate using value of production weights
from BLS KLEMS, which is available from 1987.
36

                        Table 3: Baseline Parameter Values
                                      Calibrated
              Definition                               Parameter      Value

              1. share of H-type firms                                0.006
              2. quality step                                         1.335
              3. discount factor                                      0.976
                                                           0
              4. initial overhead cost                     o          0.002
              5. R&D costs                                  r         1.694
              6. productivity gap                                     1.194


                                       Assigned
              Definition                               Parameter      Value

              7. CES                                                     4
              8. CRRA                                                    2


in Table 3.   By construction, we fit the productivity growth rate and the
aggregate markup exactly. We fit the real interest rate, intangible share and
labor share/sales correlation very closely. We undershoot the concentration by
about 6 percentage points. Nonetheless the model generates a high level of
concentration, with over half of sales accruing to the top 10% of firms.

                       Table 4: Baseline calibration targets

          Targeted                                              Target   Model

          1. top 10% concentration 1987­1992                      64.0       58.4
          2. productivity growth 1949­1995                        1.82       1.82
          3. aggregate markup 1988-2015                           1.27       1.27
          4. real interest rate 1980­1995                          6.1         6.2
          5. intangible share 1995                                10.4       10.3
          6. labor share and size relation 1982­2012              -1.1       -1.09
        Source: 1 and 6: Autor et al. (2019). 2: BLS MFP series. 3: Hall (2018). 4:
        Farhi and Gourio (2018). 5: Corrado et al. (2012).
                                                                                         37


   Table 5 displays the moments in the new steady state when o falls by 35.4%
to match decline in the relative price of IT goods over 1996­2005. With this
change in o , the model explains half (55.6%) of the fall in productivity growth
and about one-seventh of the decline in aggregate labor share. The between
component declined by about one-third of that in the data (-5.4 vs. -13.2 ppt)
while the within component rose about three-quarters of that in the data (3.9
vs. 4.7 ppt). As in the data, the output share of intangibles rises in the model,
though much less than the data (0.2 vs. 1.5 ppt). One dimension the model is
significantly different from the data is the rise in concentration. Concentration
rose by about 4.3 ppt in the data while it rose by 19.6 ppt in the model.16


            Table 5: Effect of a decline in o on untargeted moments

                                                                Data     Model

           1. 2006­18 productivity growth rate (ppt)             1.10      1.42
           % of growth slowdown explained                      55.6%


           2. change in aggregate labor share (%)                 -8.1      -1.5
           3. within change in labor share (%)                     4.5       3.9
           4. between change in labor share (%)                 -12.5       -5.4
           5. change in concentration (ppt)                        4.8     19.6
           6. change in intangible share (ppt)                     1.5       0.2

           Source: 1: BLS MFP series. 2­5: Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson and
          Van Reenen (2019), BLS KLEMS. 6: Corrado, Haskel, Jona-Lasinio and
          Iommi (2012). We lower o by 35.4% to match the decline in the relative
          price of IT products from 1996­2005. The data change in the intangible
          share is from 1995 to 2006­2010. The change in concentration and labor
          share moments (within, between and aggregate) is from 1987­1992 to
          1997­2012.


   To clarify the mechanism in our model, Table 6 displays values of selected
endogenous variables in the initial and new steady state.                Under the CES

  16
     In Online Appendix OA-C Tables OA-2 and OA-3, we show that the model explains one-
third and nine-tenths of the decline in growth when o declines by 20% and 50%, respectively.
38


specification the sales share of high productivity firms differs from the their
share of product lines S . We denote in Table 6 the sales share of the high
productivity firms by S . The decline in overhead costs encourages productive
firms to expand, increasing the share of both products and sales of the high
efficiency firms (higher S and S ). This reaction leads to a rise in overhead
costs as a share of output despite the downward shift in the overhead cost
curve (due to the decrease in o ). Hence, rising overhead spending are behind
the rising intangible share (as seen in Table 5) whereas R&D spending falls. The
rising overall intangible share implies that the drop in the aggregate labor
income share would be smaller if overhead and R&D expenses were treated as
intermediate inputs as opposed to investments. This is in line with the finding
in Koh et al. (2016). Despite the overall increase in the intangible share (i.e., the
sum of R&D expenses and overhead cost) the aggregate labor share (the
inverse of the aggregate markup) falls even more such that residual rents go up.


                        Table 6: Initial vs. new steady state

                                                                Initial   New

           1. creative destruction rate in % (z )                 4.07    3.16
           2. % of H-type products (S )                           47.9    73.4
           3. % of H-type sales (S )                              54.0    75.7
           4. markup of H-type firms                              1.33    1.33
           5. markup of L-type firms                              1.19    1.15
           6. aggregate markup                                    1.27    1.28
           7. R&D/PY (%)                                            6.9     5.4
           8. overhead/PY (%)                                       3.4     5.1
           9. rent/PY (%)                                         10.7    11.7
           10. real interest rate (%)                               6.2     5.4
          Note: The aggregate labor share is the inverse of the aggregate markup.
          The aggregate labor share, total R&D expenditure, total overhead cost
          and rents relative to GDP sum up to 1.
                                                                                                 39


    With the rise in S , within firm markup declines for the low productivity
firms because these firms are more likely to produce a product where the next
best producer is a high productivity producer.                    Within firm markup stays
constant for the high productivity firms because they are not subject to limit
pricing under the calibrated parameters.17
    The bottom of Table 6 shows that the model predicts a decline in the real
interest from 6.2% in the initial steady state to 5.4% in the new steady state.
This reflects the 40 basis point decline in the growth rate combined with a CRAA
parameter of  = 2. This is in the direction of the decline estimated by Farhi
and Gourio (2018) from 6.1% for 1980­1995 to 4.5% from 2000­2016.
    Figure 7 displays the shift in the markup distribution.                       It shows that
production reallocates to the high productivity firms who have higher
markups. This reallocation generates a rise in the aggregate markup and rent
amidst falling within firm markup. Within firm, the expected markup from
innovating declines as firms are more likely to innovate on a product produced
by a high productivity producer.                  This decline discourages firms from
innovating. The firms reduce their R&D expenditures, leading to a lower rate of
creative destruction in the equilibrium (lower z ) and hence lower growth. This
lower growth in turn translates into lower interest rate in the new steady state.
Thus, growth rate is lower in the new steady state even though rent and
aggregate markup is higher.
    Finally, recall that job reallocation across firms and establishments and
entry and exit rates are trending down in the data, as shown in Figures OA-2
and OA-3 in Online Appendix OA-A. How might our model speak to this? Job
reallocation across firms occurs when a firm's employment level rises (gross
job creation) or falls (gross job destruction). In the data, this reallocation is
partially due to firm entry and exit, which our baseline model does not have.
But a significant component of job reallocation in the data is across surviving


   17
    The fact that the decrease in the within labor income share is particularly pronounced for
firms with a falling sales share is in line with the shift share result in Kehrig and Vincent (2018).
40


                  Figure 7: Change in the distribution of markups
        % of employment

            0.7      initial
                     new
            0.6
            0.5
            0.4
            0.3
            0.2
            0.1
            0.0           1.15            1.19                1.33
                                       firm markup


firms. In our model, firms add and subtract products from their portfolio due
to creative destruction. For simplicity our firms have a continuum of products,
so this ebb and flow nets out in steady state. But it is a short leap to a model in
which firms have a finite number of products so that their employment levels
rise and fall. See Garcia-Macia, Hsieh and Klenow (2019) for just such an
analysis.   Our model may speak more directly to job reallocation across
establishments, if one makes the strong assumption that each plant is
associated with given product line produced by the firm. Then plant entry and
exit in the data can be compared to the rate of creative destruction in our
model. As our model features falling long run growth, it implies falling long
run job reallocation associated with lower product turnover.



5    Transition dynamics and welfare analysis
The analysis so far is based on a steady state analysis. In this section, we show
that our model can also generate a burst in productivity growth along the
transition followed by a long-run slowdown.
                                                                                         41


5.1    Burst in growth during the transition

In Section 2, we saw that the productivity slowdown after the mid-2000s was
preceded by a ten-year burst in productivity growth. It is easy to show that, as
o falls, our theory will also generate a burst in productivity growth along the
transition. The reason for the burst in growth along the transition is twofold: (i)
The general equilibrium force that decreases the incentive to innovate -- stiffer
competition as St increases -- is only realized over time. Hence on impact, as
o decreases, the incentive to do R&D increases and therefore quality growth
will increase initially; and (ii) the new steady state with a higher S exhibits
higher average process efficiency because the efficient firms operate a larger
fraction of the product lines. This static efficiency gain must be realized along
the transition, leading yet again to high growth along the transition.


5.2    Numerical illustration

To illustrate the possibility of a productivity burst followed by a slowdown, we
compute the transition dynamics for the baseline Cobb-Douglas version of the
model with  = 1 and  = 1.18 We set the model parameters  = 0.10,  =
                                                     0
1.273, r = 1.006,  = 0.956,  = 1.182 and the initial o = 0.03 to match
moments we discussed in Table 3. As in the baseline calibration, we reduce o
by 35.4% to match the decline in the relative price of IT goods. The decline of
this magnitude generates 103.9% of the decline in long-run growth. See Online
Appendix OA-C for the model fit and steady state results.
   Figure 8 displays the share of lines operated by the high type firms (St ) and
the rate of creative destruction (zt+1 ) after the overhead cost parameter o
declines in year 0. St rises sharply and converges to the new steady state after
around 10 years. On impact, there is a sharp increase in the rate of creative
destruction, as especially the high process efficiency firms invest more in R&D.
  18
     See Online Appendix OA-D for a description of the computation method. We focus on
the Cobb-Douglas theory when solving for the transition since this case turns out to be much
simpler.
42


But the rise in innovation is short-lived: the rate of creative destruction
converges to its new, lower steady state level after around 10 years.

                    Figure 8: Transition dynamics of St and zt+1

                              St                                         zt + 1
         0.85                                          0.18                       zt + 1
                                                                                  new steady state
         0.80                                          0.16
                                                       0.14
         0.75
                                                       0.12
         0.70
                                                       0.10
         0.65                                          0.08
         0.60                                          0.06
                                   St
                                   new steady state
         0.55                                          0.04
                0   10   20        30     40      50          0     10   20       30     40      50
                              t                                               t

     The rise in concentration and burst in creative destruction comes from a
sharp increase in the rate of innovation by the high productivity firms. Figure 9
shows innovation rate (x/n) by firm type.                         It shows a bigger jump by the
high-type than the low type. In fact, innovation rate of the low type hits zero on
impact because of the high rate of creative destruction in this period. The
innovation rate for both types however eventually converges to the level that is
lower than that in the initial steady state. This pattern qualitatively matches
the pattern in Figure 3 where only the largest firms experienced a burst of
entry rate during the high growth period.
     Compared to St and zt+1 , the transition of the shares of second-best
producers hH and hL is much slower (see Figure 10) because of the low rate of
creative destruction. It takes over 100 years (!) for this distribution to converge
to the new steady state. The identity of second-best producers affects the
distribution of markups, leading to the slow transition of labor shares (Figure
11), which are inversely related to markups in our model. Since the between
firm effect on the labor share materializes much faster than the within effect
                                                                                                                43


                             Figure 9: Transition dynamics of x/n

         1.75                                                                               new steady state
                                                                                            H-type
                                                                                            L-type
         1.50
         1.25
         1.00
         0.75
         0.50
         0.25
         0.00
                    0              5             10             15            20                 25
                                                            t

the aggregate labor share falls steeply over the first 8 years and then slowly
partially recovers.

                             Figure 10: Transition dynamics of ht
                               hHt                                                  hLt
         0.85                                              0.85

         0.80                                              0.80

         0.75                                              0.75

         0.70                                              0.70

         0.65                                              0.65

         0.60                                              0.60
                                       hHt                                                  hLt
                                       new steady state                                     new steady state
         0.55                                              0.55
                0       10    20       30     40      50             0   10        20       30        40   50
                                   t                                                    t

   Figure 12 plots allocative efficiency and process efficiency at the aggregate
level, as defined in (27), along the transition. Allocative efficiency rises slightly
(about a quarter of a percent) because markup dispersion falls as the most
productive firms grab a dominant share of products. Process efficiency rises by
44


about 4.5% for the same reason.                            Allocative efficiency depends on the
distribution of the second-best producers and hence converges very slowly to
the new steady state. In contrast, process efficiency depends only on the share
of lines operated by the high productivity firms (St ) and converges quickly to
the new steady state.

                           Figure 11: Labor share along the transition

                    ppt change in labor share                         firm-level labor share
                     aggregate                            0.900
           3         within
                     between                              0.875
           2
           1                                              0.850
           0                                              0.825                                    H-type
                                                                                                   L-type
           1                                              0.800
           2                                              0.775
           3                                              0.750
           4
                                                          0.725
                0         10     20        30   40   50           0    10    20        30       40        50
                                      t                                           t


         Figure 12: Process and allocative efficiency along the transition

         1.05

         1.04

         1.03
                                                                                      process efficiency
                                                                                      allocative efficiency
         1.02

         1.01

         1.00
                      0                   10         20               30              40                  50
                                                            t

     Finally, Figure 13 compares the path of output and consumption following
                                                                                                 45


the reduction in o with their initial steady state path (with an unchanged o ).
Following the drop in o output grows faster for the first five years but grows
more slowly thereafter. Consumption drops sharply in the first period as firms
increase their R&D and overhead investments. Consumption then recovers
and is above the initial steady state path for more than a decade, due to the
temporary burst in growth. Eventually the slowdown in innovation and growth
takes its toll and consumption falls below its old steady state trajectory.

           Figure 13: Output and consumption along the transition

                               output                                output growth
                     drops                                                         o drops
         1.6        o
                   constant   o                                                   constant   o

         1.4                                            0.04
         1.2                                            0.02
         1.0
                         consumption                               consumption growth
                    o drops                                                        o drops
        1.50       constant   o                         0.05                      constant   o


        1.25                                            0.00
                                                        0.05
        1.00
               0              10          20                   0        10       20
                                   t                                         t



5.3   Welfare analysis

The drop in o raises consumption growth in the short run but reduces
consumption growth in the long run.                       Hence it is natural to ask whether
present discounted welfare is higher or lower because of the drop in o . Recall
that utility from a consumption path is given by

                                          
                                   U0 =          t log Ct = U ({Ct }t=0 ).
                                          t=0
46


The change in welfare can therefore be evaluated in (permanent) consumption-
equivalent terms,  , using

                                     log(1 +  )
         U ({(1 +  )Ctold }t=0 ) =              + U ({Ctold }             new 
                                                             t=0 ) = U ({Ct  }t=0 ),
                                       1-

where {Ctnew }          old 
              t=0 and {Ct }t=0 are paths of consumption with and without a

drop in o . We obtain  = -1.04%, so that the decline in o lowers welfare by
the same amount as a permanent 1% decrease in consumption.                             This
numerical example illustrates that, despite the permanent boost in process
efficiency and the temporary boost in innovation, the drop in long-run
innovation dominates so that overall welfare is reduced.



6     Theoretical extensions
The baseline model we laid out here is kept parsimonious to show the
minimum ingredients need to speak to the empirical facts in Section 2
However, this tractable model can be augmented and generalized in various
ways to make the theory more quantitative and without changing the key
mechanism at work. Before concluding, we briefly discuss various potential
extensions of our theory.
     The binary process efficiency is imposed to keep the structure as simple as
possible. It is straightforward to generalize it for instance to a continuous
distribution with and upper and lower bound. Then in general the whole
(stationary) distribution will matter for the steady state and a simple sufficient
statistic like S will not exist anymore.
     One could also allow for some transition matrix between the process
efficiency levels. It is not important that this variable is here assumed to be
permanent. What is however important is that there is some persistence in the
(j ) differences. Another extension that is straightforward to do is to allow
heterogeneity in the R&D cost r or the step size  across firms (and a potential
                                                                                 47


correlation therein with a firm's level of process efficiency).
   A generalization we have analyzed is to relax the assumption  > . With
 <  high productivity firms are less likely to be replaced by creative
destruction since they remain the leader even if a low productivity type
innovated upon them in the quality space. This then leads to a more dispersed
markup distribution even with just two type of process efficiency. For instance
with  2 > , high productivity firms can have a markup factor in a given line of
either  ,  , or / whereas the low productivity type firms can have a
markup of  or  2 /.
   The quadratic functional form of the overhead function gives rise to the
simple linear-quadratic dynamic programming problem with a closed form
solution. This property is maintained by adding an additional linear effect of
n(j ) on overhead cost. In quantitative work the overhead function could be
generalized to any convex function.
   Since firms operate an interval of lines of measure n(j ) firms will not lose all
lines at once and consequently there is no firm exit in equilibrium. However we
also analyzed a variant of the model where there are additional "small" firms
that operate only one line. These firms exit when creative destruction occurs
in the one line they operate. Then, as the rate of creative destruction decreases
with the productivity slowdown so will gross firm exit and entry.
   We also considered a version of our model where firms can create new
varieties. Then, as the span of control increases, more varieties are created. As
a result R&D expenditures per variety fall, reinforcing the productivity
slowdown of our baseline theory.
   The baseline model here abstracts from physical capital. It is however
straightforward to include physical capital by assuming a Cobb-Douglas
production function for the variable input. The model would then predict that
the physical capital share declines together with the labor income share (and
the profit share goes up).
   In our model with leapfrogging innovations, the higher likelihood of facing
48


a high-efficiency firm as potential competitor on a line -- which occurs when
o decreases and therefore S                 increases -- always reduces innovation
incentives for all firms. In other words, our model does not feature any positive
escape competition effect as in Akcigit and Ates (2019) or Liu, Mian and Sufi
(2019).     Introducing such an effect would require us to move from a
leapfrogging to a step-by-step innovation model. In such a model, the higher
likelihood of facing a high-efficiency firm as competitor on a line, would
stimulate neck-to-neck high-efficiency firms to innovate more in order to
escape competition. Yet, the discouragement effect of a reduction in o on
innovation by low-efficiency firms would persist, and our conjecture is that the
overall long-term effect of a reduction in o on creative destruction z and
growth g would remain negative if the fraction 1 -  of low-efficiency firms in
the economy, is sufficiently large.
      We can also extend our model to the case where high-efficiency firms can
target the lines in which they innovate with some probability   (0, 1). High-
efficiency firms would then target lines where they would face a low-efficiency
second-best firm. Then a reduction in o would result in the long-run in yet a
higher likelihood for any innovating firm to face a high-efficiency firm as the
fringe firm on that line; consequently growth will fall by more and rents will rise
further, than in the baseline model.
      Another extension of our model, is to allow firms to innovate on their
current lines. Then a reduction in o would induce firms to innovate more on
their current lines in order to escape the reduction in mark-ups from
innovating on other lines.19 Consequently, the negative long-run growth effect
of this reduction in o on z and g will be somewhat mitigated. However,


     19
     The step-by-step models of Akcigit and Ates (2019) and Liu, Mian and Sufi (2019) allow
for incumbent own innovation. In Liu, Mian and Sufi (2019), a reduction in the interest rate
induces leading firms in the various sectors to innovate more on their current lines to increase
their lead during the transition period towards the new steady-state. But in the new steady
state aggregate growth may decline due to the resulting discouragement effect on lagging firms.
Similarly, the decline in knowledge spillovers from leaders to followers in Akcigit and Ates (2019)
induces leading firms to increase their lead, again discouraging lagging firms to innovate.
                                                                                49


recent work by Garcia-Macia et al. (2019) shows that incumbent own
innovation did not vary much between the period 1983­1993 (prior to out IT
shock) and the period 2003­2013 (after our IT shock), thereby suggesting that
the observed productivity slowdown is not primarily explained by incumbents'
own innovations.
    Finally, we analyzed a version of our model in which we allow for mergers
and acquisitions. This extended model predicts increased M&A activity during
the transition.     Moreover, allowing for M&A magnifies the long-term
productivity slowdown as a reduction o results in even larger increase in S .



7    Conclusion
We provide a new theoretical framework that can potentially account for a
significant portion of the U.S. growth experience over the past 30 years: (i) a
decline in the labor income share (driven by resource reallocation across firms
as opposed to a declining labor income share within firms), (ii) a productivity
slowdown (after a burst in productivity growth); and (iii) rising concentration
at the national level.
    We argue that a significant part of these phenomena can be explained by IT
improvements in the mid-1990s to mid-2000s which allowed the most efficient
firms to expand their boundaries. In our theory, these firms enjoy higher
markups; when they expand their reach into more markets, they raise average
markups and lower the aggregate labor share. High productivity firms expand
by innovating on more product lines, bringing a temporary surge of growth.
Within-firm markups eventually fall for both high and low productivity firms,
as they are more likely to face high productivity competitors.         This force
ultimately drags down innovation and growth.
    We focused our analysis on the overhead cost parameter o . However, the
model lends itself to richer comparative static and transition analyses. In
particular it is straightforward to explore the steady state effects of changes in
50


the efficiency gap , the innovation size  , the innovation cost r or the share
of high productivity firms . We see it as a virtue of our model that the within
vs. between firm effects of such changes can be studied easily.
     Another next step is to explore the cross-industry predictions of our theory
and see if they hold up in the data. In particular, one might look at whether
more intensively IT-using industries experienced bigger increases in
concentration (paired with declining labor share, and a more pronounced
boom-bust cycle of productivity growth).
     One could explore optimal tax and subsidy policies in our quantitative
framework.     The decentralized equilibrium is suboptimal due to markup
dispersion across products as well as knowledge spillovers across firms (quality
innovations build on previous innovations by other firms). It is possible that
falling overhead costs would increase welfare more strongly in the presence of
an optimal R&D subsidy.
     Finally, our framework is well suited for discussing competition policy and
its relation with the productivity slowdown. We analyzed the implications of
allowing for M&As, but other dimensions of competition policy such as data
access or firm breakup can be naturally considered through the lens of our
model. We leave these extensions of our analysis for future research.
                                                                            51


References
Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J Klenow, and
  Huiyu Li, "Missing growth from creative destruction," American Economic
  Review, 2019, 109 (8), 2795­2822.
Akcigit, Ufuk and Sina T Ates, "What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?,"
  Working Paper 25756, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2019.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson, and
  John Van Reenen, "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar
  Firms," Working Paper 2019.
Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "Productivity and Misallocation in
  General Equilibrium.," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019. forthcoming.
Barkai, Simcha, "Declining labor and capital shares," New Working Paper
  Series 2, Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State 2016.
                                       emy Lecat, "Productivity trends in
Bergeaud, Antonin, Gilbert Cette, and R´
  advanced countries between 1890 and 2012," Review of Income and Wealth,
  2016, 62 (3), 420­444.
Bessen, James, "Information technology and industry concentration," Law &
  Economics Paper Series 17-41, Boston University School of Law 2019.
Bils, Mark, Peter J Klenow, and Benjamin A Malin, "Resurrecting the role of the
  product market wedge in recessions," American Economic Review, 2018, 108
  (4-5), 1118­46.
Cao, Dan, Erick Sager, Henry Hyatt, and Toshihiko Mukoyama, "Firm
  Growth through New Establishments," 2019 Meeting Papers 1484, Society for
  Economic Dynamics 2019.
Cette, Gilbert, Lorraine Koehl, and Thomas Philippon, "Labor Shares in Some
  Advanced Economies," Working Paper 26136, National Bureau of Economic
  Research August 2019.
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, "The Firm Size and Leverage
 Relationship and Its Implications for Entry and Concentration in a Low
 Interest Rate World," Working paper 19-18, Federal Reserve Bank of
 Philadelphia 2019.
Corrado, Carol, Jonathan Haskel, Cecilia Jona-Lasinio, and Massimiliano
  Iommi, "Intangible capital and growth in advanced economies:
  Measurement methods and comparative results," Technical Report,
  Discussion Paper series, Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit 2012.
52


Crouzet, Nicolas and Janice C Eberly, "Understanding Weak Capital
  Investment: the Role of Market Concentration and Intangibles," Working
  Paper 25869, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2019.

David, Joel M and Venky Venkateswaran, "The sources of capital
 misallocation," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (7), 2531­67.

De Loecker, Jan and Jan Eeckhout, "The Rise of Market Power and the
 Macroeconomic Implications," Working Paper 23687, National Bureau of
 Economic Research August 2017.

Eggertsson, Gauti B, Neil R Mehrotra, Sanjay R Singh, and Lawrence H
  Summers, "A contagious malady? Open economy dimensions of secular
  stagnation," IMF Economic Review, 2016, 64 (4), 581­634.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Franois Gourio, "Accounting for Macro-Finance Trends:
  Market Power, Intangibles, and Risk Premia," Working Paper 25282, National
  Bureau of Economic Research November 2018.

Fernald, John G, "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after
  the Great Recession," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2015, 29 (1), 1­51.

  , Robert E Hall, James H Stock, and Mark W Watson, "The Disappointing
  Recovery of Output after 2009," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017,
  pp. 1­81.

Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Peter J Klenow, "How destructive
 is innovation?," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (5), 1507­1541.

Gutierrez, Germn and Thomas Philippon, "Investment-less Growth: An
 Empirical Investigation," Working Paper 22897, National Bureau of Economic
 Research December 2016.

  and , "Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S.," Working Paper
  23583, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2017.

Hall, Robert E, "Reconciling cyclical movements in the marginal value of time
 and the marginal product of labor," Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117
 (2), 281­323.

  , "New Evidence on the Markup of Prices over Marginal Costs and the Role of
  Mega-Firms in the US Economy," Working Paper 24574, National Bureau of
  Economic Research May 2018.
                                                                          53


Hopenhayn, Hugo, Julian Neira, and Rish Singhania, "From Population
 Growth to Firm Demographics:        Implications for Concentration,
 Entrepreneurship and the Labor Share," Working Paper 25382, National
 Bureau of Economic Research December 2018.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "The Industrial Revolution in
 Services," Working Paper 25968, National Bureau of Economic Research June
 2019.

   and Peter J. Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
  India," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, "The labor wedge: MRS vs. MPN," Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 2014, 17 (2), 206­223.

   and Brent Neiman, "The global decline of the labor share," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2013, 129 (1), 61­103.

  and , "Accounting for Factorless Income," Working Paper 24404, National
  Bureau of Economic Research March 2018.

Kaymak, Baris and Immo Schott, "Corporate tax cuts and the decline of the
  labor share," 2018 Meeting Papers 943, Society for Economic Dynamics 2018.

Kehrig, Matthias and Nicolas Vincent, "The Micro-Level Anatomy of the Labor
  Share Decline," Working Paper 25275, National Bureau of Economic Research
  November 2018.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel S. Kortum, "Innovating Firms and Aggregate
  Innovation," Journal of Political Economy, October 2004, 112 (5), 986­1018.

Koh, Dongya, Ral Santaeullia-Llopis, and Yu Zheng, "Labor Share Decline
  and Intellectual Property Products Capital," Working Papers 927, Barcelona
  Graduate School of Economics September 2016.

Lashkari, Danial, Arthur Bauer, and Jocelyn Boussard, "Information
  Technology and Returns to Scale," 2019 Meeting Papers 1380, Society for
  Economic Dynamics 2019.

Liu, Ernest, Atif Mian, and Amir Sufi, "Low Interest Rates, Market Power, and
  Productivity Growth," Working Paper 25505, National Bureau of Economic
  Research January 2019.

Luttmer, Erzo GJ, "On the mechanics of firm growth," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2011, 78 (3), 1042­1068.
54


Martinez, Joseba, "Automation, Growth and Factor Shares," 2018 Meeting
 Papers 736, Society for Economic Dynamics 2018.

Redding, Stephen J and David E Weinstein, "Measuring Aggregate Price
  Indexes with Taste Shocks: Theory and Evidence for CES Preferences,"
  Working Paper 22479, National Bureau of Economic Research August 2019.

Ridder, Maarten De, "Market power and innovation in the intangible
  economy," working paper 2019.

Rinz, Kevin, "Labor Market Concentration, Earnings Inequality, and Earnings
  Mobility," CARRA Working Papers 2018-10, Center for Economic Studies, U.S.
  Census Bureau September 2018.

Rognlie, Matthew, "Deciphering the fall and rise in the net capital share:
  accumulation or scarcity?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2016, 2015
  (1), 1­69.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter,
  "Diverging Trends in National and Local Concentration," Working Paper
  25066, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2018.

Syverson, Chad, "Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the US
  productivity slowdown," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (2), 165­
  86.

  , "Macroeconomics and Market Power: Context, Implications, and Open
  Questions," Journal of Economic Perspectives, August 2019, 33 (3), 23­43.

Traina, James, "Is Aggregate Market Power Increasing? Production Trends
  Using Financial Statements," New Working Paper Series 17, Stigler Center
  2018.
                                                                                             55


A      Solution of the firm's problem

This section derives the solution to the steady state firm problem with Cobb-
Douglas production. In this case the profit functions H and L are quadratic
functions of n, the policy and value functions can be characterized in closed
form. We state the solution in the next proposition.

                                            1                  1
Proposition 6 Let us denote  H (S )  S (1 -   ) + (1 - S )(1 -  
                                                                 ) and  L (S ) 
                             1
S (1 -   
          )   + (1 - S )(1 -   ). Also, we define

                                                                     r
                                          k (S ) + (1 - z )r -       
                         ¯ k (S , z ) 
                         n                                                ,
                                                     o

for k = H, L. For a given S and z , the policy functions fk (n), k = H, L are given
by
                                                            n
                                                            ¯ k (S ,z )
                                      (1 - z )n     if n       1-z
                         fk (n) =                                                           (52)
                                      ¯ k (S , z ) otherwise.
                                      n
                                                          n
                                                          ¯ k (S ,z )
Let m denote the smallest integer such that n <          (1-z )m+1
                                                                          and n
                                                                              ¯ k be a shorthand
for n
    ¯ k (S , z ). The value functions are given by
              
                         1                      1
              
                   ¯k - 2
               ( k n         ¯2
                           o n k - r z n¯ k ) 1-  
                                                                     if n = n
                                                                            ¯k
              
                n - 1  n2 -  (¯                                               n
                                                                              ¯k
                                   r nk - (1 - z )n) + vk (¯    nk ) if n < (1-
              
                k      2 o                                                      z )
     vk (n) =       1-( (1-z ))m+1                        2 m+1                             (53)
                                      1      2 1-( (1-z ) )
                k n 1- (1-z ) - 2 o n 1- (1-z )2                     Otherwise,
              
               + n m (1 - z )m+1 +  m+1 v (¯                  m
                                                   k nk ) -   r n
              
                   r                                             ¯k

for k = H, L.

Proposition 6 says that the n
                            ¯ k (S , z ) is the optimal steady state level of n for a
firm of type k = H, L. A firm invests just enough to hit n
                                                         ¯ k in the next period. If
however n is too high such that even without investing (and letting n decay at
rate z ) n
         ¯ k is not reached next period, the non-negativity constraint on R&D is
binding and the firm invests zero for m periods.
56


B    CRRA-CES generalization

In this Section, we derive the key steady state equations for the slightly
generalized model used in the calibration in Section 4 with a CES production
structure and CRRA preferences.

CRRA preferences

Instead of log preferences we generalize utility to the CRRA class

                                                        1-
                                                     t Ct-1
                                U0 =                        .
                                           t=0
                                                       1-

Then, the resulting Euler equation from household's optimization is given by

                                Ct+1                  1
                                     = [ (1 + rt+1 )]  .                       (54)
                                 Ct

Hence, the steady state relationship between gross growth rate g and the
                                                 1
interest rate is given by g = [ (1 + r )]  .


CES production

Instead of the Cobb-Douglas technology we assume a more general CES
technology in final production

                                                                      
                                       1                   -1         -1

                          Y =              [q (i)y (i)]         di         .   (55)
                                   0


Here y (i) denotes the quantity and q (i) the quality of product i. This new
structure yields as demand for product i

                                                                 
                                               -1       P
                             y (i) = q (i)                           Y,        (56)
                                                       p(i)
                                                                                     57


where we have the (new) aggregate price index given by

                                                                    1
                                      1                            1-
                                                         1-
                         P =              [p(i)/q (i)]        di        .           (57)
                                  0


We normalize this aggregate price index again to one in each period.


Solving for the steady state in this more general model

The rest of the model is unchanged. In particular we still have two process
efficiency types and the productivity differential is captured by . We now
solve for the steady state in this model.
   Together with the definition of the num´
                                          eraire the demand (56) gives for the
operating profits in a period (before overhead cost)

                                                 -1
                                   P                            1
                         YP                              1-                 .       (58)
                               p(i)/q (i)                      µ(i)

   With  > 1 (which is the empirically relevant case we will focus on) there
                                   
is an optimal markup factor of     -1
                                      .       So depending whether the marginal cost
of the second-best firm are binding or not we have the following three cases of
markups in a line i:

  1. In the case of a high type (H) facing a low type (L) second-best firm

                                                              
                                µHL = min  ,                            ,           (59)
                                                              -1


  2. In the case that both leader and second-best firm are of the same type

                                                                   
                              µHH = µLL = min ,                                 ,   (60)
                                                                   -1
58


     3. In the case that a low type (L) facing a high type (H) second-best firm

                                                                    
                                   µLH = min                      ,                  .                           (61)
                                                                  -1


     With the CES structure the demand for a product line i depends also on the
particular quality of this line (relative to the other lines). But because there is no
possibility to target the innovation activity to particular lines and all firms draw
repetitively in steady state from the same distribution, the steady state quality
level in line i is uncorrelated with the identity of the leading or second-best firm
(and therefore uncorrelated with the markup). Since the law of large number
applies each firm has in steady state in a given period t the same distribution of
quality levels across the different lines.
     In the following let us define the "average quality" by

                                                                            1
                                                 1                          -1
                                                                 -1
                              Qt =                   [qt (i)]         di         .                               (62)
                                             0


Since the quality of a line is independent of its markup we can write the
                                                        Pt
aggregate price index, (57), as P = 1 =                 Qt
                                                           ,    where

                                                                                      1
                                         1                                           1-
                                                                       1-
                        Pt = w t             [µ(i)/(j (i))]                 di            .
                                     0


In steady state we have

                                                                                                                            1
     wt       µHH        1-                µHL                        1-                                                   1-
Pt =    (S )2                 + S (1 - S )                                 + S (1 - S         )µ1
                                                                                                LH
                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                      + (1 - S   )2 µ1
                                                                                                                     LL
                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                .
     L                                      

The profit in a given line is given by (58). The sum of operating profits (before
overhead cost) of a high type firm that is active in n(j ) lines and is facing in a
                                                                                             59


fraction S of them a high second-best firm is given by20
                                                                                    
                Pt-1               1                    Pt-1                   1
n(j )Y S                     1-         + (1 - S )                       1-          = n(j )Y ·  H .
                                                                                    
                        -1                                        -1
              µHH wt              µHH                  µHL wt                 µHL
               L                                        L 


Where we define  H to be equal to the term squared brackets. Similarly, the
sum of operating profits before overhead of a L-type firm having n(j ) lines and
facing in a fraction S of them a high second-best firm is
                                                                                    
               Pt-1                1                    Pt-1                  1 
n(j )Y S                     1-         + (1 - S )                      1-        = n(j )Y ·  L ,
       
                        -1                                       -1
              µLH wt              µLH                 µLL wt                 µLL
                L                                      L


where we again define  L accordingly. Hence, the new profit functions of H and
L types relative to GDP, Y , become in steady state:

                                               1
                                  H (n) = n H - o n2 ,
                                               2

and
                                               1
                                  L (n) = n L - o n2 .
                                               2
   A steady state is characterized as before just with these new profit functions
                                                                Qt
and a different relationship between  , r and g =              Qt-1
                                                                      (as specified in the Euler
equation).


Steady state characterization

Let us again denote the value of a firm V relative to total output Y by v  V /Y .
In steady state (with h(j ) = S , j ) the number of products per firm becomes
the only individual state variable and we can write v (n). All high productivity
  20
      Note that the Q terms cancels out since the quality distribution in each H-L combination
is identical to the aggregate Q.
60


firms then solve

                                                                   g
         vH (n) =     max       {H (n, S ) - (n - n(1 - z ))r +       vH (n )}.
                    n n(1-z )                                     1+r

Similarly, all low productivity firms solve

                                                                   g
         vL (n) =     max       {L (n, S ) - (n - n(1 - z ))r +       vL (n )}.
                    n n(1-z )                                     1+r

                                               g
The household's Euler equation yields         1+r
                                                    =  (g )1- and we have

                             Yt     Qt                          1
                      g =        =      = 1 + z ( -1 - 1)       -1
                                                                     .
                            Yt-1   Qt-1

The two accounting equations are again


                                        S = nH J,                                 (63)


and
                                  nH J + nL (1 - )J = 1.                          (64)

Finally, in steady state we must have


                                       nH = fH (nH ),                             (65)


and
                                        nL = fL (nL ),                            (66)

where fH (·) and fL (·) are the policy functions of the high and low types. These
equations fully characterize the steady state values of S , z , nH and nL .
     In the following we again focus on an interior steady state solution where
both firm types are active and S < 1. The solution is given in the following
proposition.
                                                                                            61


Proposition 7 An interior steady state is a (nH , nL , S , z ) combination that
fulfills
                          JnH = S and (1 - )JnL + JnH = 1,                                 (67)

as well as the following research arbitrage equations for high and low
productivity firms respectively:

                                            H - o nH
                         r =                              1-           ,                   (68)
                                 -1 (1 - z + z  -1 )- -1 - 1 + z
                                            L - o nL
                         r =                              1-           .                   (69)
                                 -1 (1 - z + z  -1 )- -1 - 1 + z

This is again a system of four equations in four unknowns which can be solved.


Derivation of expression for concentration and labor share

In this more general model with a CES production function there is now a
difference between the fraction of lines provided by high productivity firm, S ,
and the sales weight of high productivity firm in the aggregate economy which
we denote by S . Total sales of a firm of high type is in steady state
                                                                                      
               nH
                                             Pt-1                          Pt-1
                    p(i)y (i)di = nH Y S                  + (1 - S )               -1  .
                                                                                      
                                                     -1
           0                               µHH wt                      µHL wt
                                            L                           L 


Sales of a firm of low type is given by
                                                                                     
               nL
                                            Pt-1                           Pt-1
                    p(i)y (i)di = nL Y S                  + (1 - S )               -1  .
                                                                                     
                                                     -1
           0                               µLH wt                      µLL wt
                                             L                          L


    As a consequence, the sales share of high types in the total economy can be
62


written as

                                     µHH 1-                    µHL 1-
                           S   S      
                                                  + (1 - S )    
 S =                                                                                  .
                 µHH 1-                 µHL 1-                       -           1-
         S   S    
                          + (1 - S )     
                                                     + (1 - S ) S µ1
                                                                   LH + (1 - S )µLL



Finally, let us derive the expressions for the labor income shares with a CES
production function. The firm level labor share of a high type is given by

                              nH
                             0
                                 wl(i)di          S µ-             -
                                                     HH + (1 - S )µHL
                   H =                        =        -           1- .           (70)
                            nH
                                p(i)y (i)di       S µ1
                                                     HH + (1 - S )µHL
                           0


     The firm level labor share for low-type is given by

                              nL
                             0
                                 wl(i)di        S µ-              -
                                                    LH + (1 - S )µLL
                   L =                        =      -            1- .            (71)
                            nL
                               p(i)y (i)di      S µ1
                                                   LH + (1 - S )µLL
                           0


     The aggregate labor share is the sales-weighted average of the firm labor
shares
                                = S H + (1 - S )L .                               (72)

     The within change in labor share is the unweighted average of the change in
within firm labor share. We target the within change as a fraction of the initial
labor share
                        (H,1 - H,0 ) + (1 - )(L,1 - L,0 )
                                                                   ,              (73)
                                   S0 H,0 + (1 - S0 )L,0

where 0 denotes the initial and 1 the new steady state, respectively.
