                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SKILL PRICES, OCCUPATIONS, AND CHANGES IN THE WAGE STRUCTURE
                           FOR LOW SKILLED MEN

                                        Nicolas A. Roys
                                      Christopher R. Taber

                                       Working Paper 26453
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26453


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Nicolas A. Roys and Christopher R. Taber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skill Prices, Occupations, and Changes in the Wage Structure for Low Skilled Men
Nicolas A. Roys and Christopher R. Taber
NBER Working Paper No. 26453
November 2019
JEL No. J21,J24,J3

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effect of the change in occupational structure on wages for low skilled
men. We develop a model of occupational choice in which workers have multi-dimensional skills
that are exploited differently across different occupations. We allow for a rich specification of
technological change which has heterogenous effects on different occupations and different parts
of the skill distribution. We estimate the model combining four datasets: (1) O*NET, to measure
skill intensity across occupations,(2) NLSY79, to identify life-cycle supply effects, (3) CPS
(ORG), to estimate the evolution of skill prices and occupations over time, and (4) NLSY97 to
see how the gain to specific skills has changed. We find that while changes in the occupational
structure have affected wages of low skilled workers, the effect is not dramatic. First, the wages
in traditional blue collar occupations have not fallen substantially relative to other occupations-a
fact that we can not reconcile with a competitive model. Second, our decompositions show that
changes in occupations explain only a small part of the patterns in wage levels over our time
period. Price changes within occupation are far more important. Third, while we see an increase
in the payoff to interpersonal skills, manual skills still remain the most important skill type for
low educated males.


Nicolas A. Roys
Department of Economics
Royal Holloway
University of London
Egham, Surrey TW20 OEX
United Kingdom
nicolasroys@gmail.com

Christopher R. Taber
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin -Madison
1180 Observatory Dr
Social Sciences Building #6448
Madison, WI 53706-1320
and NBER
ctaber@ssc.wisc.edu
1    Introduction
Compared to other demographic groups, low-skilled (no college) men have fared poorly in
the last 40 years. This group has actually seen their median real wage decrease during this
period. During the same time span, there has been a substantial shift in the type of work that
this group performs as occupations have moved from more traditional blue collar occupations
to service and clerical occupations. This paper tries to understand the relationship between
these two trends by investigating the role of the change in occupational composition and the
payments to multi-dimensional skills in explaining recent changes in the wage structure for
low skilled men. From a policy perspective, if our goal is to invest in skills to help these men,
the occupational trends have implications for which skills have increased most in value.
    We develop a model in which individuals are endowed with a three dimensional vector of
skills: cognitive, manual, and interpersonal. Each period they choose a "desired" occupation
but may not be able to work in that occupation due to labor market frictions. Skills evolve
on the job, but differently in different occupations.
    The wage in an occupation is determined by a non-linear hedonic pricing equation that
depends on the level of the three skills as well as occupational specific human capital. Both
the hedonic prices and the frictions evolve over time. The nonlinearity in the hedonic pric-
ing equation allows the wage difference between high skilled workers versus median work-
ers within an occupation to evolve differently than the wage difference between low skilled
workers versus median skilled workers in that occupation. This evolution could be due to
technological change, labor market institutions, or changes in international trade-we do not
model it explicitly.
    One of the biggest challenges in this literature is separating wage changes within an
occupation into the part due to changes in prices versus changes in composition. The age-
cohort-time identification problem renders it impossible to perfectly separate these effects
without assumptions. If cohort and age effects are completely unrestricted, there is always
a distribution of skills that can reconcile any hedonic pricing equation. This is, of course,
a feature of any analysis that follows different cohorts over time, not just a problem in our
paper.
    We address the age-cohort-time effect by assuming that the underlying initial skill level
is identical across cohorts, conditional on the probability of going to college-cohorts look
different ex-post only because the aggregate features of the economy have changed leading
to different occupational patterns. We use our model of human capital accumulation to
estimate the age effect. In doing this, we assume that this process does not vary across

                                               2
cohorts. Identification of the dynamic supply of skill comes from the NLSY79 in which we
have a long panel of workers who face changing wages.
    Identification of the prices come from three places. First, a crucial part of this uses
O*NET to estimate the skill intensity of each occupation. Second we follow Deming (2017) by
using the contrast between the NLSY79 and NLSY97 to measure the increasing importance of
social skills. Third, once we know the supply of worker skill as a function of prices (identified
from the NLSY79) we can use the CPS to recover the prices and also the aggregate supply
of skill to the population. This part imposes some structure but due to the age-cohort-time
problem the model is fundamentally unidentified without some type of structural assumption.
We provide an identification argument of a stylized version of our model to show formally
that the model is identified.
    While we do need to make some strong assumptions to estimate our structural model,
the advantage is that the resulting estimated model is rich and allows us to say a number of
things about the wage structure for low skilled men.
    First, we are able to estimate the changes in the hedonic pricing equation over time.
We see skill prices falling for the median skilled worker in all occupations but rising for
relatively high skilled workers in those occupations. Prices rise for the lowest workers in
some professions, but fall in others.
    We also find that many of the occupations that are expanding actually see relatively large
declines in skill prices. We can not reconcile this trend with a frictionless model. Similarly
even though the number of people doing blue collar jobs is falling, most of them remain
relatively well paid. We also show occupational composition does little to explain changes in
the wage structure. The changes in the different part of the wage distribution are primarily
driven by skill prices that evolve within occupation.
    We then explore the payoff to different skills and how that has changed over time. We
find that the importance of interpersonal skills grows over time going from little value at
the beginning of the period to substantial returns later. However, manual skills remain the
most important skill. If we were able to boost these skills for low skilled men, we could
substantially increase their lifetime earnings.
    Section 2 discusses the related literature while Section 3 describes the data and presents
some motivating facts. Section 4 presents the model that we use to explain them. Section 5
discusses identification while Section 6 describes the estimation strategy. Section 7 presents
the results, Section 8 decomposes the changes in wages into different component, and Section
9 examines the change in the payoff to different skills. We conclude in Section 10.


                                               3
2    Related Literature
This paper is related to large literatures on skill-biased technological change, human capital,
and on structural models that try to address these issues. A full survey of all of these
literatures is not possible, but we briefly name some major papers.
    There is a very large literature on changes in the wage structure, a seminal paper is
Katz and Murphy (1992) and surveys/overviews include Katz and Autor (1999), Dinardo
and Card (2002), Goldin and Katz (2009), and Acemoglu and Autor (2011). Of particular
relevance to us in this literature is the importance of occupations. There are two threads
that focus on occupations.
    The first is the polarization of the labor market: the simultaneous growth of the share of
employment in high wage occupations and low wage occupations. This has been discussed
in a large number of papers and a full survey is beyond our scope. Key ones are Autor et al.
(2003), Autor et al. (2006), Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Autor and Dorn (2013), and Goos
et al. (2014). Beaudry et al. (2016) highlight that this trend largely ends in 2000 after which
we see a decrease in demand for cognitive skill. Michel et al. (2013) are critical of some
aspects of this literature arguing that while it is an important feature of the occupational
composition it does not explain most features of the wage distribution. Our results are
broadly similar. Using a model-based approach, we estimate how these recent patterns are
related to trends in different skill prices and we examine the consequences for the wage
structure and we find that it is not a crucial determinant. We also differ from much of this
literature in focusing on occupations directly and then using our three types of skills rather
than focusing on routineness (or complexity which Caines et al., 2017 argue is important).
    The second thread is papers that use decompositions to look at occupations. The fact
that there is a lot of variation within occupations goes back at least to Slichter (1950). Using
a variance decomposition, Juhn et al. (1993) show that much of the rise in wage inequality can
be explain with an increased returns to unobserved ability. While Juhn et al. (1993) describes
a method and says it could be used for occupations, they only show results for industries.
Quite a few papers have used similar types of decompositions based on occupations or tasks
since. Examples include Lemieux (2006), Alsalam et al. (2006), Kim and Sakamoto (2008),
Mouw and Kalleberg (2010), Scotese (2013), and Burstein et al. (2019). The main findings
of these papers is that within occupation variation tends to be most important in both levels
and trends in inequality, but the relevant importance of occupations varies across the papers.
Our counterfactual differ from these in quite a few ways. We focus on low skilled men, our
main focus is on wage levels rather than inequality, we assess the role played by different

                                               4
skills, and we use our model to separate the "within variation" into components due to skill
prices and components due to composition. This last part can not be done without some
structure.
    A few paper adopt various approaches to try to separate skill prices from composition
effects. The major issue here is separating time, age and cohort effects. Antonczyk et al.
(2018) address this problem by assuming separability between age and time effects following
MaCurdy and Mroz (1995). They find that cohort effects are small in the U.S. Another
approach is a "flat spot" method which assumes there is some point in the lifecycle for which
age effects are flat allowing one to separate time effects from cohort effects. This approach was
used by Heckman et al. (1998) and Bowlus and Robinson (2012). This approach is challenging
here as we are trying to identify occupation specific prices and occupation switching is
common even late in the life cycle so there is still a selection problem. Other papers use
various panel approaches which at some level can be viewed as restrictions on age effects.
These include Cortes (2016) and Lochner et al. (2018). Gottschalk et al. (2015) estimate
return to different skills by focusing on entry level wages and using bounds to account
for selection on unobserved variables. Bohm (2019) uses implications of a generalized Roy
model and the envelope theorem to estimate skill differences between the different cohorts
of the NLSY. Our approach uses various elements of these approaches in different ways. A
key assumption is the cohorts are ex-ante identical (conditional on education levels) and as
shown in Section 6 we require panel data (NLSY) and then combine it with O*NET and the
CPS to obtain identification.
    While it does not look specifically at occupations, Charles et al. (2019) is particularly
relevant in that the main focus is really on high school men. They argue that a large part
of the decrease in labor supply since 2000 was due to decrease in manufacturing, but before
2007 this was masked by the housing boom. They also find a large role for the decline in
manufacturing to explain the decrease in wages for low skilled men. This does not contradict
our finding of a relatively low role for occupations to explain falling wages because we are
looking at different effects. They measure equilibrium effects by looking across regions. The
decline in manufacturing could lead to a substantial decrease in wages for all jobs which is
consistent with both their findings and ours.1 This suggests that much of the decline that
we find in wages within occupations could be due to declining manufacturing wages. It is
also an important reminder that our analysis is partial equilibrium as we are not trying to
   1
    Specifically Table 5 of their paper shows wage decline in other sectors of similar magnitude to the wage
declines in manufacturing.



                                                     5
identify the source of decrease in demand.
     Another key to identification for us is the contrast between NLSY79 and NLSY97 which
we use to identify cohort effects and the returns to different type of skills. Comparing NLSY
waves is also used by Altonji et al. (2012), Castex and Dechter (2014), and Deming (2017).
Using pre-market measures of skills, Castex and Dechter (2014) find declining returns to
cognitive skills while Deming (2017) documents the rising of social skills. We extend this
literature by considering the role of manual skills. Using our structural model, we also find
an increase in the payoff to interpersonal skills. However, we find that manual skills remain
the most important skills for non-college educated men. We will return to Deming (2017)
paper in greater details later on in Section 7 and Appendix D.
     Closest to our approach are papers that estimate equilibrium models of the labor market
to understand the skill premium (Heckman et al., 1998), the growth of the service sector
(Lee and Wolpin, 2006), changes in the wage structure (Johnson and Keane, 2013), and the
gains from trade (Dix-Carneiro, 2014, and Traiberman, 2019). These papers all assume log
wages are additively separable in prices and skills, partly because this equation can be micro-
founded with an aggregate production that features perfect substitutability across workers
given observables (such as education, occupation or experience). We allow for a flexible
non-linear relationship between wages and an index of unobserved skills. And we show that
it is key for understanding changes in the wage structure. Our main question is also different
from these other papers.
     Our methodology is also closely related to structural papers that use the tasks approach
to modeling specific human capital. Poletaev and Robinson (2008) and Gathmann and
Schönberg (2010) show the importance of tasks as measures of human capital. Sanders and
Taber (2012) provide a survey of the evidence. A number of papers use this approach in
estimating models of the labor market including Sullivan (2010), Yamaguchi (2012), Sanders
(2016), Lindenlaub (2017), Postel-Vinay and Lise (2019) and Guvenen et al. (2019). While
they do not explicitly use the task approach, Keane and Wolpin (1997) predates the others
and allows for two types of experience that differ by occupation. We differ from these papers
in a number of ways. The most important one is our focus on understanding changes in the
wage structure and labor market trends while they are more interested in the life-cycle.
     In an attempt to directly measure the trends in returns to tasks, Atalay et al. (2019) use
the text from job ads to construct a new data set of occupational content from 1960 to 2000.
They find within-occupation task content shifts are at least as important as employment
shifts across occupations. They however focus on the distinction between routine and non-


                                              6
routine tasks.


3       Motivating Facts
We use four different datasets described in Appendix A. We need a consistent definition of
occupations across these datasets and over time. We use a modified version of the occupation
classification of Autor and Dorn (2013) reducing their 15 occupations down to the 8 listed
in Table A1 (Appendix A1).2
    First, we use the Outgoing Rotation Group data from the Current Population Survey
(ORG CPS), to estimate the evolution of skill prices and occupations over time. Second, we
use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79), to identify life-cycle supply
effects.
    Third, we use O*NET, to measure skill intensity across occupations. We categorize skills
into cognitive, interpersonal and manual. We use factor analysis to reduce these questions
to a one dimensional factor for each combination of occupation and skill. Figure 1 reports
the implied skill intensity of each occupation. We have renormalized so that the sum of the
skills adds to one. Occupations can be characterized into three groups broadly defined. The
first two occupations correspond to managerial and clerical occupations and are intensive
in both cognitive and inter-personal skills. The service sector is intensive in inter-personal
skills and manual skills. The remaining five occupations are intensive in manual skills which
is expected since they are associated with blue-collar jobs. Overall, there is wide dispersion
in the type of skills used by different occupations. Finally, we use the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth, 1997 NLSY97. O*NET measures the skill intensity of occupations at a
point in time. To identify within occupation changes, we combine NLSY79 and NLSY97.
    To motivate our analysis, we start by presenting data on changes in the distribution of
log wages over time controlling for age. We examine 20-60 year old males with a high school
degree or less. Figure 2 shows the familiar patterns. There are a few things to note. First,
and most important, there has been a substantial decline in the median wage over this time
period falling by around 0.12 log points.3 The story for the 90th quantile is quite different
as wages for this group have risen during this time period. The 10th quantile is somewhere
    2
     Given the structural model that follows we need a sufficient number of people in an occupation in order
to obtain reliable estimates of the occupation specific variables.
   3
     This exact number depends substantially on how one accounts for inflation. The CPI yields a much
larger decline than the PCE. However, even the PCE is not perfect as accounting for technological change
and quality differences in constructing a measure is very difficult. The fact that median wages for low
educated men has fallen relative to other demographic groups is very well established.


                                                     7
                                     Figure 1: Skill intensity by occupations


                  0.8


                  0.7


                  0.6


                  0.5
              L
              j




                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                  0.0
                        Managers      Clerical       Services    Operators   Mechanics   Construction   Precision   Transport
                         Cognitive       Inter-personal       Manual




in the middle. Wages have fallen, but not by as much as the median. Clearly the effects are
not monotonic over the time period. The wages at every quantile fell through the eighties
and early nineties, rose from the mid nineties to early 2000s. The patterns for the different
quantiles are quite different during most of the 2000s, but then all three fall substantially
during the great recession and have subsequently recovered.




                                                                         8
                       Figure 2: Changes in Log Wage Quantiles over Time


                                                                             Median         10th Quantile           90th Quantile


               0.00




               0.05




               0.10




               0.15




                      1980                         1990                          2000                       2010
                                                                          Year
                      Source: CPS. Schooling 12. Each quantile is normalized to 0 in 1979. age controls included.



    At the same time the occupation distribution has been changing considerably over time
as can be seen in Table 1. The most notable changes are the decline in operators, the increase
in services and the rise of not-working. It is also important to point out that the operator
occupation is not representative of blue collar occupations. Construction and transportation
have remained roughly constant and mechanics has had a relatively small fall. Precision
production resembles operators and has almost been cut in half. Adding the five blue collar
occupations together the decline has been from 56% of the workforce to 42%. This is a
substantial change but not dramatic. Similarly the fraction of these workers doing service
jobs has risen but not dramatically: only by about 6 percentage points. By comparison, the
fraction of these men in the manufacturing sector has fallen much more substantially during
this same period. It fell by more than half.




                                                                         9
                             Table 1: Changes in Occupational Distribution over Time


                                  Occupation         % in 1979           % in 2017      Difference
                                  Managers              7.4                 7.1             -0.3
                                  Clerical             10.1                11.2             1.1
                                  Services              8.3                14.0              5.7
                                  Operators            17.3                 8.0             -9.3
                                  Mechanics             8.5                 6.1             -2.3
                                  Construction          8.5                 8.9              0.4
                                  Precision             6.8                 3.5             -3.3
                                  Transport            15.0                15.8              0.8
                                  Not-working          18.2                25.4              7.3


   Figure 3 presents the changes in mean wages across time for different occupations and
the changes in occupation share.

                                  Figure 3: Wages growth and employment growth


                           0.10
                                                        Managers
                           0.05
                                            Mechan.
                                                                                                     Services
                           0.00
                                                                     Transp.
             Wage Growth




                                  Operators
                           0.05
                                                         Constr.
                           0.10   Precis.
                                                                 Clerical

                                     0.4       0.2      0.0               0.2     0.4       0.6       0.8
                                                              Employment Growth




    We see that most occupations experience decreases in wages. It is also clear that wage
patterns are not that closely related to the changes in occupation share. For example,
clerical workers see quite a large fall in their wages even though it is a growing occupation,

                                                                  10
and operators see a relatively modest fall in wages even though it is declining faster than any
other occupation. This is surprising since we think that the change in occupations over time
has primarily been driven by demand changes, one would expect this pattern to trace out a
supply curve and be upward sloping.4 Importantly, these wages patterns cannot directly be
interpreted as technology shocks. Wages change for two reasons, because the composition
of workers is changing and because skill prices are changing. A major goal of the empirical
work is to sort out these differences.


4       Model
Overview
The only decision people make in each period is their desired occupation.
   We use i subscript to denote an individual and t to index time. We let jit denote the
occupation in which individual i works at time t. Let j = 1, .., J index occupations and
j = 0 denotes not working.
   The vector of state variables Sit at time t for individual i is,

                                                    Sit  {it , ait , it , jit-1 , t}

               c   i    m
where it = (it   , it , it ) is a vector of general skills composed of cognitive, interpersonal
and manual skills. The other state variables are age ait , consecutive tenure in the current
occupation it and last period occupation jit-1 . Time t is relevant as it indexes the current
and future values of aggregate variables which vary across cohorts (conditional on age).
   The workers are born with initial endowment of skills       ~i . Skills then evolve over time
depending on the occupation of choice. More generally the state variables evolve exogenously
    4
    An illustrative example of the challenges ahead is the following. Consider an economy with two occupa-
tions indexed by j with wage rate wj . Individuals are identical, indexed by i and derive utility from working
in occupation uij =  log wj + ij , where ij is an i.i.d. extreme-value distributed preference shock and  > 0
                                                                                       
                                                                                 w1
is a scale parameter. Relative labor supply to occupation 1 is                   w2       . The aggregate production function
                                        
               -1                 -1    -1                                                              -1        
                                                                                                  A1         w2
is (A1 n1 )    
                    + (A2 n2 )    
                                             . Relative labor demand for occupation 1 is          A2         w1      . Equilibrium
                                                                                                                        ( -1)
                                        +             -1                                                                 +
relative wages satisfies w
                         w2
                           1
                                 = A A1
                                       2
                                                                                          A1
                                             and equilibrium relative occupation share is A2
                                                                                                   . Fol-
lowing a relative demand shock, relative wages changes and relative employment changes have the same sign
if  > - . Only supply shifts, such as a change in  , can explain the lack of correlation.




                                                                  11
and deterministically given the current occupation jit

                                     Sit+1 =F (jit , Sit ) .

An important feature of the model is labor market frictions which may prevent workers from
working in their preferred occupation. These frictions, and more particularly their variation
over time, will prove critical for fitting the evolution of occupational composition given the
weak link between employment and wage evolution presented in Figure 3.
   Each period an individual chooses between three options:

  1. Continue to work in current occupation (jit = jit-1 )

  2. Move to non-employment (jit = 0)

  3. Direct search to another occupation .

If an individual chooses the third option, he must pay a search cost that allows him to find a
job in that occupation with probability jt . If the search is unsuccessful, he chooses between
the first two options. If the worker is currently non-employed, choices 1 and 2 coincide.


Preferences
Individual i with state variables Sit who searches for a job in occupation  and works in
occupation j has flow utility
                                    w(j, Sit ) + ijt - it

where w(j, Sit ) are wages, ijt is a taste shifter for an occupation, and it is the cost of
search.
   We let  = 0 denote no search. We can write
                                      
                                                   =0
                                          i0t
                               it =
                                         ¯+         = 1, ..., J
                                               it


where t are i.i.d. and type I extreme value with scale parameter  . The ijt are type I
extreme value with scale parameter  .


Timing of the model
Each period can be broken into three sub-periods.

                                               12
Sub-period 1: The t are revealed and then the agents decide whether to search for an-
    other occupation (only one at a time)

Sub-period 2: Nature reveals whether the search was successful or not. The probability of
    success is t if the agent searches in occupation . This determines the choice set Bit
    which will be available in sub-period 3. This is determined as


                            
                            {0, j , } successful search
                                 it-1
                       Bit =
                            {0, j }   unsuccessful/no search.
                                 it-1


Note that the second element in the choice set is redundant when jit-1 = 0.
Sub-period 3: The jt are revealed and the agent chooses an option from choice set Bit .
All other state variables evolve between periods.


Wages
We think of our model as an approximation of a directed search model in which workers
direct their search to a particular occupation, but wages contracts within those occupations
are posted. In this subsection we describe our parameterization of those wage contracts.

Hedonic Pricing Equation

In order to allow the pricing of high, medium, and low skilled workers to vary differently
within occupation, we model the wage function using a nonlinear hedonic pricing equation
rather than a standard linear additive model.
   We assume the wage of a worker in occupation j with state variables Sit is
                                   
                                   exp {f (h(j, S ))} j = 1, . . . , J
                                         jt      it
                      w(j, Sit ) =
                                   0                  j=0

where fjt is a hedonic pricing equation and h is a human capital index. In practice, we
simplify and parameterize the hedonic pricing function ftj as follows,
                               
                                +  h
                                jt 1jt                             if h > hj
                     fjt (h) =                                                           (1)
                                +  h +                    h - h    otherwise
                                 jt    1jt j        2jt        j


                                               13
which is a linear spline (in logs) with a kink point at hj . That is, within each occupation,
all individuals are affected equally by technology changes through the occupation specific
constant  . Depending on the level of his human capital index h, an individual sees his
skills multiplied by either 1 or 2 depending on whether his index is below (or above) some
threshold h j.
    A standard labor demand model in which workers are perfect substitutes within an
occupation would yield special case of Equation (1) in which 1jt = 2jt = 1, j, t.5 We
chose this more general parameterization for two main reasons. First, with the standard
formulation, an increase in the within-variance can only be attributed to supply factors or
occupational composition. Our more general formulation allows technology to favor some
level of human capital more than other. And we will show it is key for understanding changes
in the wage structure. Second, Figure 2 shows quite different patterns of the three different
quantiles. We use a more flexible model in an attempt to capture these patterns.
    Note that we are not trying to estimate the underlying production function, but just
the hedonic pricing equations. Therefore our counterfactuals must be interpreted as partial
equilibrium experiments that hold these pricing equations fixed.

Human capital index

We parameterize the human capital index h as

                              h(j, Sit ) = it jt +  (j,  ) 1 (j = jit-1 ) ,

where jt is a vector of skill weights and  is occupation-specific human capital. In practice
we estimate the jt using data from O*NET and from information from the two NSLY data
sets. We provide details in section 6 below.


Evolution of State Variables
Initial human capital i is drawn from a multivariate normal distribution, i  N µ        
                                                                                    c,  ,
where  is the variance and µ   c is a cohort specific mean which accounts for selection on
   5
    Formally, write a time-varying aggregate production function Gt (H1t, , . . . , HJt ) , where the arguments
are the human capital stocks Hjt provided by each J occupation at time t. When workers within an
occupation are perfect substitutes, we can write Hjt = eh djt (h) where jt is the distribution of human
capital indexes supplied to occupation j at time t. With competitive labor markets, the equilibrium wage
                                                                     1    2
function fjt is such that jt = log H jt
                                        Gt (H1t, , . . . , HJt ) and jt = jt = 1.




                                                      14
schooling. For each cohort c and for each skill l

                             µcl  bl × (Pc (College) - P1979 (College)) ,                                (2)

where bl is a parameter to be estimated and Pc (College) is the share of low-skilled men that
attended college in cohort c. We estimate Pc (College) using the Census and ACS. Appendix
C gives more details.
    The general human capital variables transition takes the form,

                         l                                        l
                         it +1 = d0jit d1l exp [-d2 (ait - 18)] + it (1 - d3l ) .


The individual accumulates general skills at different speed depending on an occupation fixed
effect d0j , a skill fixed effect d1l and potential experience ait -18 according to exp [-d2 (ait - 18)].
Skills depreciates at rate d3l .6
    Occupation specific human capital and occupation specific tenure are determined, respec-
tively, by
                                      
                                      0                                      =0
                           (j,  ) =
                                       (j,  - 1) +  exp (-  )  > 0
                                                   0j     1

                            it+1 = (it + 1) 1 (jit = jit-1 ) ,

with it = 0 at labor market entry. Occupation specific human capital  is a deterministic
function of . Occupation tenure is reset to zero after a switch to keep the dimension of
the state space tractable-otherwise we would need to keep track each individual entire work
history. Stayers get additional occupation-specific tenure through 0j exp (-1  ) where the
specific human capital profile is concave in ,1 > 0.
    The intensity of skill utilization and the relative weights of different skills also contributes
to wage growth as individuals switch occupations, due to changes in ,  and  across
occupations. A wage growth decomposition is presented in Appendix G.
   6
    We settle on this parametrization of the accumulation equation because more general versions lead to
large standard errors. We will however present identification results for a very general accumulation process
in the next section.




                                                     15
Solving the Model
Every period t, the agent chooses an occupation to maximize their discounted present value
of income.7 The discount rate is R. Since the terminal period is simpler than prior periods,
we show this expression for periods prior to the terminal period. Let V 1 (Sit ) and V 3 (Sit , Bit )
be the expected value functions at the beginning of sub-periods 1 and 3 respectively where
Bit is the choice set defined above. We can write the value functions as

                                                     1
V 3 (Sit , Bit ) = E max w(j, Sit ) + j +               V 1 (F (j, Sit ))
                        j Bit                       1+R

    V 1 (Sit ) = E max -0 + V 3 (Sit , {0, jit-1 }) ,


                          max             - + t V 3 (Sit , {0, jit-1 , }) + (1 - t ) V 3 (Sit , {0, jit-1 })   .
                    {1,...,J }\{jit-1 }



5     Identification of Stylized Model
In this section we consider identification of a stylized version of the model. To focus on the
main ideas, we make this model more general than our baseline model in some ways but
simpler in others. It is more general in that we put no structure on occupational choice
but show we can non-parametrically estimate the supply of individuals to occupations as a
function of the lifetime prices that they face. We are also more general in the way we allow
human capital to accumulate. We simplify in three important ways. First, we assume that
people live for 4 periods. We do not view this as a strong assumption as it seems clear that
the results will generalize to more periods. Second, we restrict the hedonic wage equation to
be linear. We do this in large part because it simplifies the expressions substantially. Since
the model is linear-identification of most of the parameters depends on first and second
moments only. Allowing for non-linearity makes the problem more difficult but also means
that higher order moments can help identify the model. Further, much of the identification
problem we are worried about has to do with distinguishing age from experience from cohort
effects. This problem shows up in the linear model and is perhaps easiest to see there. We
have not shown explicitly that these results would generalize to a non-linear case, but we see
no reason to expect that they would not. The third restriction is that we abstract from the
labor supply decision by assuming people work in all periods. This allows us to avoid the
     7
       We do not allow for non-pecuniary benefits because identifying them separately from frictions proved
difficult in practice.


                                                      16
selection issue of who works. Since the key data set is the NLSY79, and almost all men work
for multiple periods this does not seem important but simplifies the analysis considerably.
    We use different notation from the previous section. We index experience by e 
{0, 1, 2, 3} and let hie be the human capital of individual i at experience level e in the
occupation in which they work at that time. We let eit be the experience of individual i at
time t. The key data is the log of measured wages wit which we write as,

                                      wit = jit t + jit t hieit + uit ,

where uit is i.i.d. measurement error across both individuals and time.
    We generalize the human capital production function relative to Section 4. Let  (i, e) be
the (calendar) year in which individual i has experience level e. Let ji = ji (i,0) , ji (i,1) , ji (i,2) , ji (i,3)
denote the labor market history of individual i.
    In the year of labor market entry, human capital is

                                             hi0 = i ji (i,0) .

As mentioned above, we allow human capital with experience e to be more general than in
the model section. It can be written as

                                       hie = i De ji (i,e) + ji ,e ,

where j  e is the tenure from history j  at experience level e.8 It depends flexibly on the
exact labor market history. For example, j  e incorporates both returns to tenure  and
changes in i other than depreciation. D picks up depreciation and is a diagonal matrix
where each element is 1 - d3 defined in the human capital production function above.
   We take a simplified version of our model in which  is fixed and known from O*NET.9
   We consider identification from two different types of data sets

       · Panel data for which we observe the full lifecycle for some cohorts. This is like the
         NLSY79.

       · Cross section data for additional years in which we don't observe the panel. This is
         like the CPS.
   8
     In practice the experience level at e should only depend on the history up to that point. We do not need
this for identification though so we do not impose it.
   9
     In practice we allow this to change using the contrast between the two NLSY data sets following Deming
(2017). Since identification of this is obvious, we focus on the more subtle parts.

                                                     17
As is standard in these types of models, time effects, cohort effects, and age effects are not
separately identified and some assumption is needed. We assume that all cohorts are ex-ante
identical. In practice this means that the ex-ante distribution of i and the supply function
to occupations does not vary by cohort. To see this more formally, let p be the set of lifetime
prices facing a cohort that enters the market during period  . The per capita lifetime supply
of skills is S (p ) which is cohort invariant. Cohorts will differ ex-post because they face
different prices, but ex-ante they will be identical. Both p and S (·) are defined formally
in Appendix D. In practice in our estimation we relax this by allowing the distribution to
depend on the probability of college attendance and assume that cohorts are ex-ante identical
conditional on the probability of attending college. We can then think of the identification
argument as conditional on college.10 Note that since the college attendance rate of men
changes little since the late 1960s, in practice the difference between these is not important.
    We need two types of exclusion restrictions for identification.11 For each occupation at
experience e we need variables that influence the selection equation but not wages directly.
We also need variables that affect wages but have no separate effect on the selection equation.
We use skill prices for both. In particular for occupation j, the prices in all other occupations
operate as exclusion restrictions in the selection equation. The skill prices in occupation j
work as the second type of exclusion restriction-they affect wages in occupation j directly,
but only affect occupational choice through their effect on wages. Dealing with this is non-
standard because we do not observe prices directly. We must first identify them. As is
standard in non-parametric identification of selection models,12 we need very strong support
conditions as well which allow us to condition on very unlikely events.
    The identification results comes in the following 5 steps.

Step 1: From the panel data using the prices as exclusion restrictions we identify the vari-
                                    2
     ance of the measurement error u  , depreciation D, and the unconditional variance of
     i from conditional second moments.

Step 2: Using the same type of argument but with first moments we identify ji (e) .

Step 3: Given multiple cohorts and exclusion restrictions we identify jt and jt for the
     relevant panel data sample from first and second moments.
  10
      And in practice the college fraction does not increase monotonically so it is not difficult to separate this
effect from the time effect in general.
   11
      See e.g. Willis and Rosen (1979), Heckman and Honoré (1990), or French and Taber (2011).
   12
      See e.g. Heckman (1990).



                                                       18
Step 4: Given that we have estimated prices, we show how to identify S (p ).

Step 5: Given the supply function, we show that we can identify the prices jt and jt from
     the cross section data.

We go through these five steps in Appendix D.


6          Estimation
Let  be the vector of structural parameters. We estimate our model using indirect inference.
Indirect inference works by selection of a set of statistics of interest ^ which the model is
asked to reproduce.13 For an arbitrary value of the vector of parameters to be estimated ,
we use the model to generate the target moments  (). The parameter estimate          ^ is then
derived by searching over the parameter space to find the parameter vector that minimizes
the criterion function,

                                  ^ = arg min 
                                              ^ -  () W ^ -  ()                              (3)
                                              


where W is a weighting matrix. This procedure generates a consistent estimate of . Before
discussing the estimation approach we fill in some details about the econometric specification.


Pre-set parameters
         · We set hj threshold from Equation (1) to the median wage in each occupation in 1979.


         · 1 is normalized to one in clerical occupation in 1979.

         · The real interest rate R is set to 5%.


Measurement/Classification Error
We allow reported wages and occupations to be contaminated by measurement errors. In the
                                                                    2
simulation, we multiply true wages by u where log(u)  N (0, u         ) before calculating target
moments. Occupations can be misclassified but not-working is always correctly reported. Let
t (j0 , j1 ) be the probability that occupation j0 is reported given that the true occupation is
    13
         See Gourieroux et al. (1993) for a general discussion of indirect inference.




                                                          19
j1 at time t. Formally,

                                       
                   t (j0 , j1 ) = Pr (jit = j0 |jit = j1 ) ,     j0 , j1 = 1, . . . , J.

In principle that is J (J - 1) additional parameters to be estimated for any given set of
control variables. We follow Keane and Wolpin (2001) and assume classification errors are
unbiased, e.g. the probability that a person is observed in an occupation is equal to the true
probability that he/she chooses that occupation. Formally,

                               
                          Pr (jit = j ) = Pr (jit = j ) ,      j = 1, . . . , J.

Under that assumption, the t are known up to an unknown parameter E ,
                                   
                                   (1 - E ) Pr (j = j ) ,   j1 = j0
                                                 it   0
                    t (j0 , j1 ) =
                                   E + (1 - E ) Pr (j = j ) j = j .
                                                     it   0  1    0


Test scores are noisy measure of skills before labor market entry. AFQT is a noisy measure
of cognitive skills ~1 . The measure of social skills constructed by Deming (2017) is a noisy
measure of inter-personal skill ~2 . The variance of these two measures is denoted by  ~l , l =
1, 2.


Specification and Estimation of factor prices 
Figure 1 presented our estimates of skill weights from O*NET. Unfortunately O*NET is
not a proper panel so we can not use it alone to estimate changes in skills weights. We
augment the O*NET by using information from the comparison between the NLSY79 and
                                     l
the NLSY97. Specifically we let j      be the time-invariant loading factor we estimated from
O*NET. We assume it represents the (constant) skill intensity from 2008 and on. We allow
for time trends prior to that year.
    To reduce the dimension of the problem, we allow for a trend common to all occupations
al but that differs across skills. And we allow for a trend that is a function of the observed
change in the skill composition of an occupation. If individuals with a high skill level are
more represented in an occupation across NLSY waves, it suggests that this occupation
became more intense in that skill, ceteris paribus. Formally, let xjl denotes the difference in
difference in proportions for each occupation j and test score l. It is a difference between



                                                  20
above/below median in skill l and a difference across NLSY waves. For l = 1, 2,
                      
                        l - (a0l + a1l xjl ) × 29         t  1979
                       j
                      
                  l     l
                  jt = j  - (a0l + a1l xjl ) × (2008 - t) 1979 < t  2008                         (4)
                      
                       l
                      
                                                          t > 2008
                       j


                                            3          1     2
Finally, l = 3 is calculated as a residual jt = 1 - jt   + jt  . We then estimate these
parameters along with the rest of the structural parameters. To identify these parameters,
we use the combination of NLSY waves. We give more details when we present the auxiliary
parameters below.


Algorithm Details
It is in principle possible to estimate the full vector of parameters  at once starting from
scratch but we found that to be computationally prohibitive. Small variations in some
parameters can lead some individuals to switch occupations creating discontinuities in the
objective function. We also have a large number of parameters. Instead, we develop a se-
quential algorithm. We first divide both the structural parameters  = (1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ) and
auxiliary parameters m = (m1 , m2 , m3 , m4 ) into four groups. We obtain starting values by
dividing the estimation algorithm into four iterative steps which we repeat until convergence.
Each step selects a subset of the structural parameters to fit a subset of the auxiliary param-
eters. Let J () be individual optimal decisions given a sequence of shocks and parameters
. Given -1 from a previous iteration.
   1. Choose 1 to fit m1 1 , - 1 -1  -1
                             2 , 3 , 4  J 1 , - 1 -1  -1
                                              2 , 3 , 4

   2. Choose 2 to fit m2 1 , 2 , - 1 -1
                                 3 , 4  J 1 , - 1 -1  -1
                                              2 , 3 , 4

   3. Choose 3 to fit m3 1 , 2 , - 1 -1
                                 3 , 4  J 1 , 2 , - 1 -1
                                                  3 , 4

   4. Choose 4 to fit m4 (1 , 2 , 3 , 4 |J (1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ))
Using NLSY79 moments m1 , Step 1 estimates the preference and time invariant technology
                         0   0     J
parameters 1 = , j         , j , 0
                                 j j =1 , ,  ,  , u , ~1 ,              0
                                                           ~2 , E where j   0
                                                                          , j are initial hedonic
           0
prices and j are initial occupation offer rate.
   Step 2 estimates life-cycle wage growth parameters 2 = {d0j , 0j }J                   L
                                                                      j =1 , {d1l , d3l }l=1 , 1 , d2 ,
holding fixed individual choice, to fit m2 . The advantage is that we only need to solve the
model at the beginning of this step.

                                                21
    We apply a similar procedure to estimate the trend in prices, skill intensity and the cohort
                                 1   2       J
trend parameters 3 = jt , jt       , jt , jt j =1 , µc using m3 in Step 3. Because occupation'
choices by year m4 are, by definition, discrete, we re-solve the model at each new parameters
guess 4 = {jt }J   j =1 which contains the trend in frictions parameters.
    Once this procedure is done, we use these estimates as an initial guess and then estimate
the structural parameters using Equation (3). We find this works very well in practice as
the procedure provides excellent starting points so the final stage is relatively quick.
    This leaves us with a total of 216 parameters divided into groups of 58, 23, 103 and 32.


Auxiliary Parameters
As mentioned above, we partition the vector of auxiliary parameters m into four vectors
defined as follows.
    m1 contains all the auxiliary parameters that are used to identify the preference and time
invariant technology parameters. The data moments are

   · (CPS for NLSY79 cohorts) Quantiles of the wage distribution by occupation and by
     age.

   · (CPS for NLSY79 cohorts) The proportion of individuals choosing each of the J + 1
     occupations by age

   · (NLSY79) Occupation Mobility

        ­ The proportion of occupation-stayers between t and t + 1 and between t and t + 2
          for each of the J +1 occupations in the population and for two different age group.
        ­ The proportion of occupation-switchers moving into each J +1 occupation between
          t and t + 1 and between t and t + 2 in the population and for two different age
          group.
        ­ The transition between each of the J + 1 occupation between t and t + 1 and
          between t and t + 2 in the population for two different age group.
        ­ The median occupation-specific tenure and the median experience in each of the
          J + 1 occupations
        ­ The auto-correlation of wages by age

m2 contains all the auxiliary parameters that are used to identify the human capital accu-
mulation parameters. Using NLSY79 cohorts, the moments are

                                              22
         · (CPS) The median wage by occupation and age.

         · (NLSY79) The median wage by years of general work experience for each of the J
           occupations. The median wage by years of occupation-specific experience for each of
           the J occupations.

         · (NLSY79) The auto-correlations of wages in level between t and t + 1 separately for
           occupation stayers and occupation switchers.

         · (NLSY79) The mean 1-year difference in wages by current occupation, past occupation,
           and for two different experience group and for two different occupation-specific tenure
           group.

m3 contains all the auxiliary parameters used to identify movement in prices.

         · (CPS) Quantiles of the wage distribution for each year and for each of the J occupation.

         · (NLSY79 and NLSY97) The test scores coefficients in log-wage linear regressions across
           NLSY waves and controlling for age and year fixed effects. See Appendix E for details.

         · (NLSY79 and NLSY97) The proportion of individuals choosing each of the J + 1
           occupations by test scores and across NLSY waves.

m4 are the proportions of individuals choosing each of the J + 1 occupations by year in the
CPS used to identify trends in search frictions.


7          Changes in the Wage Structure
This section discusses the estimates of our model. We have a lot of parameters and can
not discuss all in detail. The structural parameters related to the life-cycle are relegated to
Appendix F. In this section we examine the estimated time trends which are our main focus.


Price Series
Figure 4 summarises the estimated price series. For each occupation, we graph our estimate
of the hedonic pricing equation fjt (h) function at five different points in time.14 The het-
    14
     Standard errors are reported in Table I3 (Appendix I). Using a Wald test, we can reject that the
parameters of the function fjt are equal to each other for any distinct pair of decades, given any occupation
j . We cannot reject equality of the slopes for some occupations between 1990 and 2000, a decade with little
changes in the pricing equations.

                                                     23
                             Figure 4: Price series by decades


           Managers                        Clerical                      Services                 Operators
4.0                           4.0                              4.0                      4.0

3.5                           3.5                              3.5                      3.5

3.0                           3.0                              3.0                      3.0

2.5                           2.5                              2.5                      2.5

2.0                           2.0                              2.0                      2.0

1.5                         1.5                                 1.5                      1.5
  0.5294     0.8942    1.2589 0.200         0.782          1.364 0.029    0.578     1.126 0.028     0.660     1.292
            Mechan.                        Constr.                       Precis.                   Transp.
4.0                           4.0                              4.0                      4.0

3.5                           3.5                              3.5                      3.5

3.0                           3.0                              3.0                      3.0

2.5                           2.5                              2.5                      2.5

2.0                           2.0                              2.0                      2.0

1.5                         1.5                                 1.5                      1.5
  0.3275     0.7873    1.2471 0.166         0.690          1.215 0.013    0.687     1.361 0.154     0.735     1.315

           1979       1990          2000        2010           2017




                                                      24
erogenous effects of technological changes are apparent. None of the occupations has been
positively affected by technological change (or other drivers of the wage structure) through-
out their distribution. The 1980s led to a large a decline in the price for all but the best
workers in most occupations. This is precisely the period of acceleration of technological
change documented by the literature dating back to at least Katz and Murphy (1992). An
example are operators who saw price increase larger than 10% at the top while the median
and the bottom saw decline of close to 10% during the same time period. We conjecture
that these values reflect the evolution of the manufacturing sector where many low skilled
workers have been replaced by machines. Yet, some workers, the most talented one, are now
in charge of operating these machines and whose skills became much more important than
in the past. This is an example that leads to a rise in wages for high skill workers but a
decline for the median worker.
    The pricing function has been more stable since 1990. Yet, prices at the bottom have
increased relative to prices in the middle within all occupations except managers and me-
chanics. Further, the last decade saw another wave of decrease in prices for all but those at
the top of the distribution within most occupations.


Skill Weights
Table 2 reports time-trends for skill weights and cohort effects.

                  Table 2: Skill weights by occupations and cohort effects


                                    Cognitive     Inter-personal     Manual
         a0l                    -0.0042 (0.0001) 0.0083 (0.0001)
         a1l                     0.0040 (0.0001) 0.0064 (0.0012)
         cohort effects (bl )   -0.4823 (0.0581) 0.0413 (0.1111) 0.1612 (0.0404)


    a0l and a1l are defined in Equation (4). The weight on inter-personal skills rose sig-
nificantly over time a02 > 0. It was zero in all occupations except for management and
clerical occupations at the beginning of the period. This is driven by the coefficients on
inter-personal skills in linear wages regressions across NLSY waves (reported in Table E1
in Appendix E). The inter-personal skills coefficients lack statistical significance for both
wages and the probability of working in NLSY79. Following the same logic, we find that the
loading factor on cognitive skills declined in all occupations. The weight on manual skills is

                                              25
overall stable but displays heterogeneous trends by occupations. It remained fairly stable or
rose in manual occupations but declined in management, clerical and services occupations.


Cohort Effects
Turning to cohort effects, we present bl which is defined in Equation (2) in Table 2. As one
would expect, we find a positive selection on cognitive skills. As more people went to college,
the endowment in cognitive skills declined for low-skilled men. Interestingly, there is negative
selection for manual skills which suggests that more manually able men are less likely to go to
college so the increasing college attendance rate actually leads to a more positively selected
group. This is important as manual skills turn out to be the most important for low skilled
men as we will discuss below. Finally, there have been little change for inter-personal skills.


Evolution of Occupational Composition
We saw in Section 3 that employment and wages evolutions are only weakly related. There
are two reasons why this could be the case within our model. Either selection effects are
strong and wages evolutions are not in line with price changes or the reallocation of labor
cannot be attributed to the evolution of relative productivity. We can now assess these
explanations.
    In Figure 5, we assess within the model the extent controlling for selection improves
on this dimension. The top panel of Figure 5 reports the model analog of Figure 3, wage
growth and employment growth for each J occupation. The right panel controls for selection
as follows. We calculate the distribution of the human index supplied in each occupation at
the beginning of the period, 1979. We then estimate the evolution of the wage associated
with this fixed human capital index. The top panel shows as in Section 3 the low correlation
between employment and wages evolution. The bottom panel shows that controlling for
selection allows us to make some progress understanding the data patterns. There are three
main things to notice. First, there is a positive (but low) correlation between average price
growth and employment growth while the correlation is close to zero for wages. Second,
looking at prices as opposed to wages solves some of the puzzle of the apparent lack of con-
vergence of wages between shrinking operators and expanding services. Indeed, the average
price in services fell relatively less than for operators. Last, average prices mask considerable
heterogeneity within occupations. For instance, the price of the average human index de-
cline substantially for clerical occupation but it declines much less for human capital index


                                               26
                                 Figure 5: Changes in Employment, Wages and Prices


                           0.2                     Managers
                           0.1                  Mechan.
            Wage Growth


                           0.0                                      Transp.
                                                                                             Services
                                    Operators                        Clerical
                           0.1     Precis.                Constr.

                                      0.4        0.2       0.0           0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                           0.1                                                               Services
                           0.2                  Mechan.             Transp.
            Price Growth




                                  Operators
                           0.3 Precis.             Managers
                                                       Constr.
                           0.4
                                                                     Clerical
                           0.5
                                      0.4        0.2       0.0    0.2       0.4       0.6   0.8
                                                          Employment Growth


at the bottom or at the top of the distribution, as reported in Figure 4. Another illustration
are managerial occupations that saw a large influx of high skilled individuals. As a result,
average wages grew faster than the price of an average manager skills.
    While we do find some evidence of selection in Figure 5, it turns out that selection
alone can not reconcile the results. Figure 6 reports the evolution of employment share
by occupation. The dot markers are from the baseline simulated model and the diamond
markers are from the CPS data. One can see that we fit the data very well. To show
the importance of increasing search frictions we impose that the job finding rates are fixed
over time, jt = j 1979 for all t. The pentagon markers represents the implied occupational
composition.15 While the baseline model fits the evolution of employment share in each
occupation well, the restricted model can not match the decline of operators nor the rise
of services. In other words, we attribute the decline of manual occupations to a decline
in the number of manual jobs opportunities rather than a decline in prices. The wages in
traditional blue collar occupations have not fallen substantially relative to other occupations.
This suggests, non-competitive forces drove individuals away from manual occupations while
  15
     We also estimated a restricted version of the model where we impose that frictions are fixed over time.
It could not fit the evolution of occupation composition.


                                                                    27
                Figure 6: Evolution of occupation share by year




0.18
                Managers                  0.18
                                                              Clerical                0.18
                                                                                                     Services
0.16                                      0.16                                        0.16
0.14                                      0.14                                        0.14
0.12                                      0.12                                        0.12
0.10                                      0.10                                        0.10
0.08                                      0.08                                        0.08
0.06                                      0.06                                        0.06
0.04                                      0.04                                        0.04
0.02                                      0.02                                        0.02
                      year                                        year                                     year
0.18
                Operators                 0.18
                                                             Mechan.                  0.18
                                                                                                      Constr.
0.16                                      0.16                                        0.16
0.14                                      0.14                                        0.14
0.12                                      0.12                                        0.12
0.10                                      0.10                                        0.10
0.08                                      0.08                                        0.08
0.06                                      0.06                                        0.06
0.04                                      0.04                                        0.04
0.02                                      0.02                                        0.02
                      year                                        year                                     year
0.18
                  Precis.                 0.18
                                                             Transp.                  0.35
                                                                                                     Not-work.
0.16                                      0.16
                                                                                      0.30
0.14                                      0.14
0.12                                      0.12                                        0.25
0.10                                      0.10
0.08                                      0.08                                        0.20

0.06                                      0.06
                                                                                      0.15
0.04                                      0.04
0.02                                      0.02                                        0.10
       1979    1990    2000   2010 2017          1979      1990    2000   2010 2017          1979   1990    2000   2010 2017
                      year                                       year                                      year
              data            model                     fixed frictions




                                                                  28
keeping wages high. Table I2 in Appendix I reports the estimates of the trends in frictions.
    The rise of not-working cannot be attributed to price changes either. The evolution of
the price series alone cannot match the growing share of low skilled men not-working. We
attribute the rise of not-working to an increase in frictions in all occupations but it could as
well be explained with a rise of the value of not working (Aguiar et al., 2018), nonphysical
aspects of some jobs (Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl, 2018) or health considerations (Borella
et al., 2019). In practice we cannot separately identify these factors from search frictions.


8    Decomposition of Wage Trends
Given our estimates we can decompose the simulated wages into various components. The
simplest case is average wages. In our model there are three forces that determine average
wages: skill prices, occupational composition, and selection into occupations. The differ-
ences between mean log wages between any two periods can be decomposed into these three
components as:

                   Et (wi ) - E (wi )
               =        [pjt Ejt (fjt (h (j, Sit ; jt ))) - pj Ej (fj (h (j, Sit ; j )))]
                    j

               =        [pjt - pj ] Ejt (fjt (h (j, Sit ; jt )))
                    j

                   +        pj [Ejt (fjt (h (j, Sit ; jt ))) - Ejt (fj (h (j, Sit ; j )))]
                        j

                   +        pj [Ejt (fj (h (j, Sit ; j ))) - Ej (fj (h (j, Sit ; j )))] ,    (5)
                        j


where we have defined pjt as the proportion of individuals working in occupation j in year t
and
                       h (j, Sit ; j )  it j +  (j,  ) 1 (j = jit-1 ) .

The first term represents the role of occupational occupation. The second term reflects prices
and the last term captures supply. Note that from the raw data we could directly identify
the first component, but separating prices from skill composition requires the structural
model. The top left panel of Figure 7 reports each three components and the total change
in the mean. The main thing to take away from the picture is that the prices track the
mean closely so the primary determinant of the pattern is prices. These changes would


                                                   29
                  Figure 7: Mean and Quantiles Decomposition


                          Mean                                          10th Percentile
0.15                                                0.15
0.10                                                0.10
0.05                                                0.05
0.00                                                0.00
0.05                                                0.05
0.10                                                0.10
0.15                                                0.15
0.20                                                0.20
0.25                                                0.25
       1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015             1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                         Median                                         90th Percentile
0.15                                                0.15
0.10                                                0.10
0.05                                                0.05
0.00                                                0.00
0.05                                                0.05
0.10                                                0.10
0.15                                                0.15
0.20                                                0.20
0.25                                                0.25
       1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015             1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
          total    occupations    prices   supply




                                            30
have lowered average wages by about 15 percentage points in the 1980s and then increased
average wages since. This was expected from the prices series where the constant of the wage
function dropped in the 1980s and slowly recovered.
    While the results on the mean are interesting they miss an important part of the wage
distribution. We know from Figure 2 that the patterns at the high and low end are quite
different. The other three panels of Figure 7 show the analogous pattern for the median
level, the 10th quantile, and the 90th quantile.16
    In all cases one sees that the primary determinant is the price change. Note that price
changes are due in part to the hedonic pricing equation (fjt ) and in part to the factor loading
terms (jt ) . In practice this is virtually all due to the former.
    Remarkably, occupational composition is relatively unimportant for understanding these
patterns. The changing composition does lead to a roughly 5 percentage point decrease in
wages in all four panels in the picture. Since mean changes were small, this is similar to the
overall mean change throughout the period-though clearly it can not explain the fall in the
eighties and subsequent increase. It also contributes little to understanding median wages
which have fallen considerably more than the mean-or the 90th quantile which has risen.
    Table 3 provides much more details. Looking at the formula in the decomposition equa-
tion (5), one can see that each of the three pieces is really a summation of pieces across
occupations. Table 3 reveals all 24 pieces over the full period and between 1979 and 1990-the
period in which we see the large decrease. We modify the formula above slightly when doing
this, since j [pjt - pj ] = 0 we can rewrite the first term as j [pjt - pj ] [Ejt (fjt (h (j, Sit ; jt ))) - Et (wi )]
The first row of each table provides a 3 part decomposition, and the next part provides all
24 components.
  16
     To see this let M0 (t) be the median wage in time t. Then for year t we calculate the conditional
distribution of wages conditional on occupation at time t. Then to simulate the counterfactual unconditional
distribution we weight the occupations by their importance in 1979 rather than t. We calculate the median
distribution of that distribution, call that M1 (t). The dashed line plots M1 (t) - M0 (t). To calculate M2 (t) we
simulate the counterfactual conditional distribution of wages in time t by using the actual skill distribution
but the 1979 prices. We then weight by the 1979 occupation distribution and take the median to get M2 (t).
The dotted line plots M2 (t) - M1 (t). The dash-dot line plots M2 (t). Note that the three lines add up to the
median, M0 (t). The 10th and 90th quantile are calculated analogously.




                                                       31
               Table 3: Mean decomposition: contribution of each occupation


                         Years: 1979 - 2017. Mean    Change: -0.0517
                                    Occupational
                                    Composition        Prices  Skills
                        Total          -0.0268        -0.0708 0.0458
                        Managers       -0.0041        -0.0001 0.0151
                        Clerical        0.0005        -0.0165 0.0074
                        Services       -0.0244        -0.0027 0.0004
                        Operators       0.0101        -0.0142 -0.0011
                        Mechan.        -0.0040        -0.0023 0.0101
                        Constr.        -0.0003        -0.0161 0.0035
                        Precis.        -0.0048        -0.0131 0.0024
                        Transp.         0.0002        -0.0058 0.0080



                         Years: 1979 - 1990. Mean    Change: -0.1389
                                    Occupational
                                    Composition        Prices  Skills
                        Total          -0.0084        -0.1479 0.0174
                        Managers       -0.0019        -0.0079 0.0063
                        Clerical        0.0008        -0.0147 0.0022
                        Services       -0.0075        -0.0154 0.0019
                        Operators       0.0023        -0.0284 0.0060
                        Mechan.         0.0003        -0.0102 0.0014
                        Constr.         0.0014        -0.0201 0.0004
                        Precis.        -0.0030        -0.0181 0.0002
                        Transp.        -0.0008        -0.0331 -0.0010


    A surpring result (to us) is that supply acted as a countervailing force to changes in
technology even though college enrollment is increasing. There are several forces at play.
First, there has been an increased sorting between individuals and occupations. With the
increased slope of the price series, individuals have more incentives to work in the occupation
that best fit their skills. To assess the contribution of each skill and each occupation to these
supply effects, we use an approximation to decompose the log of the sum and we use the




                                               32
             Table 4: Contribution of each occupation to the supply component


                          Years: 1979 - 2017. Mean Change: 0.0223
                              Cognitive Interpersonal Manual Specific
                  Total          0.0037       0.0035    0.0121    0.0029
                  Managers       0.0034       0.0022    0.0012    0.0010
                  Clerical       0.0008       0.0012    0.0011    0.0006
                  Services      -0.0005       0.0000    0.0004    0.0003
                  Operators     -0.0006       0.0000    0.0001    0.0000
                  Mechan.        0.0011       0.0000    0.0033    0.0002
                  Constr.       -0.0003       0.0000    0.0016    0.0002
                  Precis.        0.0000       0.0000    0.0009    0.0001
                  Transp.       -0.0002       0.0000    0.0034    0.0006


fact log fj is linear up to 1979. It gives:

                         1            L
      
                         j
 Ejt wijt   - Ej (wij )                    lj [Ejt (lit ) - Ej (li )] + [Ejt (jt ) - Ej (j )] .
                         j           l=1


Table 4 gives a decomposition of the contribution of each occupation and each skill. Manual
skills are the dominant forces behind the positive supply effect. High manual skills indi-
viduals have increasingly sorted into transport and mechanics. And high cognitive or high
inter-personal skills individuals have increasingly moved to management occupations. The
remaining factors that contributed to a positive supply effects are the following. First, and
as discussed in Section 7, different cohorts enter with different labor market skills. Selection
on manual skills is positive and it is the skill they use the most. And while selection is
negative on cognitive skills, the returns to these skills has declined over time. Second, low
skill men have gotten older. The average age rose from 38.5 years olds in 1979 to 40 years
old in 2017. And, older workers have more human capital than younger worker. Last, the
skill gap between working people and not-working has increased over time.


9    Skill Premium
In this section we examine how the relationship between skills and wages has changed over
time.



                                                 33
                                        Figure 8: Skill Premium


                               top-bottom                                      middle-bottom
          0.5                                               0.5

          0.4                                               0.4

          0.3                                               0.3

          0.2                                               0.2

          0.1                                               0.1

          0.0                                               0.0
                1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015           1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                             Wage regression                                 Working regression
        0.200
                                                           0.06
        0.175
        0.150                                              0.05

        0.125                                              0.04
        0.100                                              0.03
        0.075                                              0.02
        0.050
                                                           0.01
        0.025
                1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015           1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                    Cognitive    Inter-personal   Manual




Preliminary Evidence
We begin with a simple exercise in which we classify the individuals from our estimated
simulated model based on their endowment in each of the three skills at labor market entry.
Precisely, for each skill we look at whether their endowment is in the top third, bottom third,
or in the middle of the distribution. We then compare the mean wage of these different groups
of individuals as we simulate the model. Note that if initial skills were observable in the CPS,
this is something we could produce from the raw data without a model. Figure 8 reports the
results. The top-left panel reports the difference between the top and bottom mean wages
while the top-right panel reports the difference between the middle group and the bottom
group. The bottom-left panel reports the skills coefficients in the following regressions. For
each year, we regress log-wage on a measure of each skills at labor market entry, controlling
for age fixed effects. We normalize each skill to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1.


                                                     34
The bottom-right panel reports the same regression where the left-hand side variable takes
the value of one if the individual is working and zero otherwise. At the beginning of the
period, manual skills have the most predictive power on wages followed by cognitive skills.
Individuals in the top third in manual skills earn more than 30% more than individuals in the
bottom third (at labor market entry) in 1979. The corresponding number is close to 30% for
cognitive skills. On the hand, the pay gap associated with inter-personal skills is only 12% in
1979. The regression coefficients have the same ordering. A one standard deviation increases
in manual, cognitive and inter-personal skills, increases log wages by, respectively, 15%, 12%
and 2%. The pay premium associated with each three skills increased in the 1980s. The top
mean wages increases by 10% compared to the bottom in manual skills and the increase is
around 5% for both cognitive skills and interpersonal skills. In the 1990s, the premium fell for
both manual and cognitive skills and they remain fairly stable since 2000. By contrast, the
premium for inter-personal skills kept rising in the 1990s and it is about 25% today which is
about the same as the premium for cognitive skills. The premium for manual skills is about
35% and therefore remains the highest. The regression coefficients show the same ordering
when either the wage or a dummy for working are on the left hand side. The large increase
in all the premiums in the 1980s was expected from the increase of the slope in the price
series for each occupation, that we saw in Figure 4. Since 1990 individuals at the bottom in
either cognitive or manual skills did relatively better that individuals in the middle due to
the flattening of the price series at the bottom. This is not the case for inter-personal skills
however.


Counterfactual Skill Investment
Should we conclude that we should invest in individuals inter-personal skills before they enter
the labor market? We next do an exercise to help answer this question. Since we don't know
the relative costs of investing in the three different skills nor exactly how one might do it, we
consider a simpler case. Suppose that it were equally costly to increase skill by a standard
deviation, in which skill would we prefer to invest? We investigate this question by increasing
the endowment of each individual at labor market entry by one-standard deviation for each
skill. These are partial equilibrium experiments because the hedonic pricing function is fixed.
    Figure 9 reports the average wage gain of each policy.




                                               35
                            Figure 9: Skill improvement program




    0.200

    0.175

    0.150

    0.125

    0.100

    0.075

    0.050

    0.025
             1980 1985         1990      1995 2000      2005 2010         2015
                Cognitive             Inter-personal       Manual

     Improving low-skilled men manual skills before labor market entry has the highest re-
wards. This is true throughout the period of observations. This reflects the fact that this
group predominantly uses manual skills. The returns to improving either cognitive or man-
ual skills has increased during the 1980s and fell since. Improving interpersonal skills had
little returns at the beginning of the period. It increased throughout the period of analysis
and it is now only slightly lower than the returns to improving cognitive skills.
     To isolate the role of occupations, we again increase each individual skills but we force
individuals to work in the same occupations as before the policy was implemented. Table 5
reports the average gain for each policy. Occupation composition only explains 31% of the
returns to improving manual skills while it explains almost 40% of the returns to improving
inter-personal skills and up to 45% for cognitive skills. This is intuitive as improving the
last two skills leads some individuals to move away from declining manual occupations.
     These policies also improve the probability of working as reported in Table 6. Increasing

                                             36
                   Table 5: Skill improvement program: Decomposition




                Table 6: Skill improvement program: probability of working




cognitive skills or manual skills by one standard deviation raises the probability of working
by more than 4.5 percentage points in 1979. It remains fairly stable over time for cognitive
skills while it increased by more than 2 percentage points for manual skills. On the other
hand, improving inter-personal skills had little impact, less than 1.5 percentage points, at
the beginning of the period while it boosts the probability of working by 3.5 percentage
points at the end of the period.


Heterogeneity
Are the returns to these policies heterogenous? To answer this question, we again classify
people depending on whether their endowment in a particular skill is in the top third, bottom
third, or in the middle of the distribution. Table 7 reports the returns for each subgroup at
the beginning of the period (column t0 ) and at the end of the period (column t1 ). The last
three columns report respectively, the policy that the highest returns at the beginning of the
period, at the end of the period, and the policy that saw the highest increase in its return.
The analysis by group confirms that investing in manual group has the highest return for
most groups throughout the period of analysis. There is a high return to specializing in
manual skills for individual that are in the top group in manual skills at labor market entry.
This is the policy that has the highest return for any endowment in the remaining skills. It
is true both at the end and the beginning of the period of analysis. The only exception is
for people that are in the top group in each three skills in which case cognitive skills have


                  Table 7: Counterfactual: heterogeneity and interactions




                                             37
the highest returns and improving their inter-personal skills sees a very large increase in
its returns. This is driven by management occupations which attracts the highest skilled
workers. This is interesting as it happens simultaneously as the premium for cognitive skills
declined overall.
    The returns to improving interpersonal skills has increased more than the returns to
improving manual skills for more than two-thirds of the population. This not true however
for individuals that are in the top group in manual skills but not in the top group for either of
the remaining two skills. For these individuals, the reward to specializing further in manual
skills has increased the most.
    By the end of the period, improving interpersonal skills has the highest reward only for
individuals that are in the bottom in manual skills and that are at least in the middle in the
other two skills. Only about 10% of individuals fall in that category.Lifetime inequality by
cohort
    We examine the impact of the policies on lifetime earnings following Huggett et al.
(2011). We ask how much compensation is equivalent to entering the labor market with
a one standard deviation increase in any initial skill. We express this compensation in terms
of the percentage change in earnings in all periods that would leave an agent with the same
expected lifetime earnings as an agent with a one standard deviation change in the relevant
initial skill. Table 8 also reports these results for different cohorts.

                                 Table 8: Lifetime Inequality




   For the cohort that enters the labor market at the end of the 1970s, a one standard
deviation increase in cognitive skills is equivalent to an increase of 12.5% of wages on average.
This number drops to close to 5% for the cohort that enters the labor market towards the
end of the period of analysis. The compensating variation for manual skills increased from
26% to 28%. It goes up for inter-personal skills from 3.2% to 4.4%. Consistent with the
analysis above, inter-personal skills saw an increase in their returns but manual skills remain
the most valuable skills.




                                               38
10     Conclusions
We propose and estimate a model to understand the evolution of the wage structure of
low skilled men since 1979. We allow for a rich specification of change in the demand for
workers which has heterogenous effects on different occupations and different parts of the
skill distribution. We document the relative role of demand-side factors and supply-side
factors.
    Our first main finding is that while there was noticeable change in the occupational
composition of workers, the implications of this on wages is not dramatic. We find that the
main driver of the decline in median wages (as well as the rise at the 90th ) is driven by skill
price changes not the occupational distribution. Our second main finding is that we see
that skill prices in shrinking occupations have not been falling noticeably slower than those
in growing occupations-so much so that we can not reconcile the data with a competitive
model. Our third main finding is that while the importance of interpersonal skills has grown
for this group, manual skills still remain the most important.
    In going forward, this paper has only shed light on a small part of the picture. The
policy response to these results is that if we want to increase wages of low skilled workers we
should invest in their skills. The results suggest that interpersonal skills have become much
more important for this group than they were before and that manual skills remain the most
important. While intuitively education seems like the clear way to raise cognitive skills, it
is not at all clear how we improve manual or interpersonal skills. Further progress on these
problems would focus on how to invest in skills, incorporation of this model into a general
equilibrium framework, and inclusion of other demographic groups.




                                              39
References
Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employ-
  ment and earnings. Handbook of Labor Economics 4, 1043­1171.

Aguiar, M., M. Bils, K. K. Charles, and E. Hurst (2018). Leisure luxuries and the labor supply
  of young men. NBER Working Paper 23552, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alsalam, N., M. Dahl, and T. DeLeire (2006). Changes in low-wage labor markets between
  1979 and 2005. Technical report, Congressional Budget Office: Washington DC.

Altonji, J. G., P. Bharadwaj, and F. Lange (2012). Changes in the characteristics of american
  youth: Implications for adult outcomes. Journal of Labor Economics 30 (4), 783­828.

Antonczyk, D., T. DeLeire, and B. Fitzenberger (2018). Polarization and rising wage in-
 equality: Comparing the u.s. and germany. Econometrics 6 (2), 1­33.

Atalay, E., P. Phongthiengtham, S. Sotelo, and D. Tannenbaum (2019). The evolution of
  work in the United States. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics (forthcom-
  ing).

Autor, D. and D. Dorn (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of
 the US labor market. The American Economic Review 103 (5), 1553­1597.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006). The polarization of the US labor
 market. American Economic Review 96 (2), 189­194.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003). The skill content of recent technological
 change: An empirical exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1279­
 1333.

Beaudry, P., D. A. Green, and B. M. Sand (2016). The great reversal in the demand for skill
  and cognitive tasks. Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1), S199­S247.

Bohm, M. (2019). The price of polarization: Estimating taks prices under routine-biased
  technical change. Unpublished manuscript, University of Bonn.

Borella, M., M. D. Nardi, and F. Yang (2019). The lost ones: The opportunities and outcomes
  of non-college educated americans born in the 1960s. NBER Macro Annual 34.



                                             40
Bowlus, A. and C. Robinson (2012). Human capital prices, productivity, and growth. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 102 (7), 3483­3515.

Burstein, A., E. Morales, and J. Vogel (2019). Changes in between-group inequality: Com-
  puters, occupations, and international trade. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 11 (2), 348­400.

Caines, C., F. Hoffmann, and G. Kambourov (2017). Complex-task biased technological
  change and the labor market. Review of Economic Dynamics 25, 298­319. Special Issue
  on Human Capital and Inequality.

Castex, G. and E. K. Dechter (2014). The changing roles of education and ability in wage
  determination. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4), 685­710.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2019). Housing booms, manufacturing
  decline and labour market outcomes. The Economic Journal 129 (617).

Cortes, G. M. (2016). Where have the middle-wage workers gone? a study of polarization
  using panel data. Journal of Labor Economics 34 (1), 63­105.

Deming, D. J. (2017). The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1593­1640.

Dinardo, J. and D. Card (2002). Skill-biased technological change and rising wage inequality:
  Some problems and puzzles. Journal of Labor Economics 20, 733­783.

Dix-Carneiro, R. (2014).    Trade liberalization and labor market dynamics.       Economet-
  rica 82 (3), 825­885.

French, E. and C. Taber (2011). Identification of models of the labor market. In O. Ashen-
  felter and D. Card (Eds.), The Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4A.

Gathmann, C. and U. Schönberg (2010). How general is human capital? a task-based
 approach. Journal of Labor Economics 28 (1), 1­49.

Goldin, C. D. and L. F. Katz (2009). The race between education and technology. Harvard
 University Press.

Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2014). Explaining job polarization: Routine-biased
 technological change and offshoring. American Economic Review 104 (8), 2509­26.

                                             41
Gottschalk, P., D. A. Green, and B. M. Sand (2015). Taking selection to task: Bounds
 on trends in occupational task prices for the US, 1984-2013. Unpublished manuscript,
 University of British Columbia.

Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and E. Renault (1993). Indirect inference. Journal of Applied
 Econometrics 8 (S1), S85­S118.

Guvenen, F., B. Kuruscu, S. Tanaka, and D. Wiczer (2019). Multidimensional skill mismatch.
 American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics (forthcoming).

Heckman, J. J. (1990). Varieties of selection bias. American Economic Review 80 (2), 313­
  318.

Heckman, J. J. and B. E. Honoré (1990). The empirical content of the Roy model. Econo-
  metrica 58 (5), 1121­1149.

Heckman, J. J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998). Explaining rising wage inequality: Explo-
  rations with a dynamic general equilibrium model of labor earnings with heterogeneous
  agents. Review of Economic Dynamics 1 (1), 1­58.

Huggett, M., G. Ventura, and A. Yaron (2011). Sources of lifetime inequality. American
 Economic Review 101 (7), 2923­54.

Johnson, M. and M. P. Keane (2013). A dynamic equilibrium model of the US wage structure,
  1968­1996. Journal of Labor Economics 31 (1), 1­49.

Juhn, C., K. M. Murphy, and B. Pierce (1993). Wage inequality and the rise in returns to
  skill. Journal of Political Economy , 410­442.

Kambourov, G. and I. Manovskii (2009). Occupational specificity of human capital. Inter-
 national Economic Review 50 (1), 63­115.

Kaplan, G. and S. Schulhofer-Wohl (2018). The changing dis-utility of work. Journal of
 Economic Perspectives 9 (2), 239­258.

Katz, L. and K. M. Murphy (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: Supply and
 demand factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1), 35­78.

Katz, L. F. and D. H. Autor (1999). Changes in the wage structure and earnings inequality.
 In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A, Volume 3,
 pp. 1463­1555.

                                           42
Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997). The career decisions of young men. Journal of
  Political Economy 105 (3), 473­522.

Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (2001). The effect of parental transfers and borrowing
  constraints on educational attainment. International Economic Review , 1051­1103.

Kim, C. and A. Sakamoto (2008). The rise of intra-occupational wage inequality in the
  united states, 1983 to 2002. American Sociological Review 73 (1), 129­157.

Kotlarski, I. (1967). On characterizing the gamma and the normal distributions. Pacific
  Journal of Mathematics 20 (1), 69­76.

Lee, D. and K. I. Wolpin (2006). Intersectoral labor mobility and the growth of the service
  sector. Econometrica 74 (1), 1­46.

Lemieux, T. (2006). Increasing residual wage inequality: Composition effects, noisy data, or
  rising demand for skill? American Economic Review 96 (3), 461­498.

Lindenlaub, I. (2017). Sorting multidimensional types: Theory and application. The Review
  of Economic Studies 84 (2), 718­789.

Lochner, L., Y. Park, and Y. Shin (2018). Wage dynamics and returns to unobserved skill.
  NBER Working Paper 24220, National Bureau of Economic Research.

MaCurdy, T. and T. Mroz (1995). Measuring macroeconomic shifts in wages from cohort
 specifications. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.

Michel, L., J. Schmitt, and H. Shierhoz (2013). Don't blame the robots: Assessing the job
 polarization explanation of growing wage inequality. Epi cepr working paper, Economic
 Policy Institute.

Mouw, T. and A. L. Kalleberg (2010). Occupations and the structure of wage inequality in
 the United States, 1980s to 2000s. American Sociological Review 75 (3), 402­431.

Neal, D. (1999). The complexity of job mobility among young men. Journal of Labor
  Economics 17 (2), 237­261.

Poletaev, M. and C. Robinson (2008). Human capital specificity: evidence from the dic-
  tionary of occupational titles and displaced worker surveys, 1984­2000. Journal of Labor
  Economics 26 (3), 387­420.

                                            43
Postel-Vinay, F. and J. Lise (2019). Multidimensional skills, sorting, and human capital
  accumulation. Unpublished manuscript, University College London.

Sanders, C. (2016). Skill accumulation, skill uncertainty, and occupational choice. Unpub-
  lished manuscript, Washington University in St. Louis.

Sanders, C. and C. Taber (2012). Life-cycle wage growth and heterogeneous human capital.
  Annual Review of Economics 4.

Scotese, C. (2013). Wage inequality, tasks, and occupations. Unpublished manuscript,
  Virginia Commonwealth University.

Slichter, S. (1950). Notes on the structure of wages. The Review of Economics and Statis-
   tics 32 (1), 80­91.

Sullivan, P. (2010). A dynamic analysis of educational attainment, occupational choices, and
  job search. International Economic Review 51 (1), 289­317.

Traiberman, S. (2019). Occupations and import competition. American Economic Re-
  view (forthcoming).

Willis, R. J. and S. Rosen (1979). Education and self-selection. Journal of Political Econ-
 omy 87 (5), S7­S36.

Yamaguchi, S. (2012). Tasks and heterogeneous human capital. Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 30 (1), 1­53.




                                            44
Appendix
A      Datasets description
ORG CPS Wages are calculated using Outgoing Rotation Group data from the Current
Population Survey for earnings years 1979-2017 for all male workers aged 20-60 with 12 years
of education or less who are not in the military, institutionalized or self-employed. We do
the same data trimming as Acemoglu and Autor (2011). Wages are weighted by CPS sample
weights. Hourly wages are equal to the logarithm of reported hourly earnings for those paid
by the hour and the logarithm of usual weekly earnings divided by hours worked last week for
non-hourly workers. Top-coded earnings observations are multiplied by 1.5. Hourly earners
of below $1.675/hour in 1982 dollars are dropped, as are hourly wages exceeding 1/35th
the top-coded value of weekly earnings. All earnings are deflated by the chain-weighted
(implicit) price deflator for personal consumption expenditures (PCE). Allocated earnings
observations are excluded in all years, except where allocation flags are unavailable. We
start from the cohort that left or graduated from high school no latter than 1915 and we end
with cohorts that left or graduated from high school no earlier than 2017.

NLSY79 We use the 1979-2015 survey years of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
1979 (NLSY79). The NLSY79 is a representative sample of US households that was admin-
istered yearly from 1979-1994 by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and once every two years
since. We use both the core sample and the supplemental sample that over-represents eco-
nomically disadvantaged respondents and minorities. We reweight observations to have a
representative sample. In any given year, we only consider earnings observations for individ-
uals who work 30 or more total hours in a week and who work full time at least 20 of the past
24 weeks. We construct measures of labor market experience using the work history file. We
define work experience and occupation-specific experience as, respectively, the sum of weeks
worked since labor market entry and the sum of weeks worked in a particular occupation
since labor market entry.17

O*NET We use O*NET to obtain data on the skill intensity of different occupations.
It is a representative survey of occupations developed by the U.S. Department of Labor.
  17
    This definition of occupation-specific tenure is different from its model counterpart presented below
which we simplify for computational purposes. It is also less affected by misclassification errors.



                                                 A -1
Individuals were asked to complete a survey asking about the tasks and activities workers
perform in those occupations.

NLSY97 We follow Deming (2017) and combine NLSY79 and NLSY97. We restrict the
sample to ages 25­33 to exploit the overlap in ages across surveys. This means comparing the
returns to different skills for individuals of similar ages during the late 1980s and early 1990s,
compared to the more recent 2004­2015 period. We use respondents' standardized scores on
the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) to proxy for cognitive skill as in Altonji et al.
(2012). And following Deming (2017), we construct a measure of social skills to maximize
the comparability of the two measures of social skills across NLSY waves. All test scores are
normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1.

                   Table A1: Occupation Categories Low Educated Men
                  Occupations                              Label
              1   Executive, Administrative, and Managerial        Managers
                  Professional Specialty
              2   Technicians                                      Clerical
                  Sales
                  Administrative Support
              3   Housekeeping and Cleaning                        Services
                  Protective Service
                  Other Services
              4   Farming, Forestry, and Fishing                   Operators
                  Machine Operators, Assemblers, Inspectors
              5   Mechanics and Repairers                          Mechanics
              6   Construction Trades, Extractive                  Construction
              7   Precision Production                             Production
              8   Transportation and Material Moving               Transportation




B     Occupation share in the Census/ACS
We use the Census to assess the robustness of our results on the evolution of occupation
composition and the share of men not-working that we reported in the main text using CPS
data.

                                              B -2
    We use data from the 1980 , 1990, 2000 Census and the 2001-2016 American Community
Survey (ACS). We include all males with at most 12 years of education between the ages
of 20 and 60. We exclude individuals in the military. The number of observations range
between 284,400 in 2002 and 3,816,849 in 2000.
    Figure B1 reports the share not-working in the Census and in the CPS.

                       Figure B1: Share not-working by year: Census and CPS



               0.350


               0.325


               0.300


               0.275


               0.250


               0.225


               0.200


               0.175
                        1979            1990           2000     2010      2017
                        cps    census           year




    The trend is about similar in both sample with a rise until 2010 and a decrease since.
However, the level is about 3 percentage point higher in the Census since 2010.
    Figure B2 reports the occupational composition in the CPS and in the Census for all
relevant years. Overall, the numbers are reassuringly close to each other. Between 1982 and
1983, there is an apparent discontinuity in the proportions of managers and the proportions of
clerical in the CPS data. It can be attributed to the change in the occupational classification
scheme. Up to 1982, occupations were coded using the 1970 Census classification scheme. In
1983 (and up to 1991), occupations were coded using the 1980 Census classification scheme.
    To smooth out the discontinuity, we assume the CPS data have a constant share of
manager misclassified as clerical worker for the year between 1979 and 1982. To recover the
bias in the CPS data, we assume the proportion of managers in 1980 is measured without
error in the Census. The line "CPS-corrected" reports the corrected occupational share.


                                               B -3
            Figure B2: Occupational composition: Census and CPS


              Managers                         Clerical         Services                Operators
0.200                        0.200                   0.200                   0.200
0.175                        0.175                   0.175                   0.175
0.150                        0.150                   0.150                   0.150
0.125                        0.125                   0.125                   0.125
0.100                        0.100                   0.100                   0.100
0.075                        0.075                   0.075                   0.075
0.050                        0.050                   0.050                   0.050
0.025                        0.025                   0.025                   0.025
0.000                        0.000                   0.000                   0.000
        1979 1990 2000 20102017 1979 1990 2000 20102017 1979 1990 2000 20102017 1979 1990 2000 20102017
               Mechan.                         Constr.          Precis.                  Transp.
0.200                        0.200                   0.200                   0.200
0.175                        0.175                   0.175                   0.175
0.150                        0.150                   0.150                   0.150
0.125                        0.125                   0.125                   0.125
0.100                        0.100                   0.100                   0.100
0.075                        0.075                   0.075                   0.075
0.050                        0.050                   0.050                   0.050
0.025                        0.025                   0.025                   0.025
0.000                        0.000                   0.000                   0.000
        1979 1990 2000 20102017 1979 1990 2000 20102017 1979 1990 2000 20102017 1979 1990 2000 20102017

               cps       cps with correction         census




                                               B -4
C     Probability of going to college by cohort
We allow labor market endowments to differ across cohorts. Figure C1 reports the probability
of going to college by year-of-birth in the Census and ACS. We report two different measures.
The first measure simply calculates the fraction of the sample that goes to college in the
census data for all men aged between 20 and 60. To calculate the second measure, we first
regress a dummy variable taking the value one for individuals that went to college and zero
otherwise. The regressors are a set of dummies for each age and for each cohort. We then
report the cohort fixed effects.

                      Figure C1: Probability of going to college by cohort



               0.60


               0.55


               0.50


               0.45


               0.40


               0.35


               0.30


               0.25
                      1920         1930           1940        1950          1960     1970   1980   1990
                        raw data       cohort fixed effects          Year of birth




                                                                     C -1
D      Identification
Here we show formally the identification results described in Section 5 of the paper. We
begin by enhancing the notation introduced in the text. We define

    · C to be the set of people (indexed by i) who enter the market in year t

    · J to be the the set of the 4J different labor market histories

    · j  to generically denote ahistory in J

    · j  (e) the eth element of j 

    ·  to be the unconditional variance covariance matrix of i .

    · P  {(jt , jt ) , j = 1, ..., J, t = , ...,  + 4} to be the set of prices faced by a cohort
      that enters at time  . We normalize jt = 1 for one fixed occupation j in one given
      year t.

    · p to be a generic realization of P

For the following 3 the notation already incorporates the assumption that there are no cohort
effects.

    · j  (p ) to be the probability of choosing sequence j  given prices p .

    · Gj  (i ; p ) to be the c.d.f. of i conditional on choosing sequence j  when faced with
      prices p .

    · S (p )  {(j  (p ), Gj  (·; p )) , j   J } to be the supply function which is identical
      across cohorts

We make the following additional assumptions

    · J is at least 5

    · as in the paper the dimension of i is three

    · Normalize location: E (i ) = 0

    · Normalize scale: 1,1 = 1 (note that this is a different normalization than we use in
      the body of the paper-but is useful here)

                                               D -1
We want to identify the following components of the model:

   · Prices jt and jt for both the panel and cross section data

   · Skill depreciation D
                                                             2
   · Unconditional distribution of i and uie (which includes w and )

   · Returns to experience j 

   · Supply of skill i as a function of prices S (p )

We do this in the 5 steps listed in Section 5. Prices are identified in steps 3 and 5, depreciation
in step 1, the unconditional distributions in 1 and 4, return to experience in 2, and the supply
of skills in 4.
    We show that the model is generically identified, one might be able to construct very
special cases of parameter combinations that are not identified.

        2
Step 1: u , D, and 
                                      2
In this subsection we will identify u   , D, and . This part of identification uses the panel
                              2            2                2
data. We will also identify j   j j , j      j DDj , and j    j DDDDj for each j which
are used used in intermediate steps.
    Here we use identification at infinity in a strong way. We assume there is a three-year
period ,  + 1, and  + 2 for which

   · the cohort that enters in period  all work in occupation j for the first three years.

   · the cohort that enters in  + 1 all workin in j there for two years.

   · the cohort that enters in  + 2 all work in occupation j for that year.

This is produced by extreme versions of the prices, but we do not need to observe the prices
themselves to see when the selection is extreme.
   We get the following relationships:




                                               D -2
                                              2       2
                            var (wi | i  C ) =j j j + u
                                               2             2
                          var (wi +1 | i  C ) =j +1 j D Dj + u
                                               2               2
                         var (wigt+2 | i  C ) =j +2 j DD DDj + u
                                               2          2
                       var (wi +1 | i  C +1 ) =j +1 j j + u
                                               2             2
                       var (wi +2 | i  C +1 ) =j +2 j D Dj + u
                                               2          2
                       var (wi +2 | i  C +2 ) =j +2 j j + u


Solving algebra it is straightforward to show

    2
    j j j
        [var (wi +2 | i  C +2 ) - var (wi | i  C )] [var (wi +1 | i  C ) - var (wi | i  C )]
=
    var (wi +1 | i  C +1 ) + var (wi +2 | i  C +1 ) - var (wi +2 | i  C +2 ) - var (wi +1 | i  C )
          [var (wi +1 | i  C +1 ) - var (wi | i  C )] [var (wi +1 | i  C +1 ) - var (wi | i  C )]
    -
      var (wi +1 | i  C +1 ) + var (wi +2 | i  C +1 ) - var (wi +2 | i  C +2 ) - var (wi +2 | i  C )


                         2                     2
                         u =var (wi | i  C ) - j j j
                      2                                                     2
                      j  +1   [var (wi +1 | i  C +1 ) - var (wi | i  C )] + j j j
                        2
                            =                          2
                      j                               j j j
                      2                                                     2
                      j  +2   [var (wi +2 | i  C +2 ) - var (wi | i  C )] + j j j
                        2
                            =                          2
                      j                               j j j
                                2
              2
                              j                           2
              j j DDj =       2
                                    var (wi +1 | i  C ) - u
                              j  +1
                                2
          2
                              j                           2
          j j DDDDj =         2
                                    var (wi +2 | i  C ) - u
                              j  +2

                                              2
Note that the second expression shows that u    is identified. We can do this for each occu-
pation j = 1, ..., J .
                               2          2                    2
   From this step, we identify j j j , j    j DDj , and j        j DDDDj for each occu-
                                                                                          2
pation. If we have J occupations this gives us 3J equations in J + 5 + 3 unknowns: J j
parameters, 5 elements of  (since there is a scale normalization) and 3 elements of D. As
long as J  5 we have more equations than parameters and the parameters are generically
identified.


                                              D -3
Step 2: j 
There are a total of 4J different histories through the first three periods leading to different
j  . Using the full support condition, for any j  we find a   such that

   · Cohort C  chooses history j  with probability one

   · Cohort C  +1 chooses job j1 in period   + 1 with probability one

   · C  +2 chooses job j2 in period   + 2 with probability one

   · C  +3 chooses job j3 in period   + 3 with probability one

First, note that for each  =   ,   + 1,   + 2,and   + 2,

                                            2                      2
                         V ar (wi | i  C ) =j  (e) j  (e) j  (e) + u



                                                                 2
We have identified everything else in this expression other than j  (e) so that is identified

(we are assuming it is non-negative).
   Then notice that for each e = 1, 2, 3


                              E (wi  +e | i  C  ) - E (wi  +e | i  C  +e )
                     j  e =                       2
                                                j   (e)



We can do this for any history j   J .


Step 3:  and  for any panel data cohort
Now choose any arbitrary cohort C with the only restriction that all potential histories
j   J can be observed for this cohort. Even though we haven't yet identified p we can
identify the population probability of choosing each history j  (p ). While we have not yet
shown the function is identified, we can directly identify the population probability of each
sequence which is j  (p ) evaluated at the true (but still unknown) value of p . We condition
on cohorts for which j  (p ) > 0 for all j   J .
   In this section we will use first and second moments to identify the parameters. Let

                                 µ j  E (i | i  C , ji = j  )
                                 j  V ar (i | i  C , ji = j  )


                                              D -4
For each cohort×history we have 4 first moments:

             E (wi +e | i  C , ji = j  ) =j  (e) +e + j  (e) +e µ j  De j  (e) + j  e

for e = 0, ..., 3 where j  e is the relevant experience profile.
    We have 4 different variances

               V ar (wi +e | i  C , ji = j  ) =j
                                               2                 e     e         2
                                                  (e) +e j  (e) D  j  D j  (e) + u




for e = 0, ..., 3 and 6 covariances

         Cov (wi +e , wi + | i  C , ji = j  ) = j  (e) +e j  ( ) + j  (e) De  j  D j  ( )

for (e, ) = (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3) , (1, 2) , (1, 3), and (2, 3).
    This gives a total of 14J 4 equations and (3 + 6)J 4 + 4J + 4J unknowns. Each history
µ h has 3 parameters and  h has 6. Furthermore we have 4J  s and 4J  s.
    To fix scale and location we need to fit the population values that is we know

                                                     j  (p )µ j  =0
                                             j d J

                                      j  (p )  j  + µ j  µ j  =
                               j  J


As long as J  2 the parameters are generically identified.


Stage 4 Supply of skill S (·)
The goal of this section is identification of the supply function for a cohort-that is for a given
vector of prices (j +e , j +e ) for e = 0, .., 3 we show that we can identify the probability of
each job history, and the distribution of i conditional on choosing that history.
   From the previous section we know that we can identify all of the relevant  and  for
any cohort (except extreme cases in which some profiles are not observed). We invert that
argument, given the support conditions, for any set of prices we can find a cohort that faces
those prices. Let that cohort be C . We condition on data from that cohort and show that
we can non-parametrically identify the supply of skill.
   For each history we can directly identify the probability of choosing that history, j  (p )
as well as the joint distribution of wages over the four periods conditional on that history.

                                               D -5
Thus we need to show that from the conditional distribution of lifetime wages we can identify
the conditional distribution of i for each history j  .
   Let u be the characteristic function of the measurement error and let w      j  (s) be the
characteristic function of

  wi - j  (0) wi +e - j  (1) +1 - j  (1) +e j  1e wi +2 - j  (2) +2 - j  (2) +2 j  2 wi +3 - j  (3) +3 - j  (3)
             ,                                   ,                                  ,
    j  (0)                j  (1) +1                           j  (2) +2                          j  (3) +3

Note that all of these terms are identified so the characteristic function can be identified as
well. Since we use i to index individuals we use  to be the imaginary number so


                           3
                                       wi +e - j  (e) +e - j  (e) +e j  e
     w
      j  (s) E     exp          se                                                   | i  C , ji = j 
                          e=0
                                                   j  (e) +e
                           3
                                                           uit+e
             =E    exp          se j  (e) De i +                         | i  C , ji = j 
                          e=0
                                                          j  (e) +e
                             3                                                   3
                                                                                             se
             =E    exp               se j  (e) De i        | i  C , ji = j           u
                            e=0                                                e=0
                                                                                         j  (e) +e

Note that this first expression is directly identified from the data and is the characteristic
function of the vector of four wages adjusted for prices levels and  as described below
conditional on history j  and cohort C .
    Our goal now is to manipulate this to get the characteristic function of i by rewriting
this to make it similar to the Kotlarski (1967) case.
    We will focus on the random variable from the first period, hi0 .
    The variable  which has support will play the role of the second index in Kotlarski.
We will manipulate the model into that form by choosing (s1 ( ), s2 ( ), s3 ( )) so that

                                       3
                                            se ( )De j  (e) = j  (0) .
                                      e=1


Next let  j  be the characteristic function of hi0 conditional on i  C and ji = j  . Let

                                                 3
                                                             se ( )
                                      ( )             u                  .
                                                e=1
                                                             j  (e) +e




                                                      D -6
Then, for any s0 and  we can identify

              w
               j  (s0 , s1 ( ), s2 ( ), s3 ( ))
                                          3
            =E     exp  s0 j0 +                se ( )j  (e) De     i       | i  C , ji = j  ( )
                                         e=1

            =E (exp ( (s0 +  ) i ) | i  C , ji = j  ) u (s0 ) ( )
            = j   (s0 +  )u (s0 ) ( )

This expression is analogous to the characteristic for Kotlarski's lemma from which we know
that we can identify u .
    To get the supply of skills from this we let r be a three dimensional vector that will
index the conditional characteristic function of the three dimensional vector i . We then use
s(r) to map the three dimensional distribution of i into the four dimensional distribution
of wages. We do that by defining s(r) so that s3 (r) = 0 and the other three satisfy

                                                  2
                                         r=           se (r) De j  (e) .
                                                e=0


Then we can identify


                           w
                            j  (s(r ))
                          3         se (r)
                          e=0   u   je  +e
                                         2
                    =E      exp                se (r) je De i          | i  C , ji = j 
                                       e=0

                    =E (exp (r i ) | i  C , ji = j  )

which is the conditional characteristic function of i . Since the conditional characteristic
function is identified, the conditional distribution Gj  (·; p ) is as well.


Stage 5: Prices from Cross Section
Once we have non-parametrically estimated the supply function it is straight forward to see
how prices can be identified. We have 8J different parameters but J 4 different histories. That
gives us J 4 different conditional probabilities of choosing each option and J 4 different full 4


                                                       D -7
dimensional joint distribution of wages. It is clear that the prices are generically identified.




                                             D -8
E     Auxiliary parameters based on Deming (2017)
Combining NLSY79 and NLSY97, Deming (2017) finds that social skills are a significantly
more important predictor of full-time employment and wages in the NLSY97 cohort. We
reproduce this result for our sample of low skilled men. We estimate the following equations
with either the log hourly wage (conditional on employment) or an indicator for full-time
employment as the dependent variable yit :

    yit =  + 1 COGi + 2 SSi + 3 COGi × NLSY97i + 4 SSi × NLSY97i + Xit +                it .


The regressors includes cognitive skills COGi and social skills SSi , To test the hypothesis
that the returns to skills have changed over time, we include the interaction between skills
and an indicator for being in the NLSY97 sample NLSY97i . The Xit vector includes age and
year fixed effects and the dummy variable NLSY97i .
   The results are in Table E1. A one standard deviation increase in cognitive skills increases

         Table E1: Reproduction of Table 4 for low skilled men in Deming (2017)


                                             Employment         Wage
                                                         (1)         (2)
                       Cognitive                    0.074*** 0.126***
                                                      (0.004)    (0.008)
                       Social                           0.005      0.010
                                                      (0.004)    (0.008)
                       Cognitive*NLSY97                 0.010 -0.057***
                                                      (0.009)    (0.014)
                       Social*NLSY97                0.041***      0.030*
                                                      (0.008)    (0.014)
                       age FE                            Yes        Yes
                       year FE                           Yes        Yes
                       NLSY97                            Yes        Yes
                       N                              40,227     32,106
                       R2                              0.065      0.108


the probability of employment by 7.5% and we cannot reject that the effect is the same in
NLSY79 and NLSY97. It increases wages by 12.6% but the effect has decreased over time by

                                             E -1
6 percentage points. We cannot reject that social skills have no effect on either the probability
of working or log wages in NLSY79. In NLSY97, a one standard deviation increase in social
skills increases the probability of employment by 4.1%. And it increases wages by 3%.




                                              E -2
F        Parameter Estimates: Life Cycle
F.1       Workers
Table F1 reports heterogeneity across individuals in terms of preferences, endowment and
luck.

                                  Table F1: Heterogeneity


 Skill   Endowment              Measurement               Shocks
 1       0.4194 (0.0844)        E 0.8414 (0.0007)                28.3825 (2.2565)
 2       0.4061 (0.0388)                                         95.682 (1.9503)
 3       0.3898 (0.0286)        u    0.2384 (0.0685)
 12      0.0812 (0.0262)                                  search cost (deterministic)
 13      0.0036 (0.0047)        ~1   0.0397 (0.0184)            251.4717 (0.2972)
 21      0.0069 (0.0053)        ~2   0.8149 (0.0325)


    The actual magnitude of the skill depends on its value in different occupations, so the
levels are not directly comparable. However, the levels would be directly comparable in an
occupation that weighted them equally so we proceed to make these comparisons. Cognitive
skills are the most unequally distributed at labor market entry, followed by manual skills
and finally inter-personal skills.
    Occupation-specific shocks are more predictable than search costs. There are large costs
of attempting to switch occupations, though they are weighted against the variance of id-
iosyncratic shocks which is also large.
    We find large measurement error in wages and it is on the higher side of estimates in
related papers. Much of this is likely due to earnings shocks that we abstracted from. The
interactions between human capital shocks and technological change is an important avenue
for future research.
    Each year, we estimate about 10% of individuals misreport their occupations. This
number is reassuringly similar to estimates in the literature even though they are identified
using different approaches. In Neal (1999) and Kambourov and Manovskii (2009), E is
set using "spurious" transitions in the NLSY. These are all the within-firm occupational
transitions where an individual works in occupation j0 at both time t and t + 2, and works
in j1 = j0 at time t even though he remained in these three consecutive periods with the
same employer. About 10% of occupational shifts are "spurious" transitions according to

                                            F -1
        Table F2: Offer arrival rate, constant and slope of the wage function (until 1979)


                       Occupation        Offer proba.       Wage cons. Wage slope
                       Managers          0.34 (0.01)        1.94 (0.12) 1.11 (0.1)
                       Clerical          0.57 (0.14)        2.01 (0.07)    1 (0)
                       Services          0.84 (0.02)        1.93 (0.04) 0.86 (0.18)
                       Operators          1.0 (0.11)        2.1 (0.08) 0.87 (0.1)
                       Mechanics          0.4 (0.03)        2.17 (0.27) 0.84 (0.18)
                       Construction      0.51 (0.01)        2.26 (0.03) 0.98 (0.15)
                       Precision         0.37 (0.02)        2.28 (0.07) 0.91 (0.17)
                       Transport          1.0 (0.04)        2.06 (0.04) 0.88 (0.14)
Note : The asterisk (*) indicates normalized parameters.


this metric.


F.2        Occupations
Table F2 reports occupation specific parameters that are identified using the NLSY79. There
exists a wide dispersion in the availability of jobs and the wage schedule across occupations.
Applicants to become operators, work in service or in transport occupations have a high
chance of being successful.18 On the other hand, the probability of being successful after
applying to become a manager or precision worker is only around 0.3. The slope with respect
to skills is the highest in management.


F.3        Sources of Wage Growth
To understand the role of each skills in wage growth, we decompose additively log wage
growth by simulating career decisions. This take into account occupation transitions and
more generally people' choices. In simulating this we ignore technological change and assume
that the  ,  and  do not change over time so we suppress t subscripts on these variables.
To illustrate the decomposition, for simplicity consider the case in which a 1j = 2j for
each occupation. Letting wit be the log wage of individual i at time t we can write

                                      wit = jit + jit jit it + it ,
  18
       Though, it became harder for operators over time as we discussed in the body of the paper.



                                                     F -2
where we use the shorthand notation it =  (jit , it ). Then

                    wit - wit-1 =jit - jit-1 + jit jit - jit-1 jit-1 it
                                          c     c    c
                                  + jit-1 jit-1
                                                it - it -1
                                          i     i    i
                                  + jit-1 jit-1
                                                it - it -1
                                          m      m    m
                                  + jit-1 j it-1
                                                 it - it -1

                                  + 1 (jit = jit-1 ) jit-1 [it - it-1 ]
                                  + 1 (jit = jit-1 ) -jit-1 it-1 .

The restrictions on  and  mean that for stayers, the first term disappears and wage growth
exclusively comes from skill variations: general t or occupation-specific t . For switchers,
the first term in which , , and  change will be a component. Also switchers will lose the
value of their occupation specific human capital (jit-1 it-1 ).
    In practice we can not use the simple formula above because 1j = 2j but rather use a
linear approximation to these equations.

                    wit - wit-1 =fjit jit it + it - fjit-1 jit it + it

                                  +   j
                                      c
                                       it-1
                                            c
                                            it   c
                                               - it -1

                                  +   j
                                      i
                                       it-1
                                            i
                                            it   i
                                               - it -1

                                  +   j
                                      m
                                       it-1
                                            m
                                            it   m
                                               - it -1

                                  + 1 (jit = jit-1 )  [it - it-1 ]
                                  + 1 (jit = jit-1 ) [- it-1 ]

where

                         fjit-1 jit it + it - fjit-1 jit-1 it-1 + it-1
                     =
                                jit it + it - jit-1 it-1 + it-1

Details of this can be found in the following section. The results of the decomposition of the
five terms above is presented in Figure F1.




                                             F -1
              Figure F1: Sources of wage growth: decomposition


0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1



0.0
       20         25           30       35        40          45     50          55
      Cognitive        Inter-Personal    Manual        Specific    Occupations




                                              F -2
G      Wage Growth Decomposition
We use the steady-state values of the ,  and  and therefore omit the t subscript on these
variables. The wage function is:

              wit = jit + 1jit (it jit + it ) × it jit + it  hjit

                 + 2jit it jit + it - h                                 
                                       jit + 1jit hjit × it jit + it > hjit .


Stayers There are three different cases to consider:

  1.    it jit + it  h                                                                           
                      jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1  hjit-1 + it jit +it > hjit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1 > hjit-1   >
       0.


                 wit =    1jit it jit + it  h                          
                                             jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1  hjit-1


                      + 2jit it jit + it > h                           
                                            jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1 > hjit-1


                      × (jit it + it )


  2.    it jit + it > h                          
                       jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1  hjit-1     = 1.


               wit = 2jit it jit + it - h            
                                         jit + 1jit hjit-1 - it-1 jit-1 + it-1

                      
                    = j it
                           (it jit + it - it-1 )

       where  is a linear approximation of the two slopes.

  3.    it jit + it  h                           
                      jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1 > hjit-1     = 1.


               wit = 2jit hjit-1 - it-1 jit-1 + it-1      + 1jit it jit + it - hjit


       we use as in case 2 a linear approximation of the two slopes.

Switchers There are four different cases to consider. Let it = jit - jit-1 .




                                             G -3
1.   it jit  h                          
              jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1  hjit-1     = 1.


                         wit =it + 1jit jit - 1jit-1 jit-1 it

                                 + 1jit-1 jit-1 it - 1jit-1 it-1


2.   it jit > h                           
               jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1 > hjit-1   = 1.


                wit =it + (1jit - 2jit ) h                       
                                          jit - 1jit-1 - 2jit-1 hjit-1

                        + 2jit jit - 2jit-1 jit-1 it

                        + 2jit-1 jit-1 it - 2jit-1 it-1


3.   it jit > h                          
               jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1  hjit-1    = 1.


                          wit =it + (1jit - 2jit ) hjit

                                  + 2jit jit - 1jit-1 jit-1 it

                                  + 1jit-1 jit-1 it - 1jit-1 it-1


4.   it jit  h                           
              jit × it-1 jit-1 + it-1 > hjit-1    = 1.


                          wit =it - 1jit-1 - 2jit-1 hjit-1

                                  + 1jit jit - 2jit-1 jit-1 it

                                  + 2jit-1 jit-1 it - 2jit-1 it-1




                                        G -4
H     Auxiliary Parameters not reported in the main text
This Section presents the auxiliary parameters calculated in the NLSY79, CPS and data
simulated from the model at the estimated parameters values.
   Figure H1 and Figure H2 report, respectively, occupation share in the population and
occupation share by age. We use the CPS data but restricts to NLSY79 cohorts.

                   Figure H1: Occupation Share - CPS data, NLSY cohorts

                                                     Occupation share
                           model
                           data
            0.20


            0.15


            0.10


            0.05


            0.00      Managers   Clerical   Services Operators Mechanics Construction Precision Transport Not-working




                                                               H -1
Figure H2: Occupation Share by Age - CPS data, NLSY cohorts




             Managers                  Clerical               Services
0.35                            0.35                0.35
0.30                            0.30                0.30
0.25                            0.25                0.25
0.20                            0.20                0.20
0.15                            0.15                0.15
0.10                            0.10                0.10
0.05                            0.05                0.05
0.00                         0.00                    0.00
       20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57
             Operators                 Mechan.                 Constr.
0.35                            0.35                0.35
0.30                            0.30                0.30
0.25                            0.25                0.25
0.20                            0.20                0.20
0.15                            0.15                0.15
0.10                            0.10                0.10
0.05                            0.05                0.05
0.00                         0.00                    0.00
       20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57
               Precis.                 Transp.                Not-work.
0.35                            0.35                0.35
0.30                            0.30                0.30
0.25                            0.25                0.25
0.20                            0.20                0.20
0.15                            0.15                0.15
0.10                            0.10                0.10
0.05                            0.05                0.05
0.00                         0.00                    0.00
       20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 57

           model         data




                                       H -2
  Figure H3 reports different quantiles of the wage distribution by occupation in the
NLSY79 cohorts using CPS data.

Figure H3: Quantiles of the Wage Distribution by Occupation - CPS data, NLSY cohorts



               3.50


               3.25


               3.00


               2.75


               2.50


               2.25


               2.00


               1.75
                      Managers   Clerical   Services   Operators   Mechan.   Constr.   Precis.   Transp.
                          data   model




    Figure H4 plots auto-correlations of wages by age. The horizontal lines represent au-
tocorrelations without controlling for age. Figure H5 plots auto-correlations of wages by
occupation. The upper-panel restricts the sample to stayers. The lower-panel restricts the
sample to switchers. Table H1 reports age-earnings profile by occupation in the NLSY79
cohorts using the CPS data. Figure H6 reports different quantiles of the wage distribution by
year and occupation in the CPS. These auxiliary parameters identify prices once we control
for selection using the previous moments. Table H2 and Table H3 report the percentage of
stayers by age and occupation, respectively, annually and bi-annually. Table H4 reports
the mean difference in the log wages by current and lagged occupation. Table H5 and Table
H6 report the same statistics separately for individuals with, respectively, experience and
tenure, above and below median. Finally, Table H7 reports the same statistics separately for
above median experience individuals with tenure above or below median.          Table H8 and
Table H9 report mean wages by, respectively, experience and tenure for each occupation.
Table H10 reports the regression coefficients from Deming's regression. Table H11 and Table
H12 report the occupation distribution by, respectively, cognitive skills and social skills.


                                                            H -3
   Figure H4: Auto-correlations wages levels by age - NLSY79

   0.8
                  model
                  data
                  population: model
                  population: data

   0.7




   0.6




   0.5




   0.4



         20             22                 24          26          28                   30         32             34         36
                                                                         age




Figure H5: Auto-correlations wages levels by occupation - NLSY79

                                                                        Stayers
   1.0

   0.8

   0.6

   0.4

   0.2

   0.0
                  Managers          Clerical    Services    Operators             Mechan.    Constr.    Precis.        Transp.
                                                                    Switchers
   1.0

   0.8

   0.6

   0.4

   0.2

   0.0
                  Managers          Clerical    Services    Operators             Mechan.    Constr.    Precis.        Transp.


          model              data




                                                                 H -4
                     Table H1: Age earnings profile by occupation - CPS data, NLSY cohorts


       Age   Managers     Clerical     Services   Operators    Mechan.      Constr.     Precis.     Transp.
       20    2.25 2.17   2.24 2.22   2.05 2.08    2.27 2.26   2.31 2.29   2.44 2.35   2.39 2.35   2.21 2.25
       21    2.35 2.24   2.28 2.32   2.08 2.08    2.35 2.25   2.43 2.36   2.51 2.43   2.51 2.38   2.29 2.3
       22    2.44 2.35   2.36 2.38   2.11 2.14    2.37 2.3    2.43 2.44   2.53 2.41   2.53 2.37   2.33 2.38
       23    2.48 2.42   2.43 2.42   2.15 2.15    2.41 2.34   2.51 2.46    2.6 2.41   2.57 2.38   2.35 2.39
       24    2.57 2.43   2.46 2.46   2.18 2.14     2.4 2.38   2.55 2.48   2.63 2.42   2.59 2.43   2.36 2.39
       25    2.58 2.53   2.49 2.52   2.19 2.2      2.4 2.41   2.56 2.56   2.63 2.47   2.64 2.48   2.39 2.43
       26    2.65 2.59   2.56 2.53    2.2 2.22    2.43 2.43   2.56 2.59   2.65 2.5    2.66 2.52   2.44 2.44
       27    2.74 2.55   2.56 2.59   2.23 2.2     2.49 2.45   2.62 2.6    2.72 2.52   2.66 2.52   2.46 2.45
       28    2.73 2.6    2.58 2.6    2.23 2.29     2.5 2.47   2.65 2.63   2.74 2.61   2.68 2.58   2.48 2.47
       29    2.67 2.63   2.61 2.65   2.28 2.32    2.49 2.52   2.66 2.7    2.71 2.57   2.73 2.56   2.45 2.51
       30    2.78 2.73   2.62 2.66   2.31 2.33     2.5 2.52   2.71 2.73   2.68 2.65   2.73 2.67   2.52 2.53
       31    2.78 2.78   2.67 2.71   2.32 2.28    2.55 2.55   2.68 2.75   2.74 2.63   2.73 2.65   2.53 2.53
       32    2.85 2.84   2.66 2.71   2.31 2.36    2.52 2.56   2.71 2.79   2.76 2.7    2.74 2.73   2.53 2.57
       33     2.8 2.86   2.69 2.76   2.31 2.35    2.53 2.59   2.71 2.78   2.75 2.74   2.72 2.74   2.5 2.59
       34    2.91 2.99   2.69 2.74   2.35 2.41    2.52 2.57   2.72 2.85   2.78 2.77   2.76 2.78   2.51 2.59
       35    2.87 2.94   2.73 2.79   2.33 2.48    2.57 2.59   2.8 2.82    2.77 2.78   2.79 2.76   2.57 2.66
       36    2.93 2.97   2.78 2.79   2.35 2.48    2.57 2.62   2.81 2.85   2.82 2.82   2.79 2.76   2.57 2.64




H -5
       37    2.99 3.0    2.75 2.82   2.37 2.5     2.59 2.62   2.83 2.86   2.82 2.83    2.8 2.8    2.57 2.66
       38    2.96 2.99   2.77 2.78   2.38 2.48    2.65 2.62   2.84 2.89   2.86 2.86   2.86 2.85   2.64 2.67
       39    3.01 3.03   2.77 2.83   2.35 2.5     2.65 2.63   2.86 2.89   2.84 2.83   2.88 2.85   2.65 2.68
       40     3.1 3.09   2.83 2.84   2.41 2.49    2.63 2.66   2.88 2.85   2.87 2.86   2.82 2.87   2.66 2.69
       41    3.05 3.1    2.83 2.81   2.44 2.54    2.66 2.64   2.89 2.91   2.88 2.86   2.87 2.92   2.65 2.71
       42    3.09 3.06   2.89 2.83   2.51 2.49    2.65 2.67   2.88 2.92   2.86 2.86   2.84 2.85   2.66 2.67
       43    3.14 3.09   2.82 2.85   2.51 2.52     2.7 2.67   2.97 2.85   2.89 2.88   2.91 2.83   2.69 2.71
       44    3.14 3.11   2.89 2.86   2.48 2.53    2.67 2.65   2.92 2.95   2.97 2.87   2.91 2.93   2.72 2.71
       45    3.18 3.16   2.85 2.8    2.44 2.51    2.74 2.63   2.92 2.9    2.95 2.87   2.84 2.88   2.71 2.66
       46    3.17 3.11   2.83 2.8    2.44 2.54    2.65 2.67   2.94 2.87   2.91 2.84   2.87 2.89   2.69 2.72
       47    3.14 3.11   2.84 2.81   2.48 2.51    2.68 2.63   2.97 2.86   2.89 2.84   2.88 2.89   2.67 2.68
       48    3.22 3.12   2.83 2.75   2.48 2.49    2.69 2.65   2.94 2.94   2.94 2.8    2.89 2.86   2.7 2.71
       49    3.18 3.18   2.86 2.78   2.45 2.5     2.69 2.6    3.0 2.89    2.95 2.8    2.93 2.82   2.74 2.67
       50    3.18 3.1    2.85 2.76   2.51 2.45     2.7 2.56   2.92 2.8    2.91 2.8    2.87 2.9    2.7 2.68
       51    3.18 3.1    2.84 2.67   2.48 2.49    2.69 2.59    3.0 2.84   2.91 2.81   2.92 2.83   2.69 2.65
       52    3.22 3.08   2.86 2.7    2.52 2.48     2.7 2.57   2.91 2.79   3.01 2.79   2.85 2.8    2.71 2.63
       53    3.18 3.09   2.82 2.65    2.5 2.45    2.68 2.62   2.95 2.82   2.98 2.71   2.82 2.83   2.74 2.64
       54    3.22 3.09   2.87 2.63   2.54 2.45    2.73 2.59   2.92 2.73   2.95 2.73   2.91 2.84    2.7 2.6
       55    3.17 3.07   2.76 2.48   2.44 2.42     2.7 2.47    3.0 2.81   2.94 2.77   2.94 2.81   2.73 2.63
       56    3.24 3.02   2.83 2.6    2.52 2.4     2.64 2.43   2.92 2.77   2.93 2.78   2.99 2.86   2.74 2.57
       57    3.24 2.91   2.83 2.48    2.5 2.41    2.69 2.39   2.95 2.72   3.04 2.65   2.95 2.62   2.74 2.61
                                  Table H2: Share of Stayers by Age and Occupation (Annual)


       Age   Managers      Clerical     Services   Operators    Mechan.      Constr.     Precis.     Transp.   Not-work.
       20    0.35 0.3    0.34 0.58    0.36 0.54    0.46 0.64   0.28 0.57   0.33 0.38   0.11 0.45   0.37 0.59   0.48 0.65
       21    0.44 0.48   0.43 0.64    0.49 0.5      0.5 0.67   0.46 0.63   0.48 0.51   0.33 0.5    0.38 0.63   0.46 0.66
       22    0.36 0.52   0.38 0.64    0.48 0.57     0.5 0.62   0.49 0.67   0.54 0.55   0.27 0.53   0.39 0.65   0.46 0.68
       23    0.43 0.65   0.48 0.67    0.54 0.61    0.45 0.68   0.6 0.62    0.46 0.6    0.36 0.63   0.47 0.65   0.49 0.7
       24    0.38 0.61   0.41 0.65    0.52 0.58    0.57 0.64   0.51 0.66   0.49 0.64   0.46 0.62   0.41 0.68   0.48 0.71
       25    0.56 0.63   0.54 0.69    0.54 0.66    0.49 0.62   0.55 0.69   0.53 0.62   0.42 0.61   0.44 0.63   0.46 0.76
       26    0.56 0.64   0.51 0.67    0.59 0.6      0.5 0.64   0.57 0.74   0.59 0.61   0.36 0.66    0.5 0.66   0.57 0.72




H -6
       27    0.52 0.61   0.51 0.64    0.51 0.6     0.55 0.65   0.58 0.7    0.56 0.63   0.42 0.58   0.51 0.66   0.49 0.74
       28    0.56 0.64   0.51 0.64    0.57 0.6     0.55 0.61   0.57 0.68    0.5 0.55   0.41 0.62   0.56 0.69   0.54 0.76
       29    0.53 0.65    0.5 0.64     0.6 0.58    0.56 0.64   0.6 0.65    0.59 0.62   0.45 0.65   0.5 0.65    0.56 0.74
       30    0.59 0.65   0.59 0.65    0.59 0.62    0.57 0.65   0.59 0.69   0.52 0.63   0.36 0.59   0.57 0.63   0.54 0.77
       31    0.57 0.7    0.61 0.65    0.61 0.58    0.57 0.64   0.67 0.68    0.5 0.66   0.43 0.61   0.52 0.65    0.6 0.75
       32    0.56 0.7    0.56 0.66    0.67 0.61    0.62 0.63   0.65 0.65   0.61 0.62   0.47 0.57   0.55 0.66   0.59 0.77
       33     0.6 0.68   0.6 0.64     0.74 0.6     0.65 0.61   0.61 0.68   0.59 0.67   0.42 0.62   0.68 0.65    0.6 0.75
       34    0.68 0.72   0.54 0.64    0.71 0.62    0.56 0.65   0.73 0.72   0.55 0.64   0.61 0.65   0.66 0.66   0.62 0.79
       35    0.73 0.72   0.73 0.72    0.71 0.6     0.59 0.63   0.72 0.65   0.67 0.7     0.5 0.76   0.64 0.65   0.71 0.76
       36    0.78 0.72   0.49 0.65    0.72 0.61    0.69 0.67   0.84 0.69   0.64 0.63   0.66 0.62   0.62 0.71   0.65 0.79
       37    0.72 0.76   0.75 0.64     0.8 0.62    0.96 0.6    0.79 0.67   0.72 0.66   0.66 0.67   0.84 0.68   0.78 0.8
                                 Table H3: Share of Stayers by Age and Occupation (Bi-annual)


       Age   Managers      Clerical     Services   Operators    Mechan.      Constr.     Precis.     Transp.   Not-work.
       21    0.24 0.26   0.28 0.49    0.34 0.36    0.33 0.54   0.25 0.48    0.4 0.32   0.31 0.32   0.28 0.5     0.4 0.47
       22    0.27 0.31   0.28 0.54     0.4 0.38     0.5 0.54   0.36 0.57   0.43 0.39    0.2 0.31   0.33 0.53   0.41 0.48
       23    0.28 0.47    0.4 0.54    0.42 0.46    0.35 0.55   0.43 0.57   0.43 0.41   0.22 0.39   0.35 0.56    0.4 0.51
       24    0.45 0.59   0.39 0.59    0.44 0.48    0.43 0.59   0.42 0.58   0.44 0.51   0.27 0.51   0.34 0.59   0.41 0.54
       25    0.44 0.57   0.42 0.59    0.44 0.5     0.47 0.53   0.51 0.62   0.48 0.49   0.46 0.5    0.38 0.55   0.37 0.57
       26    0.46 0.56   0.42 0.59     0.5 0.51     0.4 0.55   0.52 0.65   0.48 0.53   0.29 0.55   0.41 0.54   0.37 0.56
       27    0.43 0.61   0.35 0.59    0.45 0.49    0.45 0.53   0.58 0.66   0.51 0.52   0.37 0.5    0.44 0.57   0.46 0.58
       28    0.48 0.57   0.44 0.55    0.44 0.49    0.48 0.5    0.52 0.61   0.48 0.52   0.42 0.51   0.5 0.6     0.43 0.62
       29    0.47 0.58   0.45 0.6     0.54 0.5     0.49 0.52   0.55 0.62   0.52 0.5    0.36 0.54   0.44 0.57   0.49 0.6
       30     0.5 0.59   0.42 0.61    0.52 0.48    0.52 0.55    0.5 0.64   0.51 0.52   0.31 0.55   0.47 0.54   0.48 0.6
       31    0.53 0.62   0.57 0.57    0.57 0.46    0.47 0.54   0.54 0.59   0.42 0.56   0.36 0.52   0.51 0.54    0.5 0.59
       32    0.53 0.67   0.42 0.58     0.6 0.48     0.5 0.53   0.63 0.59   0.52 0.52   0.37 0.49   0.47 0.54   0.58 0.59
       33    0.57 0.65   0.44 0.59    0.61 0.46    0.52 0.52   0.46 0.59   0.54 0.6    0.42 0.54   0.49 0.55   0.55 0.6
       34    0.53 0.63   0.46 0.58    0.62 0.49    0.54 0.54   0.72 0.61    0.6 0.55   0.48 0.51   0.57 0.59   0.52 0.62
       35    0.61 0.67    0.5 0.62    0.57 0.51     0.5 0.54   0.52 0.59   0.53 0.55    0.5 0.65   0.57 0.57   0.55 0.65
       36    0.61 0.71   0.49 0.54    0.64 0.52    0.57 0.57   0.79 0.6    0.62 0.59   0.48 0.64   0.56 0.62   0.52 0.64
       37    0.63 0.65   0.55 0.56    0.68 0.53    0.58 0.62   0.64 0.6    0.68 0.61   0.49 0.58   0.59 0.6    0.66 0.69




H -7
       38    0.62 0.68   0.47 0.61    0.74 0.55    0.67 0.51   0.59 0.59   0.66 0.57   0.53 0.51   0.68 0.63   0.55 0.66
       39    0.62 0.7    0.71 0.57    0.73 0.57    0.69 0.58   0.59 0.64   0.52 0.65   0.56 0.61   0.63 0.56   0.58 0.67
       40    0.67 0.64   0.62 0.56    0.67 0.54    0.72 0.54   0.71 0.59    0.7 0.63   0.65 0.58   0.67 0.62   0.63 0.73
       41    0.61 0.68   0.78 0.61    0.72 0.48    0.68 0.58   0.73 0.58   0.68 0.59   0.65 0.55   0.75 0.57   0.64 0.69
       42    0.73 0.72   0.77 0.65    0.67 0.57    0.71 0.55   0.87 0.62   0.68 0.64   0.58 0.7    0.8 0.63    0.71 0.69
       43    0.68 0.66   0.73 0.6     0.84 0.46    0.75 0.53   0.83 0.57    0.8 0.66   0.76 0.65   0.76 0.59   0.67 0.69
       44    0.73 0.74   0.78 0.59    0.76 0.53    0.72 0.52   0.83 0.55   0.77 0.63   0.56 0.57    0.7 0.61   0.66 0.72
       45     0.7 0.72   0.76 0.56    0.84 0.55     0.8 0.49   0.79 0.59   0.81 0.6    0.65 0.66   0.74 0.63    0.7 0.73
       46    0.87 0.69   0.83 0.65     0.8 0.51    0.68 0.5    0.81 0.62    0.8 0.6    0.76 0.63   0.83 0.64    0.8 0.74
       47    0.78 0.73    0.7 0.62    0.86 0.55    0.82 0.57   0.81 0.56   0.85 0.68   0.83 0.6    0.72 0.57   0.78 0.74
       48    0.75 0.66   0.83 0.59    0.72 0.54    0.79 0.67   0.74 0.59   0.77 0.63   0.87 0.67   0.72 0.6    0.78 0.76
       49    0.83 0.73   0.88 0.6     0.81 0.55    0.73 0.6    0.84 0.63   0.79 0.62   0.79 0.64   0.71 0.6    0.79 0.72
       50    0.93 0.69   0.83 0.62    0.87 0.58    0.71 0.56   0.79 0.61   0.77 0.61   0.78 0.6    0.69 0.63   0.81 0.73
       51    0.85 0.75   0.78 0.68    0.74 0.55    0.65 0.55   0.8 0.51    0.89 0.66   0.73 0.59   0.8 0.66    0.82 0.72
       52    0.82 0.69   0.94 0.56    0.75 0.59    0.81 0.48   0.92 0.48   0.71 0.63    0.8 0.49   0.71 0.63    0.8 0.71
       53    0.75 0.73   0.82 0.54    0.93 0.53     0.8 0.5    0.9 0.6      1.0 0.57   0.7 0.57    0.78 0.58   0.78 0.73
       54    0.92 0.59   0.86 0.65    0.86 0.64    0.94 0.52   0.79 0.63   0.91 0.59   0.71 0.53    0.8 0.6    0.93 0.79
       55    0.82 0.69   0.75 0.53    0.74 0.59     1.0 0.41    1.0 0.49   0.71 0.53   0.18 0.55   0.62 0.69   0.78 0.77
       56     0.0 0.72   1.0 0.6       0.5 0.56     0.0 0.44    1.0 0.59    1.0 0.69   1.0 0.57    0.84 0.6    0.61 0.75
       57     1.0 0.78   0.0 0.5       1.0 0.64     0.5 0.48    1.0 0.48    0.0 0.59   0.0 0.43    0.66 0.57    1.0 0.69
                                 Table H4: Mean wage growth by current and lagged occupation


                     Managers       Clerical     Services Operators       Mechan.     Constr.       Precis.      Transp.
       Managers      0.04 0.08    0.09 0.06    0.05 0.08 0.07 0.12      0.02 0.06 -0.03 0.07     -0.01 -0.02   0.08 0.07
       Clerical     -0.01 0.06    0.05 0.08    0.04 0.11 -0.05 0.05     0.17 -0.02 -0.25 -0.06   -0.06 0.11    -0.0 0.06




H -8
       Services     0.05 0.04     0.08 -0.03   0.04 0.07 0.0 -0.03      0.05 -0.02 -0.15 -0.04   -0.01 -0.16   0.03 -0.02
       Operators    -0.02 0.03    0.13 0.06    0.11 0.11 0.05 0.05      0.04 0.01 -0.02 0.03      0.06 -0.01   0.06 0.01
       Mechanics    0.07 0.04     0.09 0.08    0.14 0.09 0.09 0.09      0.05 0.07 0.05 -0.05      0.01 0.01    0.01 0.06
       Construction 0.04 0.03     0.18 0.07    0.24 0.14 0.11 0.09      0.16 0.04 0.05 0.04      0.09 0.07     0.11 0.09
       Precision     0.04 0.08    0.07 0.08     0.1 0.13 0.08 0.05      -0.0 0.03 0.07 0.03      0.06 0.05     0.13 0.04
       Transport    -0.01 0.02    0.02 0.06    0.13 0.06 0.04 0.07       0.1 0.03 -0.0 -0.01     -0.05 -0.06   0.04 0.06
                             Table H5: Mean wage growth by current, lagged occupation and experience


                      Managers        Clerical     Services      Operators      Mechan.     Constr.       Precis.      Transp.
                                                              High Experience
       Managers       0.07    0.07   0.11   0.08 0.04 0.05 0.06         0.1 -0.01   0.11 -0.09 0.15     0.06 -0.05    0.15     0.1
       Clerical       0.05     0.1   0.08     0.1 -0.01 0.12 -0.03    0.04 0.21     -0.06 -0.32 -0.07   0.01 0.11      0.0    0.09
       Services       0.06     0.1   0.11   -0.04 0.04 0.07 0.07      -0.01 0.16    -0.03 -0.14 -0.01    0.02 -0.2    0.04   -0.02
       Operators      0.01    0.06   0.16    0.07 0.18 0.13 0.07       0.05 0.12     0.02 0.01 0.03      0.08 -0.02   0.08    0.05
       Mechanics      0.07    0.03   0.19    0.08 0.13 0.11 -0.01     0.09 0.08      0.07 0.09 -0.07    0.11 0.07     0.03    0.07
       Construction   0.16    0.08   0.3    0.11 0.37 0.16 0.08       0.07   0.2     0.06 0.06 0.05     0.16 0.12     0.18    0.07




H -9
       Precision      0.08    0.11   0.08   0.05 0.15 0.17 0.07       0.07 0.03     -0.08 0.07 -0.02    0.09 0.05     0.14    0.08
       Transport      -0.1     0.0   0.02   0.09 0.17 0.09 0.03       0.06 0.12     0.02 0.01 0.02      -0.03 -0.02   0.06    0.07
                                                              Low Experience
       Managers      0.02 0.08 0.08 0.04          0.05   0.1 0.07 0.14 0.04 0.03       0.0   0.01 -0.07 0.01 0.03 0.04
       Clerical     -0.09 0.02 0.02 0.07          0.11    0.1 -0.07 0.05 0.12 0.02 -0.19 -0.06 -0.14 0.11 -0.01 0.04
       Services     0.02 -0.02 -0.01 -0.03        0.04   0.06 -0.09 -0.05 -0.21 -0.01 -0.15 -0.08 -0.1 -0.11 0.02 -0.02
       Operators    -0.08 -0.02 0.08 0.05         0.02   0.08 0.03 0.04 -0.06 0.0 -0.06 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.03 -0.04
       Mechanics    0.06 0.04 -0.02 0.08          0.14   0.06 0.16   0.1   0.02 0.06 0.01 -0.02 -0.09 -0.05 -0.01 0.06
       Construction -0.09 -0.03 0.05 0.02         0.09   0.12 0.14   0.1   0.1  0.01 0.03 0.03 -0.0 0.01 0.03      0.1
       Precision     0.0  0.04 0.05   0.1         0.04   0.09 0.1   0.04 -0.02 0.1    0.06 0.08 0.03 0.05 0.12     0.0
       Transport     0.11 0.04 0.02 0.03          0.05   0.03 0.05 0.08 0.06 0.05 -0.01 -0.04 -0.07 -0.12 0.03 0.06
                             Table H6: Mean wage growth by current, lagged occupation and tenure


                      Managers       Clerical       Services    Operators     Mechan.     Constr.      Precis.     Transp.
                                                               High Tenure
        Managers      0.03   0.08   0.11   0.08    0.08   0.05 0.09 0.11     -0.07 0.08 -0.09 0.14 0.04 -0.03 0.12       0.09
        Clerical      0.04    0.1   0.08    0.1    0.03    0.1 -0.05 0.04    0.22 -0.03 -0.25 -0.04 -0.02 0.11 -0.01     0.09
        Services     0.04    0.08   0.08   -0.01   0.04   0.07 0.0 -0.01     0.09 -0.02 -0.13 0.03 0.06 -0.14 0.04       -0.03
        Operators    -0.02   0.06    0.2   0.09    0.18   0.11 0.08 0.05      0.09 0.02 -0.02 0.04   0.1 -0.03 0.06      0.05
        Mechanics    0.04    0.02   0.14   0.09    0.15    0.1  0.1  0.09     0.08 0.07 0.08 0.01 -0.01 0.08 0.01         0.06
        Construction -0.03   0.05   0.24    0.12   0.24   0.18 0.11 0.06     0.24 0.06 0.07 0.06     0.1  0.11 0.14      0.11
        Precision     0.04   0.11   0.15   0.06    0.15    0.2 0.08 0.08     0.04 -0.04 0.07 -0.01 0.09 0.05 0.12        0.07




H -10
        Transport    -0.04   0.01   0.03    0.1    0.13   0.07 0.03 0.06     0.08 0.03 -0.01 0.02 -0.03 0.01 0.06        0.07
                                                               Low Tenure
        Managers      0.05 0.08 0.08 0.04 -0.0            0.11 0.05 0.12      0.11 0.03   0.0  -0.0 -0.06 -0.0    0.03    0.04
        Clerical     -0.08 0.01 0.03 0.07 0.07            0.12 -0.05 0.05    0.08 -0.0 -0.26 -0.08 -0.11 0.12      0.0    0.03
        Services     0.06   0.0  0.07 -0.07 0.03          0.06 0.01 -0.05    -0.04 -0.02 -0.2 -0.14 -0.37 -0.18   0.03    -0.0
        Operators    -0.02 -0.02 -0.04 0.01 0.01           0.1 0.02 0.04      -0.1 -0.01 -0.02 0.02 -0.0 0.02     0.05   -0.05
        Mechanics    0.13 0.06 -0.0 0.06 0.12             0.06 0.07  0.1     0.03 0.06 -0.03 -0.1 0.05 -0.08      0.01   0.07
        Construction 0.2    0.0   0.08 0.01 0.25          0.09 0.09 0.12     -0.06 -0.0 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.03       0.07    0.07
        Precision     0.04 0.02 -0.08 0.1 0.05            0.06 0.08 0.02     -0.06 0.09 0.06 0.07 0.04 0.05       0.15     0.0
        Transport     0.07 0.04 -0.0 0.01 0.12            0.04 0.06 0.08     0.13 0.03 0.01 -0.06 -0.13 -0.18     0.02    0.05
              Table H7: Mean wage growth by current, lagged occupation and tenure for high experience individuals


                      Managers       Clerical      Services      Operators    Mechan.       Constr.       Precis.       Transp.
                                                                High Tenure
        Managers     -0.05 0.11 0.14      0.08   0.04 -0.01     0.09 0.19 -0.05 0.11      -0.25 0.1 -0.02      0.4    0.08 -0.0
        Clerical     -0.06 0.13 0.04      0.06   0.17 0.12      -0.07 0.05 0.24 -0.0      -0.11 -0.02 -0.11   0.04    0.01 0.07
        Services     -0.24 0.02 -0.07     0.14    0.04 0.06     -0.29 -0.02 -0.23 -0.02   -0.09 0.23   0.2     0.33   -0.01 -0.06
        Operators    -0.07 -0.07 0.15     0.15    0.09 0.05     0.08 0.06 -0.03 0.09       0.02 0.02 0.07      -0.0    0.01 -0.06
        Mechanics     -0.1 -0.14 0.04     0.11    0.09 0.11      0.22 0.15 0.07 0.05      -0.01 0.12 -0.15     0.04   -0.09 0.07
        Construction -0.15 -0.24 0.11      0.1    0.09  0.2     0.17 0.05 0.25 -0.01      0.05 0.06 0.01      -0.17   -0.02 0.13
        Precision    -0.01 0.15 0.12      0.12   0.22   0.2      0.1  0.06   0.0  0.26     0.05 0.18 0.04      0.08   0.12 0.05




H -11
        Transport     0.12 0.13 0.04      0.2    -0.01 0.0      0.08 -0.03 -0.01 0.05     -0.03 0.01 -0.07    0.01     0.01 0.06
                                                                Low Tenure
        Managers      0.03 0.08 0.07 0.04        0.07    0.13    0.07 0.12 0.09   0.0  0.06 -0.0 -0.09 -0.04 0.01 0.05
        Clerical     -0.11 0.01 0.02 0.07        0.05    0.1    -0.07 0.05 0.07 0.02 -0.24 -0.06 -0.15 0.13 -0.02 0.03
        Services     0.06 -0.03 0.04 -0.07        0.03   0.06    0.05 -0.06 -0.2 -0.01 -0.2 -0.13 -0.41 -0.13 0.04 -0.01
        Operators    -0.09 -0.02 -0.01 0.02      -0.05   0.09   0.02 0.04 -0.08 -0.02 -0.12 0.03 -0.0 0.01 0.03 -0.04
        Mechanics    0.09 0.05 -0.06 0.06         0.21   0.04    0.1  0.08 0.01 0.06 0.04 -0.03 -0.04 -0.08 0.02 0.05
        Construction 0.04   0.0   -0.0 -0.0        0.1   0.09    0.13 0.11 -0.02 0.01 0.03 0.02 -0.04 0.05 0.06 0.09
        Precision     0.04 0.02 -0.02 0.1        -0.09   0.08     0.1  0.03 -0.04 0.09 0.07 0.06 0.02 0.05 0.12 -0.01
        Transport     0.1   0.04   0.0 -0.02      0.09   0.03    0.04  0.1  0.11 0.05 -0.0 -0.05 -0.07 -0.15 0.03 0.06
               Figure H6: Wage quantiles by year and by occupation. CPS

                            Managers                         Clerical                       Services                        Operators
               4.0                             4.0                             4.0                             4.0

               3.5                             3.5                             3.5                             3.5

               3.0                             3.0                             3.0                             3.0

               2.5                             2.5                             2.5                             2.5

               2.0                             2.0                             2.0                             2.0

                     1979 1990 2000 20102017         1979 1990 2000 20102017         1979 1990 2000 20102017         1979 1990 2000 20102017
                            Mechan.                          Constr.                         Precis.                         Transp.
               4.0                             4.0                             4.0                             4.0

               3.5                             3.5                             3.5                             3.5

               3.0                             3.0                             3.0                             3.0

               2.5                             2.5                             2.5                             2.5

               2.0                             2.0                             2.0                             2.0

                     1979 1990 2000 20102017         1979 1990 2000 20102017         1979 1990 2000 20102017         1979 1990 2000 20102017
                          model        data




                       Table H8: Mean wages by experience and occupation


                           1                           2                        3                        4                              5
Managers        0.23           0.19            0.3         0.24         0.34          0.28       0.45          0.37          0.41           0.35
Clerical        0.09           0.12           0.13         0.22         0.24          0.25       0.31           0.3          0.29           0.35
Services        0.08           0.06           0.11         0.16         0.17           0.2       0.25          0.24          0.26           0.28
Operators       0.08           0.05           0.13         0.11         0.17          0.15       0.19          0.17          0.23           0.23
Mechanics       0.07           0.09           0.16         0.12         0.22          0.19        0.2          0.23          0.31           0.25
Construction    0.06           0.07           0.17         0.11         0.19          0.15       0.21          0.23          0.27           0.27
Precision        0.1           0.19           0.11         0.17         0.13          0.18       0.23          0.23          0.28           0.26
Transport       0.07           0.11           0.11         0.16         0.18          0.18       0.23          0.24          0.26           0.26




                                                                        H -12
               Table H9: Mean wages by tenure and occupation


                       1                 2                 3                 4                 5
Managers        0.34       0.09   0.43       0.15   0.41       0.17   0.47       0.23   0.52       0.24
Clerical        0.14       0.06   0.28       0.13    0.3       0.16   0.32       0.21   0.36       0.21
Services        0.05       0.03   0.09       0.07    0.1       0.12   0.09       0.16   0.06       0.21
Operators       0.12       0.06    0.2       0.07   0.23        0.1   0.27       0.13   0.31       0.17
Mechanics       0.17       0.01   0.22       0.05   0.25       0.08   0.34        0.1    0.4       0.15
Construction     0.1        0.1   0.23       0.12   0.21       0.17   0.25        0.2   0.26       0.2
Precision       0.13       0.12   0.22       0.11   0.26       0.13   0.31       0.19   0.33       0.21
Transport       0.14       0.09   0.2        0.12   0.26       0.14   0.26       0.2     0.3       0.23



                           Table H10: Deming's regressions


                             Employment                                Wages
          Cognitive        0.0742 0.0582                           0.126 0.1248
          Social           0.0053 0.0059                           0.0103 0.0154
          Cognitive*NLSY97 0.0097 -0.0049                         -0.0575 -0.047
          Social*NLSY97    0.0409 0.0154                            0.03  0.0186



          Table H11: Occupation distribution by cognitive skills


                         NLSY79                                       NLSY97
                     High       Low                               High       Low
     Managers     0.03 0.03 0.1 0.07                           0.03 0.03 0.06 0.05
     Clerical     0.06 0.09 0.11 0.13                          0.09 0.09 0.17 0.14
     Services     0.14 0.1 0.09 0.1                            0.18 0.14 0.16 0.15
     Operators    0.14 0.14 0.15 0.17                          0.08 0.1 0.08 0.09
     Mechanics    0.05 0.09 0.09 0.09                          0.05 0.05 0.08 0.06
     Construction 0.08 0.07 0.1 0.06                           0.09 0.07 0.12 0.07
     Precision    0.03 0.04 0.07 0.04                          0.03 0.02 0.03 0.03
     Transport    0.19 0.18 0.17 0.18                          0.2 0.19 0.18 0.19
     Not-working 0.26 0.25 0.12 0.16                           0.26 0.31 0.12 0.21



                                              H -13
     Table H12: Occupation distribution by social skills


                    NLSY79                    NLSY97
                High       Low            High       Low
Managers     0.05 0.04 0.07 0.05       0.03 0.03 0.05 0.05
Clerical     0.07 0.1 0.09 0.12        0.11 0.11 0.15 0.13
Services     0.12 0.1 0.12 0.1         0.16 0.15 0.17 0.15
Operators    0.15 0.15 0.14 0.15       0.09 0.1 0.07 0.09
Mechanics    0.07 0.09 0.07 0.09       0.06 0.06 0.07 0.06
Construction 0.09 0.07 0.09 0.07       0.08 0.07 0.13 0.07
Precision    0.05 0.04 0.04 0.04       0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03
Transport    0.19 0.18 0.18 0.17       0.19 0.19 0.19 0.19
Not-working 0.2 0.22 0.21 0.2          0.24 0.28 0.14 0.24




                           H -14
I   Structural Parameters not reported in the main text

                       Table I1: Learning-by-doing parameters


Occupation Specific                                          General Skills
01 1.8773 (0.5229)                           d01    0.812 (0.0325) d11 0.0777 (0.0006)
02 1.5315 (0.369)                            d02        1 (0)       d12 0.1186 (0.0006)
03 0.7802 (0.3288)                           d03   0.8876 (0.0239) d13 0.1168 (0.0002)
04 0.4606 (0.5357)                           d04   0.9163 (0.0206) d2       0.054 (0.0)
05 0.8064 (0.7447)                           d05   1.1389 (0.0231) d31 0.0121 (0.0001)
06 0.6501 (0.5852)                           d06   0.6462 (0.0766) d32 0.0325 (0.0003)
07 1.203 (0.4771)                            d07   0.6903 (0.1065) d33 0.034 (0.0001)
08 1.5157 (0.6615)                           d08    0.9211 (0.003)
1   2.4443 (0.206)



                      Table I2: Job offer arrival rates by decades


Occupation        1979              1990                2000            2010            2017
Managers     0.3428 (0.0093)   0.2029 (0.0093)     0.1446 (0.0093) 0.0981 (0.0094) 0.0557 (0.0094)
Clerical     0.5696 (0.1404)   0.5699 (0.1404)     0.4730 (0.1404) 0.4192 (0.1404) 0.4464 (0.1405)
Services     0.8353 (0.0228)   0.9563 (0.0228)     0.8307 (0.0228) 0.8475 (0.0229) 0.9274 (0.0237)
Operators    1.0000 (0.1122)   0.7872 (0.1122)     0.5416 (0.1122) 0.3220 (0.1122) 0.5945 (0.1124)
Mechanics    0.4037 (0.0261)   0.3087 (0.0261)     0.1964 (0.0263) 0.1506 (0.0266) 0.1574 (0.0321)
Construct.   0.5082 (0.0097)   0.5794 (0.0098)     0.4842 (0.0101) 0.3004 (0.0102) 0.2727 (0.2514)
Precision    0.3718 (0.0167)   0.2968 (0.0168)     0.2228 (0.0169) 0.1123 (0.0177) 0.1674 (0.2783)
Transport    1.0000 (0.0395)   1.0000 (0.0395)     0.7090 (0.0396) 0.5461 (0.0398) 0.7584 (0.0453)




                                          I -1
                       Table I3: Hedonic function's time trends


                                  jt : Time Trends
Occupation          1980               1990            2000             2010
Managers       -0.0155 (0.0)     0.0005 (0.0001) -0.0493 (0.0002) -0.049 (0.0031)
Clerical     -0.0153 (0.0001)    0.0132 (0.0001) 0.0138 (0.0002) 0.0108 (0.0009)
Services     -0.0283 (0.0001)    0.0226 (0.0002) 0.007 (0.0005)   0.0092 (0.0006)
Operators      -0.0202 (0.0)     0.0238 (0.0005) 0.014 (0.0005)   0.0062 (0.0014)
Mechanics    -0.0205 (0.0008)    0.0044 (0.0007) 0.0088 (0.0008) -0.0069 (0.0026)
Construction -0.0272 (0.0002)    0.0145 (0.0003) 0.0049 (0.0005) -0.0095 (0.002)
Precision    -0.0419 (0.0001)    0.0156 (0.0008) 0.0133 (0.0011)    0.0 (0.0016)
Transport    -0.0101 (0.0001)    0.0179 (0.0002) 0.0102 (0.0002) 0.0072 (0.0015)


                                 1jt : Time Trends
Occupation            1980             1990            2000               2010
Managers         -0.0079 (0.0)  -0.0024 (0.0002) 0.0539 (0.0004)     0.0452 (0.0031)
Clerical       -0.0068 (0.0001) -0.0305 (0.0001) -0.0278 (0.0004)   -0.0281 (0.0038)
Services        0.014 (0.0004) -0.0303 (0.0004) -0.0145 (0.0001)    -0.0095 (0.0001)
Operators       -0.005 (0.0003) -0.0431 (0.0011) -0.0252 (0.0011)   -0.0175 (0.0025)
Mechanics      0.0097 (0.0009) -0.0085 (0.0004) -0.0109 (0.0004)     0.0008 (0.0127)
Construction   0.0026 (0.0003) -0.0199 (0.0003) -0.0175 (0.0013)     0.0138 (0.0028)
Precision       0.026 (0.0002) -0.0242 (0.0007) -0.0254 (0.0011)    -0.0086 (0.0102)
Transport      -0.0242 (0.0002) -0.0187 (0.0004) -0.0047 (0.0006)   -0.0182 (0.0016)


                                  2jt : Time Trends
Occupation         1980                 1990          2000             2010
Managers     0.0877 (0.0004)    -0.0088 (0.0006) 0.0502 (0.001)   0.096 (0.0022)
Clerical     0.0609 (0.0001)     0.0195 (0.0006) 0.019 (0.0014)   0.0313 (0.006)
Services      0.0503 (0.001)    -0.0182 (0.0009) 0.0187 (0.0004) -0.0197 (0.0132)
Operators    0.0595 (0.0001)     0.0101 (0.0009) 0.0087 (0.0018) 0.0227 (0.0172)
Mechanics    0.0294 (0.0021)     0.0051 (0.0025) 0.0196 (0.0055) 0.0438 (0.0318)
Construction 0.0586 (0.0001)    -0.0147 (0.0011) 0.0378 (0.0027) 0.0306 (0.0078)
Precision     0.048 (0.0014)    0.0016 (0.0019) 0.0256 (0.002) 0.0407 (0.0354)
Transport    0.0535 (0.0002)    -0.0117 (0.0005) 0.001 (0.0021) 0.0308 (0.0042)




                                         I -2
