                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF HOUSING SPECULATION

                                          Zhenyu Gao
                                         Michael Sockin
                                          Wei Xiong

                                      Working Paper 26457
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26457


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




This paper supersedes an earlier draft circulated under the title "Housing Speculation and Supply
Overhang." We are grateful to Gene Amromin, Barney Hartman-Glaser, Andrew Haughwout,
Zhiguo He, Tim Landvoigt, Alvin Murphy, Charlie Nathanson, Monika Piazzesi, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the University of Texas at Austin, the
Wharton School, the American Economic Association Meetings, the American Finance
Association Meetings, the CICF meetings, and the FRB Atlanta, GSU Real Estate Finance, and
Texas Finance Festival Conference for helpful comments and discussion. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Zhenyu Gao, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Consequences of Housing Speculation
Zhenyu Gao, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 26457
November 2019
JEL No. E3,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

By exploiting variation in state capital gains taxation as an instrument, we analyze the economic
consequences of housing speculation during the U.S. housing boom in the 2000s. We find that
housing speculation, anchored, in part, on extrapolation of past housing price changes, led not
only to greater price appreciation, economic expansions, and housing construction during the
boom in 2004-2006, but also to more severe economic downturns during the subsequent bust in
2007-2009. Our analysis supports supply overhang and local household demand as two key
channels for transmitting these adverse effects.

Zhenyu Gao                                      Wei Xiong
Chinese University of Hong Kong                 Princeton University
Hong Kong                                       Department of Economics
gaozhenyu@baf.cuhk.edu.hk                       Bendheim Center for Finance
                                                Princeton, NJ 08450
Michael Sockin                                  and NBER
Department of Finance                           wxiong@princeton.edu
UT Austin McCombs School of Business
Austin, TX 78712
michael.sockin@mccombs.utexas.edu
      Economists have long been concerned with the economic consequences of speculation and
asset bubbles. A growing strand of the literature, including Shiller (2009), Haughwout et al. (2011),
Barlevy and Fisher (2011), Mayer (2011), Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012, 2015), Bayer et al.
(2015), Chinco and Mayer (2016), Albanesi, De Giorgi, and Nosal (2017), DeFusco, Nathanson,
and Zwick (2017), Nathanson and Zwick (2017), and Soo (2018) has highlighted the importance
of housing speculation in driving the recent housing cycle.1 Housing speculation became a national
phenomenon in the low interest rate environment of the mid-2000s, with purchases of non-owner-
occupied homes (second and investment homes) contributing up to 30% of all home purchases
during the boom in cities such as Las Vegas. Housing speculation also represented a source of
housing demand largely orthogonal to the credit expansion to subprime households that occurred
during the housing boom, which is widely regarded, for instance by Mian and Sufi (2009), Keys
et al. (2009), and Justiano et al. (2017), as a key driver of the boom. Interestingly, areas in which
speculation became more prevalent during the boom period experienced local economic
expansions, while subprime credit expansion occurred more in areas that experienced local
economic contractions. In addition, while supply inelasticity and non-recourse mortgage laws have
a positive and statistically significant correlation with the fraction of subprime mortgages in a zip
code, they have an opposite, smaller, and less significant correlation with housing speculation.2
As such, speculation represents an important complementary channel in explaining the cross-
sectional variation in the housing and economic cycles across the U.S. during the 2000s.

      An intuitive hypothesis posits that speculation in the housing market can have important
economic consequences. Housing speculation, anchoring on extrapolative expectations of past
housing price growth, can amplify local economic conditions by contributing a non-fundamental
source of demand to housing markets. When these speculators purchase more non-owner-occupied
homes in an area during a housing boom, their speculation can magnify the boom and contribute
not only to a greater price drop, but also to a more severe economic contraction, during the
subsequent housing bust. Despite its intuitive appeal, this hypothesis remains elusive to test
because of the well-appreciated endogeneity issue with identification, i.e., housing speculation


1
  Glaeser (2013) provides an eloquent analysis of nine episodes of real estate speculation in American history and
highlights housing speculation as one of several recurring themes in these episodes.
2
  This opposite and less significant correlation suggests that studies that instrument the housing price boom with supply
elasticity or variation in non-recourse mortgage laws are capturing the impact of subprime rather than speculation.

                                                           1
may reflect local housing demand or other unobservable economic conditions, rather than be a
cause of housing and economic cycles.

     In this paper, we undertake this challenge to study how housing speculation contributed to
higher housing prices and local economic expansions during the boom period of 2004-2006, and
adversely affected economic activity during the bust period of 2007-2009. We measure housing
speculation during the boom by the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in a zip code,
which conveniently measures the intensity of housing speculation relative to primary home
demand. For identification, we construct a novel instrument for housing speculation that takes
advantage of the variation across U.S. states in their taxation of capital gains. While homeowners
can exclude capital gains from the sale of their primary residence from their income taxes, this
exclusion does not cover capital gains from selling non-owner-occupied homes. As U.S. states
have significant variation in how they tax capital gains, housing speculation is more intensive in
states with either no or low capital gains taxes. We therefore construct our instrument as the
marginal tax rate for the median income household in each state.

     By instrumenting non-owner-occupied home purchases with the capital gains tax variable,
we find that zip codes with a greater share of non-owner-occupied home purchases during the
boom had not only more pronounced housing cycles during the boom and bust, but also
experienced greater swings in employment, payroll, per capital income, and the number of
business establishments. The economic magnitude of these effects is substantial: an increase of
9.9% (one standard deviation across zip codes) in the share of non-owner-occupied home
purchases in 2004-2006 led to a housing price increase of 26.5% during the boom, and a drop of
37.4% during the bust. Similarly, this increase led to an increase of 13.7% in real payroll, 8.4% in
employment, 12.9% in per capita income, and 6.8% in the number of establishments from 2004-
2006. During 2007-2009, in contrast, it contributed to declines of 15.4% in real payroll, 14.6% in
employment, 7.8% in income per capita, and 8.7% in the number of establishments. These results
on the impact of housing speculation are robust to excluding the so-called "sand states" of Arizona,
California, Florida, and Nevada that saw particularly phenomenal housing cycles. Furthermore,
our analysis shows that, among states with lower capital gains taxes, the share of non-owner-
occupied home purchases responds more strongly to past housing price increases, even after



                                                 2
controlling for past changes in local housing fundamentals. This finding supports extrapolative
expectations as a key driver of housing speculation.

      We also examine two transmission mechanisms to understand how housing speculation
during the boom propagated to the real economy during the bust. The first is the supply overhang
channel, explored, for instance, in Rognlie, Shleifer, and Simsek (2015). By again using the
instrumental variable approach, we find that areas with more intensive housing speculation during
the boom also had a greater increase in housing construction in the same period, which, in turn,
contributed to the subsequent contraction of the construction sector during the bust. An increase
of one standard deviation in instrumented housing speculation in 2004-2006 led to an increase of
4.2% in building permits in 2004-2006, relative to the number of housing units in 2000, and
decreases of 33.8% in construction-sector employment and 12.4% in non-construction sector
employment in 2007-2009. These findings confirm the importance of the supply overhang channel.

      To further explain the substantial downturn experienced by non-construction sectors, we also
examine a second transmission channel, local household demand, as suggested by Mian, Rao, and
Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014), by analyzing the impact of housing speculation on non-
tradable sectors--and the retail and restaurant sectors more narrowly--which primarily rely on
local consumption demand. We find significant real effects through this channel. An increase of
one standard deviation in instrumented housing speculation in 2004-2006 led to a decrease of
15.1% in non-tradable sectors' employment in 2007-2009, and a decline of 15.6% in the retail and
restaurant sectors, specifically. 3 In contrast, housing speculation had a more modest effect on
employment in tradable sectors and in industries other than retail and the restaurant business.

      While our tax instrument allows us to establish and quantify the causal link between housing
speculation, housing prices, and real activity, an important limitation is that it relies on state-level
variation. As such, we do not have a source of within-state exogenous variation in the fraction of
non-owner-occupied home purchases for the first stage of the IV test. While this lack of granularity
is not ideal for our analysis of housing speculation at the zip-code level, this limitation biases our
results against finding supportive evidence for the housing speculation hypothesis. Nevertheless,

3
 Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017), through the lens of a quantitative framework, also find that a shift in household
expectations of future capital gains on housing investments deepened the Great Recession through the household
balance sheet channel.

                                                          3
this instrument provides sufficient cross-sectional variation to identify the economic consequences
of housing speculation.

     Our study contributes to the rapidly growing literature on housing speculation. Using credit-
report data, Haughwout et al. (2011) document a large increase in the share of housing purchased
by real estate investors during the recent U.S. housing boom, who took on more leverage and had
higher default rates during the bust. Using micro-level data, Chinco and Mayer (2016) show that
speculation by investment-home buyers played an important role in the dramatic house price boom
and bust cycles in 21 cities, including Las Vegas, Miami, and Phoenix. Nathanson and Zwick
(2017) turn to speculation in the land market and investigate how land investment by homebuilders
shapes the house price boom in areas with elastic housing supply. DeFusco, Nathanson, and Zwick
(2017) investigate the importance of short-term real estate investors in explaining housing price
and volume dynamics in the recent housing cycle. While most of these studies have explored the
relation between speculation and housing market outcomes, such as house prices and default, we
provide causal evidence that speculation exacerbated the recent U.S. housing cycle. In addition,
we investigate its causal impact on local economic activity, including establishments, payroll,
employment, and per capita income growth, during both the housing boom and bust. We also
highlight the interaction between state capital gains, speculation, and extrapolation of past housing
price appreciation as a potential explanation for the cross-sectional variation in housing
speculation. Last, we investigate potential transmission mechanisms through which housing
speculation during the boom propagated to the real economy during the bust.

     Our work is also related to the literature on the economic distortions of housing booms. Chen
et al. (2016) show that firms responded to rising real estate prices in China by diverting resources
from their core businesses to real estate investment. Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016a,
2016b) explore how the housing boom led to distortions in the employment and educational
attainment decisions predominantly among low-skilled, prime-aged laborers by temporarily
expanding the construction and services sectors. Consistent with their results, we find that
construction and local retail and service sectors contracted during the housing bust.

     While our study focuses on the role of housing speculation in explaining the recent U.S.
housing cycle, the housing literature has explored several other mechanisms. Himmelberg, Mayer,


                                                 4
and Sinai (2005) and Mayer and Sinai (2009), for instance, focus on the role of interest rates, while
Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2015) emphasize the relaxation of borrowing
constraints. Mian and Sufi (2009, 2011) and Favara and Imbs (2015) link the surge in household
debt and house prices during the recent housing cycle to an expansion in the supply of credit that
resulted from securitization and subprime lending, Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015) also
emphasize the role of cheap credit for poor households in driving house price dynamics, and Mian
and Sufi (2010) examine the relation between this buildup and the cross-section of house price
booms and busts in the recent cycle. Furthermore, Keys et al. (2009, 2010), Purnanandam (2011),
and Griffin and Maturana (2015, 2016), among others, highlight that agency issues associated with
securitization may have helped fuel this credit expansion. Along this dimension, Griffin and
Maturana (2015) document the importance of mortgage origination misreporting by the worst
originators in explaining housing price booms and busts. Similarly, Mian and Sufi (2015) show
mortgage fraud to be associated with low income zip codes that exhibited the strongest mortgage
credit growth in 2002 to 2005. The speculation channel that we analyze is distinct from that of
fraud and misreporting, as our results remain robust when we control for the misreporting measure
of Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin (2015). To the extent that the credit expansion and agency issues in
mortgage origination facilitated participation by optimistic speculators in housing markets during
the boom, we view these channels as being complementary.


                                      I.       Empirical Methodology

     We aim to examine the economic impact of housing speculation during the boom and bust
cycle of the U.S. housing markets in the 2000s. The literature has established that this housing
cycle was, in part, driven by a credit expansion to households across the country, which was
precipitated by the rapid growth of securitization and shadow banking in the early 2000s, e.g.,
Mian and Sufi (2009) and Keys et al. (2010). While this was a national housing cycle, there was
substantial variation across regions. We are interested in testing whether housing speculation
contributed to this cross-region variation and, specifically, whether housing speculation during the
boom affected the housing cycles and economic performance during the subsequent downturn.4


4
 We focus on the recent U.S. housing cycle of the 2000s because the data are more complete for this period than for
earlier years, and because the national housing cycle allows us to directly compare the cross-sectional variation in

                                                         5
      To facilitate our cross-region analysis during this national cycle, we divide the housing cycle
into three phases: 2001-2003 as the pre-boom period, 2004-2006 as the boom period, and 2007-
2009 as the bust period.5 We define 2004-2006 as the boom period because housing speculation,
as we will show, was most intensive during this period. Anchoring on this three-year boom period,
we analyze how housing price growth in the previous three years (the pre-boom period) stimulated
housing speculation during the boom through home buyers' extrapolative expectations, and how
housing speculation during the boom affected local economic performance both during the boom
period and the subsequent three years (the bust period).

      We measure housing speculation in an area in a given year by the fraction of non-owner-
occupied homes in all home purchases financed by mortgages. Since non-owner-occupied homes
provide less housing service to their owners than primary homes, the decision to purchase a non-
owner-occupied home is driven to a greater extent by buyers' speculative motives than their
decision to purchase a primary home. 6 As such, the fraction of non-owner-occupied home
purchases provides a convenient and intuitive measure of the intensity of housing speculation
relative to primary housing demand.

      We face the typical issue of endogeneity in testing the impact of housing speculation. A large
fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in an area might reflect local economic conditions
rather than be a cause of housing and economic cycles. To address this challenging identification
issue, we need an instrumental variable that exogenously affects housing speculation in an area.

      To construct such an instrument, we take advantage of the heterogeneity in capital gains taxes
imposed across different states. The primary residence exclusion allows homeowners to exclude



housing markets and local economic conditions. Such a cross-sectional analysis is not feasible for the earlier housing
cycles of the 1980s and 1990s, as they were asynchronous and experienced by only a few cities.
5
  This definition is largely consistent with the timing convention in the literature. In particular, 2006 is widely
recognized as the turning point of the cycle, as noted by Glaeser (2013). Haughwout et al. (2013) define the boom
period as 2000-2006, and the bust period as 2007-2010. Ferreira and Gyourko (2018) find that the start of the house
price boom was not synchronized across the U.S. and house prices for each zip code also peaked in different months.
Since our speculation measure and several economic outcome variables are at the annual frequency, we use 2006 as
the turning point of housing cycles across regions.
6
  This measure does, however, have its limitations. For instance, investors may purchase their houses for vacation
purposes. Non-owner-occupied house purchases could also be affected by demand from renters and new migrants. To
address this issue, we include various local characteristics, such as the fraction of employment in the sectors of art,
entertainment, and recreation, the ratio of renters, as well as the fraction of migrants, as controls in our analysis.

                                                          6
up to $250,000 ($500,000 per couple) of capital gains from the sale of their primary residence, at
both the federal and state levels, defined as a home that they have owned and lived in for at least
two of the five years prior to the sale. As there is no capital gains exclusion for sales of non-owner-
occupied homes during the recent housing boom, buyers of non-owner-occupied homes are subject
to capital gains taxation.

     Taxation of capital gains at the state level is similar to that at the federal level, but different
states impose different capital gains tax rates, and nine states (i.e., Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New
Hampshire, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming) impose no capital gains
taxes at all. The choice of capital gains tax rates are not driven by shocks to housing markets. In
fact, during the boom period of 2004-2006, all of these nine states remained without capital gains
taxes, and only the District of Columbia and Ohio slightly changed their capital gains tax rates.7

     There is ample evidence showing that economic agents across the U.S. were overly optimistic
about the housing market. 8 As optimistic households might choose to buy investment homes, state
capital gains taxes provide a source of exogenous variation in the fraction of non-owner-occupied
home purchases across areas. In particular, optimistic buyers expect to realize a capital gain rather
than a loss on the sale of an investment home. As such, capital gains taxes would have a negative
impact on investment home purchases. The magnitude of this impact could be substantial: as
reported by the Bureau of Census, the average sales price for houses sold in 2003 is $244,550
dollars. For a back-of-the-envelope calculation, using the summary statistics in our sample in Panel
A of Table 1, the capital gains would be, on average, $68,000 dollars if one purchased a house in
2003 and sold it in 2006. This sale would incur a tax of $3,400 dollars for a 5% average state
capital gains tax.

     That capital gains taxation represents an important margin for home buyers and sellers can
be seen by revealed preference from the passage of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997. This act
introduced the exclusion of capital gains from the sale of primary residences at the federal level.

7
  For a median income household, the marginal capital gains tax rate changed from 9% to 8.7% in the District of
Columbia and from 4.983% to 4.764% in Ohio from 2005 to 2006.
8
  Even credit rating agencies, such as Moody's, calculated the credit risk of mortgage-backed securities during the
boom period under the assumption that housing prices would not decline in the near future. In addition, Cheng, Raina,
and Xiong (2014) find that a sample of securitization agents also increased their own exposures to housing in 2004-
2006.

                                                         7
States followed suit in honoring this exclusion, providing an additional windfall to their residents.
Shan (2011) studies housing market behavior after the passage of the act and finds that the semi-
annual housing sales rate increased by 17 to 24% from baseline levels for homeowners with capital
gains between $0 and $500,000, with an elasticity of -0.1 to -0.2% in home sales for a $10,000
increase in capital gains taxes. That some states have extended the capital gains exclusion to
secondary homes since the financial crisis suggests that taxes on capital gains are a relevant margin
in home buyer decisions.

      Motivated by this observation, we instrument the fraction of non-owner-occupied home
purchases during the boom period of 2004-2006 with a tax variable that incorporates the marginal
capital gains tax rate across states. This variable is equal to zero in states with no capital gains
taxes and the marginal tax rate for a median income household in states with capital gains taxes.9
In using this instrument, we implicitly assume that the marginal buyer of non-owner-occupied
homes is an in-state resident. According to a survey by the National Association of Realtors (2015),
the typical investment property is 24 miles from the buyer's primary residence. This finding
suggests that the typical investment home buyer is likely to be in-state, supporting the relevance
requirement of our instrument. 10 In Section II, we also conduct a border analysis for states without
capital gains taxes to provide evidence of the relevance of state capital gains taxes as an instrument
for housing speculation.

      For our instrument to be valid, it also needs to satisfy the exclusion restriction for causality
with respect to the housing boom and the subsequent housing bust and economic contraction.11


9
  Albanesi, DeGiorgi, and Nosal (2017) provides evidence that real estate investors during the housing boom were
concentrated in the middle and upper echelons of the income distribution. We have also verified that our results are
robust to using instead the top marginal capital gains tax rate or a dummy indicator variable of whether a state has a
capital gains tax.
10
   Investment home buyers from out of state introduce a nuanced issue. A buyer expects to pay taxes on future capital
gains in both states ­ the state of residence and the state where the home resides ­ but may receive tax credits from
the state of residence to offset the double tax incidence. The buyer thus pays the higher tax rate between the two states.
We expect this issue to mostly affect zip codes close to the state border. In Section B of the Internet Appendix, we
repeat our empirical tests after splitting zip codes into two subsamples: 1) zip codes within 50 miles of state borders,
and 2) zip codes further than 50 miles from state borders. Consistent with our relevance assumption, the impact of
housing speculation on housing prices and real outcomes is quantitatively more pronounced in the second subsample,
where there is likely less noise from incorrect assignment of the tax treatment to non-owner-occupied home purchases.
Our results are still quantitatively and statistically significant for the first subsample, despite this classification issue.
11
   One concern is that although homeowners can exclude up to $250,000 ($500,000 per couple) of capital gains from
the sale of their primary residence, the capital gains taxes could still affect households' primary home demand. As

                                                              8
While economic activity in a state might be related to its treatment of state-level personal taxation,
our analysis requires only that, in absence of omitted variables correlated with both taxes and
changes in housing prices, the relative magnitudes of the housing boom and bust and real outcomes
during the Great Recession were not directly driven by variation in state-level capital gains
taxation during the boom period.12 We believe that this is the case for several reasons.

      First, capital gains taxation is only a part of state taxes. As summarized by Fajgelbaum et al.
(2018), there are several sources of state tax revenue, such as personal income taxes, corporate
income taxes, general sales taxes, selective sales taxes (e.g., alcohol sales taxes), and license taxes,
which accounted, respectively, for 35%, 7%, 32%, 15%, and 6.2% of total state tax revenue in
2017. Capital gains taxes are part of personal income taxes, and there is substantial variation across
states in the total state tax revenue, as well as in the rate for each of these tax components. There
is little evidence suggesting that state fiscal policies and capital gains taxation impact local
economic activity. Da et al. (2016) documents that state fiscal policies have a negligible effect on
firm cash flows, and only impact discount rates if a firm has a concentrated investor base. Several
studies, including Walden (2014) and Gale, Krupkin, and Reuben (2015), also find little relation
between the relative size of the public sector (state and local taxes as a percentage of personal
income) and state differences in economic growth during the recent recovery. In addition, as a
small portion of state tax revenue, capital gains taxes are even unlikely to affect economic
performance directly.

      Second, to directly test for a potential relation of state capital gains taxation with housing
prices and local economic activity, we conduct several placebo tests, available in Section A of the
Internet Appendix, for the pre-sample period of 1999 to 2001.13 We find an economically and
statistically insignificant link between state capital gains taxation and housing market and
economic outcomes during this period.



we construct our speculation measure as the fraction of non-owner-occupied homes in all home purchases, we filter
out the potential effect of the primary home demand to mitigate this concern.
12
   We use the level of, rather the change in, state capital gains taxes as our instrument. The level was stable during the
period of 2004-2006. While change in taxation might shock housing markets and local economies directly, the level
of state capital gains taxation likely affected only housing speculators' decisions when widespread optimism arose
during the boom period.
13
   We report the results for this pre-sample period because the data from the IRS start from 1998. The results are also
insignificant for the variables available in the Zip Code Business Patterns database since 1994.

                                                            9
      Third, we perform several Granger causality tests, available in Section E of the Internet
Appendix, and find that neither contemporaneous, lagged, nor leading changes in housing prices
or economic performance can predict state capital gains taxation from 1978 to 2010.14 The lack of
any evidence directly linking state capital gains taxation to housing market and economic
outcomes ensures the validity of our instrument.


                                            II.      Data Description

      Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics for a set of variables used in our analysis.

      Housing speculation: The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data set includes
comprehensive individual mortgage application and origination data for the U.S. It discloses owner
occupancy for each individual mortgage and indicates whether the mortgage is for a primary
residence or a non-owner-occupied home. We aggregate the HMDA data to the zip code level and
calculate the fraction of mortgage originations for non-owner-occupied homes in the total
mortgage origination as our measure of the share of non-owner-occupied home purchases.15 The
fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006 has a mean of 13.6% and a standard
deviation of 9.9% across zip codes.

      Figure 1 depicts the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases for the U.S. and three
cities, New York, Las Vegas, and Charlotte, from 2000 to 2010. Non-owner-occupied home
purchases represent a sizable fraction of mortgage originations, comprising 15.31% of all new
originations in the U.S. at its peak in 2005. While this measure of non-owner-occupied home
purchases contains both second home and investment home purchases, both types of home



14
   Specifically, we run the state-level panel regressions of marginal state capital gains tax rate for $50,000 in income
(in 2005 USD) on contemporaneous, lagged (one or five years), or leading (one or five years) changes in housing
prices, and economic performance including wages and salaries, number of establishments, employment, per capita
income, and unemployment rate. We also control for the corporate tax rate, sales tax rate, and year fixed effects. We
find similar results for the $10,000, $25,000, $75,000, and $100,000 income brackets. We also find similar results if,
instead of one and five year leads and lags, we use two, three, or four years. These state-level variables are from
Serrato and Zidar (2018) and NBER TAXISM.
15
   Haughwout et al. (2011) use the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel to determine housing investors based on the
number of first-lien mortgage accounts that appear on their credit reports. Their proprietary data are more reliable than
the HMDA data. Chinco and Mayer (2016) identify out-of-town second home buyers by distinguishing between the
property and tax bill mailing addresses in transaction deeds. These data, however, are not as comprehensive as the
HMDA data with which we are able to conduct a nationwide analysis of housing markets.

                                                           10
purchases are at least partially influenced by the motive to speculate on housing price appreciation,
which became a national phenomenon in the low interest rate environment of the mid-2000s.
Among the three cities, Las Vegas had the highest fraction of non-owner-occupied home
purchases, which rose from a level 17.77% in 2000 to 29.41% in 2005, and then dropped back
down to 17.77% in 2008. New York had the lowest fraction, which, while having a synchronous
rise and fall with the other two cities, remained below 7% during this period.

        One may be concerned that our measure of speculation has substantial measurement error
because it does not include investment home purchases made in cash, and there is evidence of
systematic misreporting of owner occupancy by banks to MBS investors, for instance in Piskorski,
Seru, and Witkin (2015). Consistent with the intuition that our measure of speculation
underestimates the true level of speculation in a zip code, Table C2 in Section C of the Internet
Appendix confirms that the OLS estimates of all our coefficients of interest are biased downward
compared to their IV counterparts. To address the potential issue that our results may be driven by
fraud from misreporting, rather than speculation itself, we add the misreporting measure from
Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin (2015), which measures the mean fraction of loans in a zip code with
undeclared second-liens or non-owner occupancy status, as a control in all our main regressions in
Section D of the Internet Appendix.16

        Capital gains instrument: We use the historical state capital gains tax rate as a key
instrument for our analysis of housing speculation. Specifically, we collect state capital gains tax
data from the Tax Foundation and state median income data from the American Community
Survey conducted by the Census Bureau. We construct the measure of the capital gains tax burden
on housing speculation at the state level based on the historical tax schedule in these states. We
exploit variation in the state capital gains taxation by measuring the marginal capital gains tax
burden for the median-income residents within a state in 2005. Figure 2 displays a map of the
distribution of capital gains taxes at the state level. As shown in this figure, there are nine states
without capital gains tax: Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Washington, and Wyoming. For states with capital gains taxes, the marginal capital gains




16
     We do not control for it in our main tables because of the loss of zip code observations in matching the data.

                                                            11
tax rates range from 2.1% in states such as North Dakota to 9% in states such as Oregon. The mean
of the tax burden on the intensive margin is 4.77% and the standard deviation is 1.27%.17

      To demonstrate that state capital gains taxes influenced speculation during the boom period,
we perform a border analysis by examining zip codes within 50 miles of the border of states with
zero capital gains taxes, excluding Alaska.18 Panel A of Table 2 tests for a jump across borders in
the fraction of non-owner occupied home purchases from 2004 to 2006 and in the fraction of
subprime mortgages in 2005, and reveals that the dummy for whether the state has capital gains
taxes significantly negatively predicts our measure of speculation, but has no impact on subprime
credit expansion. The fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases jumps by 4.9%, and this
economic magnitude is substantial relative to its mean of 13.6% and standard deviation of 9.9%.
Panel A of Figure 3 confirms graphically that there is a discontinuous jump in the fraction of non-
owner-occupied home purchases at the state borders when plotting the coefficients from the
distance regression, while Panel B demonstrates that there is no discernable analogous jump in the
fraction of subprime mortgages. To further confirm that our instrument captures only variation in
housing speculation, Panel B of Table 2 reports results from border regressions of the tax dummy
on all our control variables and reveals that all coefficients are statistically insignificant. Our
border analysis consequently provides evidence that our instrument satisfies the relevance
condition, and that it instruments for housing speculation and not for subprime credit expansion.

      House prices: We use zip code level house price data from the Case-Shiller Home Price
indices, which are constructed from repeated home sales.19 We further deflate the Case-Shiller
Home Price Indices with the Consumer Price Index (CPI) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The
real house price change has a mean of 27.8% in 2004-2006 across the zip codes in our sample, and
a mean of -41.3% in 2007-2009.



17
   Table C1 in Section C of the Internet Appendix reports reduced-form regressions of house price changes and all our
economic outcomes during the cycle on the tax instrument. While the coefficients are not economically interpretable
in the context of housing speculation, their statistical significance provides evidence of an economic link between our
tax instrument and economic outcomes, which is central for our IV regressions.
18
   Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2015) used a similar zip code-level analysis around state borders with different foreclosure
laws to justify state judicial requirements as an instrument for foreclosures. They find a jump in the foreclosure rate
at the border between a judicial and a non-judicial state.
19
   All our results are quantitatively similar, and remain significant, if we instead use Zillow housing price indices as
our measure of local housing prices. These results are reported in Section F of the Internet Appendix.

                                                          12
     Figure 4 displays the Case-Shiller real house price indices for the U.S. and three cities, New
York, Las Vegas, and Charlotte, from 2000-2010. The national housing market experienced a
significant boom and bust cycle in the 2000s with the national home price index increasing over
60% from 2000-2006, and then falling back to its 2000 level in 2007-2009. New York had a real
housing price appreciation of more than 80% during the boom and then declined by over 25%
during the bust. Charlotte had an almost flat real housing price level throughout this decade.
Interestingly, Las Vegas, which had the most dramatic rise and fall in non-owner-occupied home
purchases, also experienced the most pronounced housing price expansion--over 120%--during
the boom, and the most dramatic housing price drop--over 50%--during the bust.

     Local economic performance: We collect data on economic performance at the zip code
level from various sources. Annual population and annual per capita income at the zip code level
are available from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The IRS does not, however, provide data
for 2000 and 2003. We therefore use the data for 2002 and 2006 to calculate the changes during
the boom period and the changes from 2001 to 2002 for the pre-boom period. Annual total
employment, annual payroll, and the number of establishments at the zip code level are available
from the Zip Code Business Patterns database. We include both resident income and annual payroll
from employers because, as argued by Mian and Sufi (2009), residents in a certain area do not
necessarily work in the same place that they live. The change in per capita income has a mean of
5.2% in 2003-2006 and a mean of -11.3% in 2007-2009, which is consistent with the dramatic
economic expansion and recession during the boom and bust period. Similarly, the employment
change has a mean of 7.1% (-8.3%), the change in the number of establishments has a mean of
6.4% (-3.8%), and the real payroll change has a mean of 8.7% (-10.0%) in 2004-2006 (2007-2009).

     Zip Code Business Patterns database also provides employment data by establishment size
and by industry. For our analysis, we are interested in the construction industry as it is directly
related to the supply side of housing markets. We also follow Mian and Sufi (2014) to identify
non-tradable industries because they produce non-tradable goods and services, which reflect the
strength of local demand. Alternatively, we examine the retail and restaurant industries, which rely
on local consumption.

     New housing supply: To measure supply-side activities in local housing markets, we use
building permits from the U.S. Census Bureau, which conducts a survey of permit issuing all over

                                                13
the U.S. Compared with other construction-related measures, such as housing starts and housing
completions, building permits are more detailed and available at the county level. In addition,
building permits are issued before housing starts and can therefore predict price trends in a timely
manner.20 A potential weakness of this measure, however, is that the Census Bureau does not
provide building permit data at the zip code level. Specifically, using 2000 U.S. census data, we
measure new housing supply at the county level during the boom period by the building permits
issued from 2004 to 2006 relative to the existing housing units in 2000.21 This measure has a mean
of 5.6% across counties in our sample and a substantial standard deviation of 5.6%.

     Figure 5 depicts the annual building permits granted in 2000-2010 relative to the number of
housing units in 2000 for the U.S. and for three cities, New York, Las Vegas, and Charlotte. At
the national level, annual building permits had a modest increase from 1.05% in 2000 to 1.45% in
2005 and then a substantial drop to 0.38% in 2009. New York saw very little increase in its housing
supply, with annual building permits staying at a flat level of less than 0.4% throughout this
decade. Charlotte had a larger increase in supply than New York in the 2000s. Interestingly, Las
Vegas had the most dramatic rise and fall in annual building permits, rising from 2.03% in 2000
to a level above 5% in 2005 and 2006, and then dropping to 0.50% in 2009, roughly in sync with
the rise and fall of non-owner-occupied home purchases and the housing price cycle.

     Credit conditions: We include several variables on credit conditions at the zip code level to
control for the credit expansion during the recent housing boom. We use mortgages originated for
home purchases and link the lender institutions on the HUD subprime home lender list to the
HMDA data to identify the mortgages issued to the subprime households. As the HUD subprime
home lender list ended in 2005, we use the fraction of subprime mortgage originations in 2005 as
the share of low-quality loans in the zip code during the housing cycle. This fraction has a mean
of 21.1% and a standard deviation of 13.8%. The HMDA data set also indicates whether a
mortgage application is denied by the lender, and whether the originated mortgage is sold to

20
   Authorization to start is a largely irreversible process, with housing starts being only 2.5% lower than building
permits at the aggregate level according to https://www.census.gov/construction/nrc/nrcdatarelationships.html, the
website of the Census Bureau. Moreover, the delay between authorization and housing start is relatively short, on
average less than one month, according to https://www.census.gov/construction/nrc/lengthoftime.html. These facts
suggest that building permits are an appropriate measure of new housing supply.
21
   Our results for new housing supply are robust to allocating new building permits at the county level to zip codes
according to the fraction of employment in residential construction in 2000.

                                                        14
government sponsored entities (GSEs). Consequently, we can also control for the mortgage denial
rate and the share of mortgages sold to GSEs in 2005 at the zip code level.22 The mortgage denial
rate has a mean of 13.9% and the fraction of GSE mortgages has a mean of 19.3%.23 We also
include the denial rate and the fraction of mortgages sold to GSEs for non-owner-occupied
mortgages to control for the possible heterogeneous credit conditions to housing investors.

      Other controls: For housing supply elasticity, we employ the widely used elasticity measure
constructed by Saiz (2010). This measure reflects geographic constraints in home building by
defining undevelopable land for construction as terrain with a slope of 15 degrees or more and as
areas lost to bodies of water including seas, lakes, and wetlands. This measure has a lower value
if an area is more geographically restricted.24

      We also control for various economic fundamentals at the zip code level. We use information
from the Census Bureau in 2000 including population, fraction of college-educated population,
fraction of workforce, median household income, poverty rate, urban rate, and the fraction of white
people. In addition, we control for whether a state is one of the so-called "sand states" (Arizona,
California, Florida, and Nevada), and whether the state has non-recourse mortgage laws. As
highlighted, for instance, by Nathanson and Zwick (2017) and Choi et al. (2016), the sand states
experienced phenomenal housing cycles in comparison to the rest of the U.S. in such outcomes as
mortgage origination, defaults, and housing price fluctuations.25 The nature of the mortgage laws
in a given state has been found to be an important predictor of real outcomes in the housing market
(Dobbie and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2014)) and of speculative activity in the housing market (Nam
and Oh (2016)).




22
   We control for these variables only in 2005 since we use the subprime mortgage fraction in 2005. The results are
unaffected if we instead choose these controls in 2004-2006.
23
   We acknowledge that misreporting is common in mortgage data, as emphasized in Griffin and Maturana (2015,
2016). For example, recent studies such as Avery et al. (2012), Blackburn and Vermilyea (2012), and Mian and Sufi
(2015), cast doubt on the accuracy of HMDA data, and, in particular, find that the income variable could be overstated
by home buyers. For this reason, we use income data from the IRS and control for the misreporting measure from
Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin (2015) for robustness.
24
   The Saiz (2010) measure is not, however, without its issues. Davidoff (2015), for instance, argues that the Saiz
measure is a poor instrument for housing prices because it is correlated with many variables related to housing demand.
25
   In Section G of the Internet Appendix, we rerun all our regressions excluding the four sand states for robustness. It
is reassuring that our results are not affected by their exclusion.

                                                          15
     In addition, we control for other potential sources of secondary housing demand beyond
speculation. We collect the fraction of renters in a zip code, as well as the fraction of immigrants
in the past five years, to control for long-term trends in local demographics. We also collect the
fraction of employment in recreation and entertainment to proxy for the appeal of a zip code as a
vacation destination. We construct these variables from the 2000 Census data. While it is infeasible
to consider all potential confounding factors in our analysis, we believe that with theses controls,
we provide an improvement over existing measures of housing speculation to systematically
investigate its causal effects.

     Note that the limitation of our sample is that Case Shiller housing price data requires a
sufficient number of housing transactions within a zip code to be able to construct indices based
on repeated sales of the same house. After including all these controls, our data sample covers
3,935 zip codes during the boom period and 3,904 zip codes during the bust period across the U.S.

     Speculation vs subprime: Figure 6 shows that there is little correlation between the
distribution of housing speculation and that of subprime mortgages across zip codes. Statistically,
the correlation coefficient between the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-
2006 and the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005 is only 0.004 and is insignificant. This
suggests that housing speculation is a phenomenon largely independent of the credit expansion to
subprime households. Instead, our measure of housing speculation captures the purchases of non-
owner-occupied homes by relatively wealthier households in booming areas.

     Panel B of Table 1 provides evidence of where non-owner occupied versus subprime housing
purchases were prevalent during the boom period by examining their correlations with our
controls. Although both occurred in areas with similar initial fundamentals in 2000, along
demographic dimensions including the poverty rate, median household income, and employment,
and were pronounced in the four sand states and areas that had higher housing price appreciation
from 2003-2006 and mortgage denial rates in 2005, they differed along several substantive
dimensions during the boom. Speculation occurred in areas that experienced economic expansions
in income, payroll, and employment. Subprime credit expansion, in contrast, flourished in areas
that experienced economic contractions, and that had inelastic housing supplies, non-recourse
mortgage laws, and a lower fraction of GSE loans.


                                                16
     Regression analysis: To account for the relative importance of different zip codes in the
recent U.S. housing cycle, we conduct all our regression analyses by weighting observations by
the number of households within the zip code in 2000. All our results are robust to employing an
equal-weighting scheme instead. In addition, because our instrument varies across states, we
cluster standard errors at the state level in all regressions. Although our tax instrument is at the
state level, it nevertheless provides substantial cross-sectional variation for us to identify the
effects of speculation during the recent U.S. housing cycle.


                                III.    Economic Consequences

     In this section, we examine the cross-section of housing speculation during the boom period
of 2004-2006, and its economic consequences during both the boom period and the subsequent
bust period of 2007-2009.

A. Housing Cycle

     We first examine the link between housing speculation and the housing cycle. Figure 7
provides a scatter plot of the real housing price changes during the boom period of 2004-2006
(Panel A) and the bust period of 2007-2009 (Panel B) against the fraction of non-owner-occupied
home purchases during the boom period of 2004-2006 at the zip code level. The plot displays a
clear association between more intensive housing speculation and both greater housing price
increases during the boom, and greater subsequent housing price collapses during the bust.

     Table 3 reports the two-stage instrumental variable approach to formally analyze this relation
by using the variable of the marginal capital gains tax rate for the median income household within
the state as our instrument. Specifically, we first regress the fraction of non-owner-occupied home
purchases during the boom period of 2004-2006 on the tax instrument:

                 , =  +   +  +  ,                                                   (1)

where we use a list of controls, including the supply elasticity measure, the fraction of subprime
mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate in 2005, the fraction of GSE mortgages in 2005, the
mortgage denial rate for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, the fraction of GSE mortgages

                                                17
for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, per capita income change in 2003-2006, population
change in 2003-2006, the change in the number of establishments in 2004-2006, real payroll
change in 2004-2006, the employment change in 2004-2006, the natural logarithm of the
population in 2000, the fraction of the college educated in 2000, the fraction of the employed in
2000, the fraction of workforce in 2000, median household income in 2000, the poverty rate in
2000, the urban rate in 2000, the fraction of white residents in 2000, the fraction of employment
in arts, entertainment, and recreation in 2000, the fraction of renters in 2000, the fraction of
immigrants in 2000, a dummy for whether a state has non-recourse mortgage laws, and a dummy
for whether a state is a sand state.

     Column (1) of Table 3 shows the first stage result that the tax instrument has a significant
explanatory power for the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases. The F-statistic of
69.93 provides reassurance that the tax rate variable is a valid instrument, with regard to relevance,
for the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases.

     We next analyze the causal effect of housing speculation on price expansion during the boom
period, and the price contraction during the bust period. Specifically, we regress cumulative
changes in housing price in 2004-2006 and in 2007-2009 on the predicted fraction of non-owner-
occupied home purchases during the boom period of 2004-2006, instrumented by our tax rate
variable, following the first-stage regressions:

              ,   =  +  , +  +  ,                                                           (2)

where the left-hand variable is the housing price change during either the boom period of 2004-
2006 or the bust period of 2007-2009, and , is the projected housing speculation
from the first-stage regression. We also add the same control variables from the first stage
regression.

     Column (2) of Table 3 shows that the IV coefficient estimate of the impact of housing
speculation on housing prices during the boom is significantly positive, both statistically and in its
economic magnitude: a one standard deviation increase in the fraction of non-owner-occupied
home purchases across zip codes causes a substantial price increase of 26.5%. Column (3) of Table
3 shows the IV estimate of the impact of housing speculation on the housing price contraction


                                                   18
during the bust is significantly negative, both statistically and in its economic magnitude: a one
standard deviation increase in the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases across zip
codes translates to a substantial price decline of 37.4%. Taken together, our analysis establishes a
causal link between housing speculation during the boom period of 2004-2006 and the housing
boom and bust cycle of 2004-2009.

      What drove housing speculation during the boom period? We now examine extrapolative
expectations as a driver of housing speculation. We hypothesize that non-owner-occupied home
purchases in areas with less capital gains taxation would anchor more strongly on lagged housing
price changes, given that speculators with extrapolative expectations expect to profit more from
housing speculation in these areas. To test this hypothesis, we run the following regression:

        , =  +  ,- +   +  ,-   +
                                     +  ,                                               (3)

where , is the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in zip code 
during the boom period of 2004-2006 and ,- refers to the cumulative housing price
change during the pre-boom period of 2001-2003. We also interact ,- with the
capital gains tax rate  . Lastly, we also control for a host of local fundamental variables during
the pre-boom period.

      Table 4 displays the results on extrapolation. Without including the state capital gains tax
rate, Column (1) shows positive though statistically insignificant relationship between housing
speculation and the lagged housing price change. In contrast, when we introduce the state capital
gains tax rate into the regression, as specified in equation (3). Column (2) shows that, across zip
codes, housing price increase during the pre-boom period significantly predict higher fractions of
non-owner-occupied home purchases during the boom period. More importantly, housing
speculation at the zip code level in states with less capital gains taxes reacted more strongly to the
pre-boom housing price increase, and this relation is statistically significant at the 1% level.26 This


26
  The Frisch Waugh Theorem gives an alternative interpretation of our results. The coefficient on past housing prices
and its interaction with the tax instrument is equivalent to regressing the residual from regressing the fraction of non-
owner-occupied home purchases on fundamentals on the residuals from regressing past housing prices and its

                                                           19
finding thus provides evidence that housing speculation, anchored on past house price changes,
contributed a non-fundamental source of housing demand during the boom, especially in areas
more prone to speculative behavior.27 This result also indicates the important role played by state
capital gains taxation in shaping speculators' extrapolative behavior, validating relevance of this
instrument for our subsequent analysis.


B. Economic Cycle

     By affecting housing prices, housing speculation can also impact local economic activity. We
again apply the two-stage instrumental variable approach to formally analyze this relation by using
the variable of the marginal capital gains tax rate for the median income household within a state
as the instrument. For the second stage, we run the following regression:


                ,   =  +  , +  +  ,                                                                   (4)


where ,   indicates the cumulative change in economic outcomes (per capita income,
the number of establishments, real payroll, and employment) during either the boom period of
2004-2006 or the bust period of 2007-2009, and , is the projected housing
speculation from the first-stage regression specified in equation (1).

     We first examine to what extent housing market speculation contributed to local economic
expansions during the boom period. Table 5 Panel A reports the results from using the measures
of economic activity during the boom period of 2004-2006 as the dependent variables. Housing
speculation is positively associated with all these measures. Real payroll, as shown in column (3),
is most heavily affected by local housing speculation during the boom: a one standard deviation
increase in the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases across zip codes leads to a
substantial increase of 13.7% in real payroll. Income per capita and employment, as shown in
columns (1) and (4), also increase by 12.9% and 8.4%, respectively. Finally, the change in the


interaction on fundamentals. The OLS coefficients therefore capture the responsiveness of non-fundamental housing
demand to past housing price growth that is orthogonal to fundamentals, and its interaction with the tax instrument.
27
   Consistent with our results, Wheaton and Nechayev (2008) show that a regression forecasting housing price
appreciation systematically underestimates the realized housing price growth between 1998 and 2005, and that these
forecast errors are positively correlated with the percentage of home sales attributed to investors and second home
buyers within a MSA.

                                                        20
number of establishments, shown in column (2), is the most modest, although the effect is still
economically meaningful: a one standard deviation increase in the fraction of non-owner-occupied
home purchases across zip codes translates to an increase of 6.8% in the number of establishments.

     Panel B of Table 5 reports the results of regressing our measures of economic activity in the
bust period of 2007-2009 on the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases during the boom
period of 2004-2006, instrumented by our tax rate variable. Housing speculation is negatively
associated with all four measures of economic consequences at the 1% significance level during
the bust. Among these measures, real payroll, which is shown in column (3), is most heavily
affected by local housing speculation during the boom: a one standard deviation increase in the
fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases across zip codes corresponds to a substantial drop
of 15.4% in real payroll. The same increase in housing speculation also corresponds to substantial
drops of 7.8% in income per capita, 8.7% in the number of establishments, and 14.6% in
employment, as shown in columns (1), (2), and (4), respectively. The variation across zip codes in
their economic responses, consequently, reflects not only differences in the deterioration of local
fundamentals and firm adjustment costs of employment, wages, and establishments, but also
differences in exposure to housing speculation during the boom.

     As shown in Tables 3 and 5, some of these control variables are also highly significant. In
particular, the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005 is significantly correlated with the
magnitudes of the housing price boom and bust, as well as our four measures of the local economic
downturn during the bust period, consistent with the findings of Mian and Sufi (2009, 2014).

     In addition to the results presented here, we also report robustness analyses in the Internet
Appendix. As two of the four sand states, Florida and Nevada, have no capital gains taxes, this
raises a potential concern that the effect of housing speculation on the price increase during the
boom, and decline during the bust, might be driven by these two states. Section G of the Internet
Appendix invalidates this concern by repeating Tables 3 and 5 excluding the four sand states.
Section F illustrates that our results are quantitatively similar, and remain significant, if we instead
use Zillow housing price data. Section H shows that our results are robust after excluding control
variables related to local economic performance during the boom period that are potentially
correlated with speculation and endogenous to the housing cycle. Finally, Table C2 in Section C


                                                  21
reports the OLS estimates of Tables 3 and 5. Our IV analyses reveal a consistent downward bias
in the OLS estimates. This is consistent with investment home buyers reducing their demand as
house prices increase, and consequently having a smaller impact on economic outcomes, as well
as with a downward bias in our measure of speculation because of cash deals and bank
misreporting.


                               IV.     Transmission Mechanisms

     Having demonstrated a causal relationship between housing speculation during the boom
period and the decline in local economic activity during the bust, we now investigate several
potential transmission mechanisms by which housing speculation propagated to the real economy
during 2007-2009.


A. Supply Overhang

     By driving up housing demand, housing speculation may have boosted the supply side of the
housing market during the boom. The increased housing supply would then overhang on the
housing market and the local economy during the bust, as argued by Rognlie, Shleifer, and Simsek
(2015). This effect implies that housing speculation during the boom has a stronger negative
predictive power for economic outcomes in the construction sector than for the non-construction
sector. To examine this supply overhang effect, we first examine the impact of housing speculation
on housing supply. Given that the Census Bureau provides building permit data only at the county
level, we carry out the analysis by aggregating non-owner-occupied home purchases and all other
controls to the county level. Figure 8 provides a scatter plot of the building permits in 2004-2006
relative to the number of housing units in 2000--our measure of new housing supply--against the
fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in the same period. The plot vividly illustrates a
positive relation between housing speculation and new housing supply.

     Table 6 then demonstrates a causal link by regressing the new housing supply measure on the
fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006, instrumented by the state capital
gains tax rate variable. We report the two-stage results in columns (1) and (2), from the regressions
specified in equations (1) and (2), respectively. A difference from our previous analyses is that the
observations in Table 6 are at the county level. We weight observations by the total number of

                                                 22
households at the county level in 2000, and cluster standard errors at the state level. As shown in
column (1), the tax instrument also has significant explanatory power for the fraction of non-
owner-occupied home purchases at the county level. The F-statistic of 19.75 from the first stage
suggests that the instrument is statistically strong for this county-level test. Column (2) reports the
second-stage results. The IV coefficient estimate of the impact of housing speculation on the new
supply during the boom is significantly positive, establishing a causal link between them.
Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in the fraction of non-owner-occupied home
purchases across counties corresponds to a substantial increase of 4.2% in new housing supply
between 2004 and 2006.

     We also expect stronger explanatory power for economic outcomes in the construction sector
than other sectors during the boom period. We examine this effect by returning to a zip code-level
and Panel A of Table 7 confirms this hypothesis. Housing speculation drove the increase in
employment in the construction sector more dramatically than that in other sectors: a one standard
deviation increase in the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases across zip codes
corresponds to an increase of 25.1% in employment in the construction sector (Column 1) and of
6.1% in other industries (Column 2). The statistically and economically significant impact of
housing speculation on industries other than the construction sector, however, suggests that
additional transmission mechanisms are needed to explain the overall economic effect of housing
speculation.

     Supply overhang can both exacerbate the subsequent housing price bust and reduce demand
for new housing, leading to a large decline in construction activity during the recession. The impact
could be even more pronounced than that in the boom since construction is irreversible. We
examine this effect by returning to a zip code-level analysis of economic performance of different
sectors during the bust period using the same two-stage regressions as in Panel B of Table 7.
Column (1) shows that housing speculation leads to a severe reduction in employment in the
construction sector. Consistent with the supply overhang channel, the IV coefficient estimate
shows that the impact of housing speculation on the construction sector is more than twice as great
as that on total employment (reported in Panel B of Table 5)--a one standard deviation increase
in the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases across zip codes during the boom is
associated with a decrease of 33.8% in construction-sector employment during the bust.

                                                  23
        In column (2), we also examine the change in employment in all industries except the
construction sector. The result is still both statistically and economically significant: A one
standard deviation increase in the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases across zip
codes causes a decrease of 12.4% in non-construction sector employment. This result suggests that
the economic effects of housing speculation are not restricted to the construction sector.


B. Local Demand

        We also examine an alternative channel for housing speculation to affect the real economy
through local demand. Housing speculation may have exacerbated the fluctuations in household
wealth during the housing boom and bust, which may affect their consumption. As suggested by
Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014), the shock to household consumption would,
in turn, drive the demand for local services. Thus, housing speculation during the boom may also
lead to an economic cycle through this local demand channel. As such, we expect housing
speculation during the boom to have stronger explanatory power for economic outcomes in
industries that are driven by local demand.

        To examine this local demand channel, we use the classification of non-tradable and tradable
industries from Mian and Sufi (2014), 28 who define these sectors based on an industry's
geographical concentration. Since non-tradable sectors service local demand within a region, their
locations tend to be dispersed geographically. In contrast, tradable sectors supply goods to meet
national demand and are less exposed to local economic conditions, and therefore they should be
more concentrated spatially to take advantage of economic scale and specific resources. As an
alternative, we also examine the restaurant and retail sectors more narrowly, which mainly rely on
local demand.

        Table 8 reports the coefficient estimates from the regression of the fraction of non-owner-
occupied home purchases during the boom period on the change in employment in the non-tradable
sectors in column (1), and the retail and restaurant sectors in column (3), during both the boom
(Panel A) and the bust (Panel B) periods using our IV method. Housing speculation has an
economically profound impact on employment in these sectors at the 1% significance level: an

28
     For the detailed classification, refer to Appendix Table 1 of Mian and Sufi (2014).

                                                            24
increase of one standard deviation in the share of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-
2006 is associated with an increase of 8.8% (a decrease of 15.1%) in the employment of non-
tradable sectors, and of 8.9% (15.6%) in the employment of retail and restaurant sectors in 2004-
2006 (2007-2009). These economic magnitudes are similar to those for the change in overall
employment, reported in column (4) of Table 5, and for the change in non-construction
employment, reported in column (2) of Table 7. This sizable effect on the non-tradable sectors,
whether broadly or narrowly defined, indicates that housing speculation during the housing boom
had a substantially adverse effect on local demand during the housing bust.

     For comparison, we also include the estimates for the employment change in tradable
industries in column (2) and the employment change in industries other than retail and the
restaurant business in column (4). Housing speculation has an insignificant effect on the
employment of tradable industries and on industries other than retail and the restaurant business
during the boom period. During the bust period, we also find an insignificant impact on the
employment of tradable sectors, and that the impact of housing speculation on the retail and
restaurant business was stronger than that on the other sectors (15.6% versus 11.2% from a one-
standard-deviation increase in housing speculation). As employment in tradable sectors relies more
on national demand, the adverse effects of local housing speculation are weaker for these
industries.

     Taken together, our analysis provides evidence that housing speculation affected real
economic outcomes during the Great Recession through the supply overhang and the local demand
channels. Since employment in residential construction contributes to local demand, these two
channels are likely complementary, and it is reassuring that we find that both are significant in
contributing to the severity of the local recessions during the bust. 29



29
  While we focus on only two channels, the literature has identified several other potential transmission mechanisms.
By reducing the collateral value of housing (a widely-used collateral for firms to raise debt financing), housing
speculation may have affected firms' access to credit during the housing bust, as studied in Adelino, Schoar, and
Severino (2015) and Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar (2017). Another channel is through the impairment of intermediary
balance sheets of local banks during the bust, which may have prevented them from lending to local firms, as
highlighted in Gan (2007) and He and Krishnamurthy (2013). Housing speculation may also affect local economic
activity through a crowding out effect. By encumbering mortgage financing from local banks, housing speculation
may have crowded out limited bank financing to non-housing investment, as suggested by Chakraborty, Goldstein
and MacKinlay (2018). We leave it to future research to analyze these potentially important channels.

                                                         25
                                         V.      Conclusion

     In this paper, we provide evidence that housing speculation, as measured by the fraction of
non-owner-occupied home purchases, arose from extrapolation by speculators of past housing
price changes. We document how this speculation during the boom period of 2004-2006 had
positive economic consequences during the boom period, and adverse consequences during the
bust period of 2007-2009. We demonstrate this causal relationship by taking advantage of an
instrument based on variation in state capital gains taxation. Our results suggest that housing
speculation had real economic consequences during the boom, by increasing housing prices and
fueling local economic expansions, and during the recession, by depressing residential
construction employment, as a result of supply overhang, and by reducing local household
demand. Taken together, our analysis reveals that speculation in housing markets, partly driven by
behavioral biases, impacted the real economy both during and in the aftermath of the recent U.S.
housing cycle.



References

Albanesi, Stefania, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Jaromir Nosal (2017), Credit Growth and the
Financial Crisis: A New Narrative, mimeo University of Pittsburgh, Geneva School of Economics
and Management, and Boston College.
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino (2015). House Prices, Collateral, and
Self-employment. Journal of Financial Economics 117(2), 288-306.
Avery, Robert, Neil Bhutta, Kenneth Brevoort, and Glenn Canner (2012), The Mortgage Market
in 2011: Highlights from Data Reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, Federal
Reserve Bulletin 98(6): 1-46.
Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel (2017), The Economic
Effects of Social Networks: Evidence from the Housing Market, Journal of Political Economy,
forthcoming.
Barlevy, Gadi and Jonas D.M. Fisher (2011), Mortgage Choice and Housing Speculation, mimeo
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Bayer, Patrick, Christopher Geissler, Kyle Mangum, and James W. Roberts (2015), Speculators
and Middlemen: The Strategy and Performance of Investors in the Housing Market, mimeo Duke
University, Georgia State University, ISO New England, and NBER.
Blackburn, McKinley and Todd Vermilyea (2012), The Prevalence and Impact of Misstated
Incomes on Mortgage Loan Applications, Journal of Housing Economics 21: 151-168.


                                               26
Case, Karl and Robert J. Shiller (2003), Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2003(2): 299-362.
Case, Karl, Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Thompson (2012), What Have They Been Thinking?
Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 265-315.
Case, Karl, Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Thompson (2015), What Have They Been Thinking?
Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets -- A 2014 Update, Cowles Foundation Discussion
Paper.
Chakraborty, Indraneel, Itay Goldstein, and Andrew MacKinlay (2018), Housing Price Booms and
Crowding-Out Effects in Bank Lending, Review of Financial Studies 31(7): 2806-2853.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2016a), Housing Booms and
Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance, mimeo University of Chicago and
Northwestern.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2016b), Housing Booms,
Manufacturing Decline, and Labor Market Outcomes, mimeo University of Chicago and
Northwestern.
Chen, Ting, Laura Xiaolei Liu, Wei Xiong, Li-An Zhou (2016), The Speculation Channel and
Crowding Out Channel: Real Estate Shocks and Corporate Investment in China, mimeo Princeton
University.
Cheng, Ing-haw, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong (2014), Wall Street and the Housing Bubble,
American Economic Review 104, 2797-2829.
Chinco, Alex and Christopher Mayer (2016), Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing in the
Housing Market. Review of Financial Studies 29(2): 486-522.
Choi, Hyun-Soo, Harrison Hong, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeffrey P. Thompson (2016), Sand States
and the U.S. Housing Crisis, mimeo Singapore School of Management, Columbia University,
Syracuse University, and Federal Reserve Board.
Da, Zhi, Mitch Warachka, and Hayong Yun (2016), Fiscal Policy, Consumption Risk, and Stock
Returns: Evidence from U.S. States, mimeo University of Notre Dame, University of San Diego,
and Michigan State University.
Davidoff, Thomas (2015), Supply Constraints Are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home
Prices Because They Are Correlated with Many Demand Factors, mimeo UBC.
DeFusco, Anthony A., Charles G. Nathanson, and Eric Zwick (2017), Speculative Dynamics of
Prices and Volume, mimeo Kellogg School of Management and University of Chicago Booth.
Dobbie, Will, and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham (2014), Debtor protections and the Great Recession,
Working paper.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, and Owen M. Zidar (2018),
State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation. Review of Economic Studies, Forthcoming.
Favara, Giovanni, and Jean Imbs (2015). Credit Supply and the Price of Housing. American
Economic Review, 105(3), 958-992.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2015), Macroeconomic
Implications of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General
Equilibrium, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.


                                            27
Ferreira, Fernando, and Joseph Gyourko (2018), Anatomy of the Beginning of the Housing Boom:
US Neighborhoods and Metropolitan Areas, mimeo NBER.
Gale, William G., Aaron Krupkin, and Kim Reuben (2015), The Relationship between Taxes and
Growth at the State Level: New Evidence, mimeo Brookings Institute.
Gan, Jie (2007), The Real Effects of Asset Market Bubbles: Loan- and Firm-level Evidence of a
Lending Channel. Review of Financial Studies 20(6), 1941-1973.
Glaeser, Edward (2013), A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American History,
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103(3), 1-42.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz (2008), Housing Supply and Housing Bubbles,
Journal of Urban Economics 64, 198-217.
Glaeser, Edward and Charles G. Nathanson (2017), An Extrapolative Model of House Price
Dynamics, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Griffin, John M., and Gonzalo Maturana (2016), Who Facilitated Misreporting in Securitized
Loans? Review of Financial Studies 29, 384-419.
Griffin, John M., and Gonzalo Maturana (2015), Did Dubious Mortgage Origination Practices
Distort House Prices? Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Haughwout, Andrew, Donghoon Lee, Joseph Tracy, and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2011), Real
Estate Investors, the Leverage Cycle, and the Housing Market Crisis, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Staff Reports 514.
Haughwout, Andrew, Richard Peach, John Sporn, and Joseph Tracy (2013), The Supply Side of
the Housing Boom and Bust of the 2000s, in Housing and the Financial Crisis, pp. 69-104,
University of Chicago Press.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2013). Intermediary Asset Pricing, American Economic
Review 103, 732-770.
Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai (2005), Assessing High House Prices:
Bubbles, Fundamentals, and Misperceptions, Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (4), 67-92.
Hurst, Erik, Benjamin J. Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph S. Vavra (2016), Regional redistribution
through the US mortgage market, American Economic Review 106(10), 2982-3028.
Justiano, Alejandro , Georgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambolatti (2017), Credit Supply and the
Housing Boom, mimeo Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and Northwestern University.
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L. Violante (2017), The Housing Boom and Bust:
Model Meets Evidence, mimeo University of Chicago, Stockholm University, and Princeton
University.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig (2009), Financial Regulation
and Securitization: Evidence from Subprime Mortgage Loans, Journal of Monetary Economics 56
(5), 700­720.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig (2010), Did Securitization
Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
125(1): 307-362.
Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider (2015), The Housing Market (s) of San
Diego. American Economic Review 105.4, 1371-1407.

                                             28
Mayer, Christopher (2011), Housing Bubbes: A Survey, Annual Review of Economics 3, 559-577.
Mayer, Christopher and Todd Sinai (2009), U.S. House Price Dynamics and Behavioral Finance,"
in Christopher L. Foote, Lorenz Goette and Stephan Meier, eds., Policy Making Insights from
Behavioral Economics. Boston, Mass: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Ch. 5.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013), Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and
the Economic Slump, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1687-1726.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2009), The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1449-1496.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2010), Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007-09, IMF
Economic Review, 58, 74-117.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2011), House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US
Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132-2156.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2014), What Explains the 2007­2009 Drop in Employment?
Econometrica 82(6), 2197-2223.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2015), Fraudulent Income Oversight on Mortgage Applications During
the Credit Expansion of 2002 to 2005, mimeo University of Chicago and Princeton University.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi (2015). Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real
Economy, Journal of Finance 70(6), 2587-2634.
Nathanson, Charles and Eric Zwick (2017), Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence of
Supply-side Speculation in the Housing Market, mimeo, University of Chicago and Northwestern
University.
Nam, Tong Yob and Seungjoon Oh (2016), Non-recourse Mortgage Law and Housing
Speculation, mimeo OCC and Peking University.
National Association of Realtors (2015), Investment and Vacation Home Buyers Survey 2015.
Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider (2009), Momentum Traders in the Housing Market:
Survey Evidence and a Search Model, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99(2),
406-411.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and James Witkin (2015), Asset Quality Misrepresentation by
Financial Intermediaries: Evidence from the RMBS Market, Journal of Finance, 70(6), 2635-
2678.
Purnanandam, Amiyatosh (2011), Originate-to-distribute Model and the Subprime Mortgage
Crisis, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1881­1915.
Rognlie, Matthew, Andrei Shleifer, and Alp Simsek (2015), Investment Hangover and the Great
Recession, Working paper.
Saiz, Albert (2010), The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125(3), 1253-1296.
Schmalz, Martin C., David Alexandre Sraer, and David Thesmar (2017), Housing Collateral and
Entrepreneurship, Journal of Finance, 72(1), 99-132.
Serrato, Juan Carlos Suárez, and Owen Zidar (2018), The Structure of State Corporate Taxation
and its Impact on State Tax Revenues and Economic Activity, Journal of Public Economics 167,
158-176

                                             29
Shan, Hui (2011), The Effect of Capital Gains Taxation on Home Sales: Evidence from the
Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Journal of Public Economics 95(1-2), 177-188.
Shiller, Robert (2009), Unlearned Lessons from the Housing Bubble, Economics Voice 6, 6.
Soo, Cindy K. (2018). Quantifying Sentiment with News Media across Local Housing Markets.
Review of Financial Studies, 31(10), 3689­3719.
Stumpner, Sebastian (2016), Trade and the Geographic Spread of the Great Recession, Working
Paper.
Walden, Michael L. (2014), Recovery from the Great Recession: Explaining Differences among
States, Journal of Regional and Policy Analysis 44, 166-174.
Wheaton, William and Gleb Nechayev (2008), The 1998-2005 Housing "Bubble" and the Current
"Correction": What's Different This Time?, Journal of Real Estate Research 30, 1-26.




                                            30
                                                             Figure 1: Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied Home Purchases
This figure plots the share of non-owner-occupied home purchases for the U.S. and three cities, New York,
Las Vegas, and Charlotte. The fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in each city is computed
from the "Home Mortgage Disclosure Act" data set.


                                                           35%
              Share of non-owner-occupied home purchases




                                                           30%

                                                           25%

                                                           20%                                                           New York
                                                                                                                         Las Vegas
                                                           15%
                                                                                                                         Charlotte
                                                           10%                                                           US

                                                           5%

                                                           0%
                                                             2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                                                      Year




                                                             Figure 2: Distribution of Capital Gains Tax across U.S. States
    This figure plots the map of the marginal state tax rates on capital gains for state median income in
2005 across U.S. states.




                                                                                             31
                Figure 3: Zip codes near borders of states without capital gains taxes
This figure plots the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-06 (Panel A) and the fraction
of subprime mortgages in 2005 (Panel B) in zip codes near borders of states without capital gains taxes.
The variables of interests are regressed on dummies indicating each one mile distance from the border
(dummies are negative for neighboring states with capital gains taxes) and state-border*10-mile strip fixed
effects. The figure plots the coefficients on the distance dummies.
                                                                   Panel A: Non-owner-occupied home purchases

                                                                     0.2
                       Fraction of Non-owner-occupied homes




                                                                    0.15

                                                                     0.1
                                     in 2004-06




                                                                    0.05

                                                                         0

                                                                   -0.05

                                                                     -0.1
                                                                             -50        -30      -10       10      30   50
                                                                                               Miles from border




                                                                                   Panel B: Subprime mortgages

                                                                  0.2
                        Fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005




                                                                 0.15

                                                                  0.1

                                                                 0.05

                                                                    0

                                                                 -0.05

                                                                  -0.1

                                                                 -0.15

                                                                  -0.2
                                                                         -50          -30       -10       10       30   50
                                                                                              Miles from border




                                                                                                32
                                                                     Figure 4: Case-Shiller Home Price Indices

This figure plots the Case-Shiller home price indices for the U.S. and three cities, New York, Las Vegas,
and Charlotte. The price index is deflated by the CPI and normalized to 100 in 2000.


                                                250
                   Normaized home pirce index




                                                200


                                                150
                                                                                                                  New York
                                                                                                                  Las Vegas
                                                100
                                                                                                                  Charlotte
                                                       50                                                         US


                                                       0
                                                            20002001200220032004200520062007200820092010
                                                                                  Year




                                                                          Figure 5: New Housing Supply
This figure depicts building permits in 2000 to 2010 relative to the housing units in 2000 for the U.S. and
three cities, New York, Las Vegas, and Charlotte.


                                                       6%
           Building permits in 2004 to 2006 relative




                                                       5%
                 to the housing units in 2000




                                                       4%
                                                                                                                   New York
                                                       3%
                                                                                                                   Las Vegas
                                                       2%                                                          Charlotte
                                                                                                                   US
                                                       1%

                                                       0%
                                                         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                                                  Year




                                                                                         33
                                                                              Figure 6: Speculation and Subprime Households
                                     This figure plots the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004 to 2006 against the fraction
                                     of subprime mortgages in 2005 at the zip code level.




                                                             1
                                                           .8
                                                           .6
                                                           .4
                                                           .2
                                                             0




                                                                      0                 .2                 .4               .6              .8
                                                                                        Fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005




                                                                          Figure 7: Speculation and Housing Price Cycle

                                     These figures plot the real housing price change during the boom period of 2004 to 2006 (Panel A) and the
                                     bust period of 2007 to 2009 (Panel B) against the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004
                                     to 2006 at the zip code level.
                                     Panel A:
                                                            .8
Real house price change in 2004-06




                                                            .6
                                                            .4
                                                            .2
                                                                  0
                                                            -.2




                                                                          0              .2           .4          .6            .8               1
                                                                                 Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied Home Purchases in 2004-06




                                                                                                      34
                                     Panel B:




                                                                    0
Real house price change in 2007-09




                                                              -.5 -1
                                                           -1.5
                                                                  -2




                                                                           0             .2           .4          .6            .8          1
                                                                                 Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied Home Purchases in 2004-06




                                                                           Figure 8: Speculation and New Housing Supply

                                     This figure plots building permits in 2004 to 2006 relative to the number of housing units in 2000 against
                                     the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004 to 2006 at the county level.
                                                         .5
                                                         .4
                                                         .3
                                                         .2
                                                         .1
                                                           0




                                                                       0                   .2             .4              .6                    .8
                                                                               Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied Home Purchases in 2004-06




                                                                                                     35
                           Table 1 Summary Statistics and Correlations


Panel A: Summary statistics of the key variables

                                                                            (1)     (2)       (3)
     VARIABLES                                                               N     Mean       Sd

     Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied Home Purchases in 2004-06              3,975     0.136   0.0987
     Real house price change in 2001-03                                    4,027     0.191    0.135
     Real house price change in 2004-06                                    4,027     0.278    0.191
     Real house price change in 2007-09                                    4,027    -0.413    0.278
     Per capita income change in 2003-06                                   4,027    0.0521    0.125
     Per capita income change in 2007-09                                   4,026    -0.113   0.0957
     Change in no. of establishments in 2004-06                            3,942    0.0638   0.0870
     Change in no. of establishments in 2007-09                            3,924   -0.0382   0.0706
     Real payroll change in 2004-06                                        3,942    0.0866    0.179
     Real payroll change in 2007-09                                        3,924   -0.0998    0.191
     Employment change in 2004-06                                          3,942    0.0707    0.158
     Employment change in 2007-09                                          3,924   -0.0831    0.148
     Saiz's elasticity                                                     4,027     1.376    0.715
     Fraction of subprime mortgages in 2002                                3,468    0.0896   0.0725
     Fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005                                3,975     0.211    0.138
     Mortgage denial rate in 2002                                          3,468     0.111   0.0573
     Mortgage denial rate in 2005                                          3,975     0.139   0.0507
     Non-owner-occupied home mortgage denial rate in 2002                  3,414     0.115   0.0956
     Non-owner-occupied home mortgage denial rate in 2005                  3,939     0.130   0.0637
     Fraction of GSE mortgages in 2002                                     3,468     0.376    0.113
     Fraction of GSE mortgages in 2005                                     3,975     0.193    0.103
     Fraction of GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied home in 2002         3,388     0.383    0.170
     Fraction of GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied home in 2005         3,935     0.181    0.114
     Ln of population in 2000                                              4,027     10.32    0.572
     Fraction of the college educated in 2000                              4,027     28.12    15.63
     Fraction of the employed in 2000                                      4,027     61.14    8.782
     Fraction of workforce in 2000                                         4,027     64.70    8.106
     Median household Income in 2000                                       4,027    49,524   17,274
     Poverty rate in 2000                                                  4,027     10.77    7.713
     Urban rate in 2000                                                    4,027     94.30    14.21
     Fraction of the white in 2000                                         4,027     71.89    23.05
     Number of households in 2000                                          4,027    12,935    6,235
     Fraction of renters in 2000                                           3,942     0.355    0.964
     Fraction of immigrants in past 5 years (2000)                         3,942     0.214   0.0703
     Fraction of employment in arts entertainment and recreation in 2000   3,942   0. 0832   0.0419




                                                   36
Panel B: Correlations of non-owner-occupied versus subprime housing purchases with control
variables during the boom period and the p-values of their differences

                                  Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied   Fraction of subprime     p-
 VARIABLES                           Home Purchases in 2004-06      mortgages in 2005     value
 Real house price change in                   0.277***                   0.383***         0.000
 2004-06
 Per capita income change in                0.206***                    -0.388***         0.000
 2003-06
 Change in no. of                           0.100***                    -0.066***         0.000
 establishments in 2004-06
 Real payroll change in 2004-               0.105***                     -0.035*          0.000
 06
 Employment change in 2004-                 0.061***                    -0.041**          0.000
 06
 Mortgage denial rate in 2005               0.199***                     0.704***         0.000
 Fraction of GSE mortgages in                -0.015                     -0.564***         0.000
 2005
 Non-owner-occupied home                    0.199***                    0.389***          0.000
 mortgage denial rate in 2005
 Fraction of GSE mortgages                    -0.015                    -0.396***         0.000
 for non-owner-occupied home
 in 2005
 Population change in 2003-06                 -0.001                       0.011          0.592
 Ln of population in 2000                     -0.028                     0.315***         0.000
 Fraction of the college                    -0.175***                   -0.553***         0.000
 educated in 2000
 Fraction of the employed in                -0.453***                   -0.323***         0.000
 2000
 Fraction of workforce in 2000              -0.446***                   -0.224***         0.000
 Median household Income in                 -0.423***                   -0.404***         0.428
 2000
 Poverty rate in 2000                        0.393***                    0.497***         0.000
 Urban rate in 2000                          0.078***                    0.182***         0.000
 Fraction of the white in 2000              -0.113***                   -0.636***         0.000
 Dummy for states with non-                 -0.084***                    0.201***         0.000
 recourse mortgage law
 Dummy for sand states                      0.318***                     0.308***         0.648
 Saiz's elasticity                           0.034*                     -0.208***         0.000
 Fraction of renters in 2000                0.236***                     0.302***         0.000
 Fraction of immigrants in past             0.219***                    -0.157***         0.000
 5 years (2000)
 Fraction of employment in                  0.580***                    0.069***          0.000
 arts entertainment and
 recreation in 2000




                                                37
              Table 2: Zip Codes near Borders of States without Capital Gains Taxes
Panel A of this table presents discontinuity tests for the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in
2004-06 (Column 1) and the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005 (Column 2) in zip codes near borders
of states with no capital gains taxes. Panel B shows discontinuity tests for other control variables in zip
codes near borders of states with no capital gains taxes. Distance from borders are divided by 1,000 and is
negative on the side of neighboring states with capital gains taxes. We control for distance and its squared
and cubic terms in all regressions (their coefficients are omitted to save space). Distance from borders are
divided by 1,000 and is negative on the side of neighboring states with capital gains taxes. Standard errors
are clustered at the state-border level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient estimates statistically distinct from 0
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



Panel A

                                                 (1)                                         (2)
                              Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied Home                  Fraction of subprime
                                        Purchases in 2004-06                        mortgages in 2005
 Dummy for states with                       -0.0487**                                   0.00182
 capital gains tax                            (0.0212)                                   (0.0248)
 Distance                                     -2.241**                                      0.763
                                               (1.039)                                    (0.964)
 Distance squared                              -40.59*                                    -37.77*
                                               (21.32)                                    (19.72)
 Distance cubed                               1035.5**                                     -66.09
                                               (397.3)                                    (423.6)
 State-border X 10-
 mile strips FE                                  Yes                                        Yes
 Observations                                   1072                                       1072
 R-squared                                      0.347                                      0.185




                                                        38
Panel B

                                                                  Dummy for states         Standard
                                                                  with capital gains tax   errors
 Mortgage denial rate in 2005                                            0.00267             (0.0111)
 Fraction of GSE mortgages in 2005                                       -0.0109             (0.0638)
 Non-owner-occupied home mortgage denial rate in 2005                    -0.0173             (0.0306)
 Fraction of GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied home in
 2005                                                                    -0.0690            (0.0602)
 Population change in 2003-06                                            -0.0368            (0.0277)
 Ln of population in 2000                                                  0.114             (0.157)
 Fraction of the college educated in 2000                                 -3.478             (2.131)
 Fraction of the employed in 2000                                         -1.560             (1.607)
 Fraction of workforce in 2000                                            -2.025             (1.441)
 Median household Income in 2000                                         -2689.7            (1972.3)
 Poverty rate in 2000                                                      0.296             (1.434)
 Urban rate in 2000                                                       -0.998             (9.154)
 Fraction of the white in 2000                                             3.712             (4.773)
 Fraction of renters in 2000                                            -.002964            (0.0336)
 Fraction of immigrants in past 5 years (2000)                            -.0273            (0.0209)
 Fraction of employment in arts entertainment and recreation in
 2000                                                                    -.00983            (0.0180)




                                                   39
                              Table 3: Speculation and Housing Price Cycles
This table reports the two stage least squares regressions of the real house price change in 2004-2006 and
2007-2009 on the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006 instrumented with the
state capital gains tax rate for the median income. Column 1 shows the coefficients of the first stage
regression of the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006 on the state capital gains
tax rate for the median income. Columns 2 and 3 show the coefficients of the second stage regression of
the real house price changes in 2004-2006 and 2007-2009 respectively on the instrumented fraction of non-
owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006. The regressions control for the supply elasticity measure,
the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate in 2005, the fraction of GSE
mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, the fraction of
GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, per capita income change in 2003-2006,
population change in 2003-2006, the change in the number of establishments in 2004-2006, real payroll
change in 2004-2006, employment change in 2004-2006, the natural logarithm of population in 2000, the
fraction of the college educated in 2000, the fraction of the employed in 2000, the fraction of workforce in
2000, median household Income in 2000, poverty rate in 2000, urban rate in 2000, the fraction of the white
in 2000, the fraction of employment in arts, entertainment, and recreation in 2000, the fraction of renters in
2000, the fraction of immigrants in 2000, the dummy for states with non-recourse mortgage law, and the
dummy of sand states. Observations are weighted by the number of households. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient estimates statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                  (1)                         (2)                 (3)
                                        Fraction of non-owner-          Real house price    Real house price
                                      occupied home purchases in        change in 2004-     change in 2007-
                                               2004-06                         06                  09
 State capital gains tax rate for
 median income                                   -0.677**
                                                  (0.269)
 Fraction of non-owner-occupied
 home purchases in 2004-06                                                  2.685**             -3.785***
                                                                             (1.078)              (0.892)
 Saiz's elasticity                              0.0170***                  -0.114***             0.106***
                                                (0.00472)                   (0.0228)             (0.0231)
 Fraction of subprime mortgages
 in 2005                                        -0.216***                   0.901***            -1.691***
                                                 (0.0402)                    (0.286)              (0.256)
 Mortgage denial rate in 2005                    0.509***                  -1.938***               1.086
                                                 (0.0819)                    (0.642)              (0.780)
 Fraction of GSE mortgages in
 2005                                           -0.175***                   0.620**             -0.682***
                                                 (0.0362)                   (0.301)               (0.260)
 Non-owner-occupied home
 mortgage denial rate in 2005                   -0.133***                    0.225              -0.623***
                                                 (0.0323)                   (0.213)               (0.208)


                                                      40
Fraction of GSE mortgages for
non-owner-occupied home in
2005                                   0.0177         -0.0616          0.107
                                      (0.0198)        (0.0765)        (0.164)
Per capita income change in
2003-06                               0.0954**         0.0599          0.395*
                                      (0.0375)         (0.185)         (0.239)
Population change in 2003-06         -0.0417**          0.134        -0.349***
                                      (0.0193)        (0.0894)         (0.112)
Change in no. of establishments
in 2004-06                             0.0481*         0.223*           0.254
                                       (0.0243)        (0.124)         (0.204)
Real payroll change in 2004-06       0.0204***         0.0113          0.0959*
                                      (0.00560)       (0.0296)        (0.0490)
Employment change in 2004-06          -0.00610        -0.0101         -0.0813*
                                       (0.0106)       (0.0300)        (0.0490)
Ln of population in 2000             -0.0161***        0.0352        -0.0706**
                                      (0.00535)       (0.0288)        (0.0348)
Fraction of the college educated
in 2000                             0.00119***      -0.00488***      0.00339*
                                    (0.000241)        (0.00146)      (0.00197)
Fraction of the employed in
2000                                 -0.000672       -0.00875         -0.00339
                                     (0.00196)       (0.00869)        (0.0171)
Fraction of workforce in 2000         -0.00140         0.0114         -0.00239
                                     (0.00227)       (0.00968)        (0.0171)
Median household Income in
2000                               -0.00000234***   0.00000587**   -0.00000811***
                                    (0.000000261)   (0.00000285)     (0.00000289)
Poverty rate in 2000                  0.00233**       -0.00657*          0.00632
                                      (0.000919)       (0.00397)        (0.00449)
Urban rate in 2000                   0.000827***      -0.00204*        0.00249**
                                      (0.000205)       (0.00120)        (0.00113)
Fraction of the white in 2000         -0.000266       0.0000601       -0.00307***
                                      (0.000249)      (0.000989)       (0.000936)
Fraction of renters in 2000           -0.156***         0.511**           -0.268
                                       (0.0253)         (0.202)          (0.265)
Fraction of immigrants in 2000         0.191***          -0.412            0.401
                                       (0.0346)         (0.289)          (0.387)
Fraction of employment in arts
entertainment and recreation in
2000                                  0.742***        -1.983**        2.339***
                                       (0.117)         (0.840)         (0.798)
Dummy for states with non-
recourse mortgage law                  0.0123         -0.0155         0.0976*
                                      (0.0176)        (0.0409)        (0.0523)

                                          41
Dummy for sand states      -0.0227   0.229***   -0.383***
                          (0.0190)   (0.0525)    (0.0658)
Constant                  0.408***     -0.458    1.532***
                           (0.111)    (0.650)     (0.517)
Observations                3935        3935       3935
First-stage F statistic     69.93        NA         NA
R-squared                   0.617       0.539      0.463




                              42
                             Table 4: Extrapolation and Housing Speculation
This table reports coefficient estimates from regressing the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases
in 2004-2006 on the house price change in 2001-2003 (Columns 1), the state capital gains tax rate for the
median income, and their interaction (Columns 2). All regressions control for the host of lagged variables
including the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2002, mortgage denial rate in 2002, the fraction of GSE
mortgages in 2002, the mortgage denial rate for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2002, the fraction of
GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2002, per capita income change in 2001-2002, the
population change in 2001-2002, the change in the number of establishments in 2001-2003, the real payroll
change in 2001-2003, the employment change in 2001-2003, the natural logarithm of population in 2000,
the fraction of the college educated in 2000, the fraction of the employed in 2000, the fraction of workforce
in 2000, median household Income in 2000, poverty rate in 2000, urban rate in 2000, the fraction of the
white in 2000, the fraction of employment in arts, entertainment, and recreation in 2000, the fraction of
renters in 2000, the fraction of immigrants in 2000, as well as the dummy for states with non-recourse
mortgage law and the dummy of sand states. Observations are weighted by the number of households.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient estimates statistically distinct
from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Observations are weighted by the number of
households. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient estimates
statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                       (1)                           (2)
                                         Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied Home Purchases in 2004-06

 Real house                                           0.0231                                0.229***
 price change in 2001-03                             (0.0574)                               (0.0508)


 Interaction                                                                               -5.413***
                                                                                             (0.986)

 State capital                                                                                0.157
 gain tax rate for median income                                                             (0.288)

 Constant                                            0.283***                               0.260***
                                                     (0.0768)                               (0.0818)
 Controls                                               Yes                                    Yes
 Observations                                          3379                                   3379
 R-squared                                             0.552                                  0.593




                                                       43
                              Table 5: Real Effects of Housing Speculation
This table reports the two stage least squares regressions of economic outcomes in 2004-2006 (Panel A:
The boom period) and in 2007-2009 (Panel B: The bust period) on the fraction of non-owner-occupied
home purchases in 2004-2006 instrumented with the state capital gains tax rate for the median income. All
regressions control for the supply elasticity measure, the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005, the
mortgage denial rate in 2005, the fraction of GSE mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate for non-
owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, the fraction of GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied mortgages in
2005, population change in 2003-2006, per capita income change in 2003-2006, the change in the number
of establishments in 2004-2006, real payroll change in 2004-2006, employment change in 2004-2006, the
natural logarithm of population in 2000, the fraction of the college educated in 2000, the fraction of the
employed in 2000, the fraction of workforce in 2000, median household Income in 2000, poverty rate in
2000, urban rate in 2000, the fraction of the white in 2000, the fraction of employment in arts, entertainment,
and recreation in 2000, the fraction of renters in 2000, the fraction of immigrants in 2000, the dummy for
states with non-recourse mortgage law, and the dummy of sand states. Observations are weighted by the
number of households. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient
estimates statistically distinct from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Panel A: The boom period



                                          (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                       Change in no.
                                       Per capita             of            Real payroll       Employment
                                    income change      establishments     change in 2004-       change in
                                      in 2003-06         in 2004-06              06              2004-06
 Fraction of non-owner-
 occupied home purchases in
 2004-06                              1.305***              0.687***         1.383***            0.850***
                                       (0.347)               (0.245)          (0.431)             (0.301)
 Saiz's elasticity                   -0.0410***            -0.0301***       -0.0290***          -0.0218***
                                      (0.00887)             (0.00605)        (0.00502)           (0.00408)
 Fraction of subprime
 mortgages in 2005                      0.0962                0.128            0.296*             0.182*
                                       (0.0961)             (0.0887)           (0.152)            (0.101)
 Mortgage denial rate in 2005         -0.747***             -0.390**         -0.869***           -0.552**
                                        (0.211)              (0.156)           (0.296)            (0.224)
 Fraction of GSE mortgages in
 2005                                   0.0665              0.196**          0.324***            0.247***
                                       (0.0746)             (0.0831)          (0.106)            (0.0888)
 Non-owner-occupied home
 mortgage denial rate in 2005          0.160**               0.0629            0.153*             0.0556
                                       (0.0756)             (0.0402)          (0.0805)           (0.0485)
 Fraction of GSE mortgages
 for non-owner-occupied
 home in 2005                          -0.0686*             0.0410           -0.00600             0.0341
                                       (0.0384)            (0.0256)          (0.0483)            (0.0418)
 Population change in 2003-06           -0.0635            0.324***          0.300***            0.300***

                                                      44
                                  (0.0688)            (0.0460)       (0.0540)        (0.0623)
Ln of population in 2000          0.00197            0.0186***      0.0273***       0.0193***
                                  (0.0103)           (0.00629)      (0.00909)       (0.00571)
Fraction of the college
educated in 2000                 0.00167**           -0.000693     -0.00243***     -0.00208***
                                 (0.000693)          (0.000507)     (0.000912)      (0.000766)
Fraction of the employed in
2000                              -0.00263           0.000487        0.00130        0.000343
                                  (0.00324)          (0.00201)      (0.00383)       (0.00333)
Fraction of workforce in 2000      0.00210            0.00184        0.00306         0.00318
                                  (0.00374)          (0.00233)      (0.00413)       (0.00362)
Median household Income in
2000                            0.00000304***     0.00000104      0.00000394***   0.00000265***
                                (0.000000819)   (0.000000665)      (0.00000129)   (0.000000996)
Poverty rate in 2000               -0.00121      -0.00243***          -0.00137        -0.00108
                                   (0.00152)      (0.000771)          (0.00189)       (0.00119)
Urban rate in 2000               -0.00191***     -0.000832**        -0.00129***    -0.000929***
                                  (0.000306)      (0.000346)         (0.000422)      (0.000322)
Fraction of the white in 2000     0.00109***      -0.0000902          0.000475        0.000386
                                  (0.000375)      (0.000209)         (0.000314)      (0.000275)
Fraction of employment in
arts entertainment and
recreation in 2000                -0.792**            -0.397*       -0.868**        -0.438*
                                   (0.402)             (0.217)       (0.365)         (0.262)
Fraction of renters in 2000       0.181***            -0.0167         0.112          0.0291
                                  (0.0684)            (0.0457)       (0.102)        (0.0700)
Fraction of immigrants in
2000                              -0.284***            0.0968        0.0958          0.108*
                                   (0.0996)           (0.0747)      (0.0819)        (0.0641)
Dummy for states with non-
recourse mortgage law             -0.00485            -0.00965       0.00965         0.00197
                                  (0.0165)            (0.0108)       (0.0207)        (0.0134)
Dummy for sand states             0.0481**           0.0511***      0.0883***       0.0684***
                                  (0.0234)            (0.0149)       (0.0233)        (0.0175)
Constant                           -0.0314             -0.284*      -0.704***       -0.497***
                                   (0.238)             (0.166)        (0.242)         (0.154)
Observations                        3935                3935           3935            3935
R-squared                           0.211               0.251          0.102           0.082




                                                45
Panel B: The bust period

                                       (1)                      (2)               (3)               (4)
                                Per capita income        Change in no. of     Real payroll     Employment
                                 change in 2007-          establishments    change in 2007-   change in 2007-
                                       09                   in 2007-09             09               09
 Fraction of non-owner-
 occupied home purchases in
 2004-06                           -0.794***                -0.877***         -1.563***         -1.475***
                                     (0.199)                  (0.205)           (0.356)           (0.341)
 Saiz's elasticity                  -0.00524                 0.00724*         0.0281***         0.0246***
                                   (0.00614)                (0.00393)         (0.00596)         (0.00611)
 Fraction of subprime
 mortgages in 2005                 -0.284***                -0.232***         -0.378***         -0.369***
                                    (0.0544)                 (0.0489)           (0.108)          (0.0910)
 Mortgage denial rate in 2005        0.0191                  0.325***          0.730***          0.688***
                                     (0.164)                  (0.115)           (0.225)           (0.195)
 Fraction of GSE mortgages in
 2005                              -0.141***                -0.112**          -0.265***         -0.230***
                                    (0.0480)                (0.0503)           (0.0997)          (0.0891)
 Non-owner-occupied home
 mortgage denial rate in 2005      -0.0828**                -0.147***         -0.277***          -0.202**
                                    (0.0378)                 (0.0410)          (0.0893)          (0.0792)
 Fraction of GSE mortgages
 for non-owner-occupied
 home in 2005                        0.0387                  0.0205             0.0363            0.0123
                                    (0.0416)                (0.0152)           (0.0437)          (0.0314)
 Per capita income change in
 2003-06                            -0.184**                0.134***           0.261***          0.195***
                                    (0.0836)                (0.0370)           (0.0692)          (0.0740)
 Population change in 2003-06      -0.159***                0.164***            0.119**           0.115**
                                    (0.0514)                (0.0238)           (0.0505)          (0.0476)
 Change in no. of
 establishments in 2004-06          0.182***                0.191***           0.479***          0.523***
                                    (0.0450)                (0.0516)           (0.0996)          (0.0964)
 Real payroll change in 2004-
 06                                  0.0300                 0.0326**           -0.107**          0.162***
                                    (0.0194)                (0.0126)           (0.0503)          (0.0327)
 Employment change in 2004-
 06                                   -0.0113                -0.0134           -0.0133           -0.308***
                                     (0.0157)                (0.0126)          (0.0357)           (0.0290)
 Ln of population in 2000          -0.0217***              -0.0144***         -0.0249**         -0.0279***
                                    (0.00579)               (0.00537)          (0.0109)          (0.00872)
 Fraction of the college
 educated in 2000                   -0.000532              0.00115***        0.00379***        0.00277***
                                   (0.000473)              (0.000349)        (0.000561)        (0.000407)


                                                    46
Fraction of the employed in
2000                               -0.00271             -0.00450**       -0.0110***      -0.00777***
                                  (0.00275)              (0.00223)        (0.00395)        (0.00281)
Fraction of workforce in 2000      0.00259                0.00295        0.00809**          0.00526
                                  (0.00277)              (0.00239)        (0.00401)        (0.00324)
Median household Income in
2000                            -0.00000261***        -0.00000178***   -0.00000479***   -0.00000376***
                                 (0.000000690)         (0.000000616)     (0.00000111)    (0.000000854)
Poverty rate in 2000                 0.00161                0.00182         0.00331         0.00325*
                                    (0.00115)              (0.00122)       (0.00204)        (0.00190)
Urban rate in 2000                 0.0000585             0.000813***      0.00190***       0.00151***
                                   (0.000221)             (0.000210)      (0.000413)       (0.000408)
Fraction of the white in 2000     -0.00143***           -0.000621***      -0.000887*      -0.000764**
                                   (0.000278)             (0.000191)      (0.000460)       (0.000342)
Fraction of employment in
arts entertainment and
recreation in 2000                  0.252*               0.642***         1.115***         1.091***
                                    (0.152)               (0.165)          (0.297)          (0.333)
Fraction of renters in 2000        -0.120**              -0.113**        -0.277***        -0.239***
                                   (0.0570)              (0.0482)         (0.0950)         (0.0739)
Fraction of immigrants in
2000                               -0.0908*               0.0276          0.0368            0.0523
                                   (0.0545)              (0.0587)         (0.107)          (0.0905)
Dummy for states with non-
recourse mortgage law             -0.000547               0.0126*         0.0349**        0.0366***
                                   (0.0115)              (0.00749)         (0.0144)         (0.0141)
Dummy for sand states              -0.0332*             -0.0324***       -0.0883***       -0.0877***
                                   (0.0175)               (0.0119)         (0.0231)         (0.0249)
Constant                           0.591***              0.305***         0.489***         0.493***
                                   (0.0921)                (0.116)          (0.181)          (0.175)
Observations                         3934                   3904             3904             3904
R-squared                            0.237                  0.241            0.095            0.074




                                                 47
                              Table 6: Speculation and New Housing Supply

This table reports the two stage least squares regressions of building permits in 2004-06 relative to the
housing units in 2000 on the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006 instrumented
with the state capital gains tax rate for the median income. Column 1 shows the coefficients of the first
stage regression of the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006 on the state capital
gains tax rate for the median income. Column 2 shows the coefficients of the second stage regression of
building permits in 2004-2006 relative to the housing units in 2000 on the instrumented fraction of non-
owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006. All regressions control for the supply elasticity measure,
the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate in 2005, the fraction of GSE mortgages
in 2005, the mortgage denial rate for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, the fraction of GSE
mortgages for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, per capita income change in 2003-2006, population
change in 2003-2006, the change in the number of establishments in 2004-2006, real payroll change in
2004-2006, employment change in 2004-2006, the natural logarithm of population in 2000, the fraction of
the college educated in 2000, the fraction of the employed in 2000, the fraction of workforce in 2000,
median household Income in 2000, poverty rate in 2000, urban rate in 2000, the fraction of the white in
2000, , the fraction of employment in arts, entertainment, and recreation in 2000, the fraction of renters in
2000, the fraction of immigrants in 2000, the dummy for states with non-recourse mortgage law, and the
dummy of sand states. Observations are weighted by the number of households at the county level. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient estimates statistically distinct from 0 at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                        (1)                                   (2)
                                             Fraction of Non-Owner-             Building permits in 2004-06
                                            Occupied Home Purchases            relative to the housing units in
                                                    in 2004-06                               2000
 State capital gains tax rate for                   -0.822***
 median income                                        (0.138)

 Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied                                                           0.428***
 Home Purchases in 2004-06                                                                 (0.105)

 Constant                                            0.656***                             -0.263**
                                                      (0.104)                              (0.114)

 Controls                                               Yes                                  Yes

 Observations                                           309                                  309
 First stage F statistics                              19.75                                 NA
 R-squared                                             0.563                                0.455




                                                        48
       Table 7: Effects of Housing Speculation on Construction and Non-construction Sectors

This table reports the two stage least squares regressions of the employment change in the construction
(Column 1) and non-construction sectors (Column 2) in 2004-2006 (Panel A: The boom period) and in
2007-2009 (Panel B: The bust period) on the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006
instrumented with the state capital gains tax rate for the median income. All regressions control for the
supply elasticity measure, the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate in 2005,
the fraction of GSE mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate for non-owner-occupied mortgages in
2005, the fraction of GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, population change in
2003-2006, per capita income change in 2003-2006, the change in the number of establishments in 2004-
2006, real payroll change in 2004-2006, employment change in 2004-2006, the natural logarithm of
population in 2000, the fraction of the college educated in 2000, the fraction of the employed in 2000, the
fraction of workforce in 2000, median household Income in 2000, poverty rate in 2000, urban rate in 2000,
the fraction of the white in 2000, the fraction of employment in arts, entertainment, and recreation in 2000,
the fraction of renters in 2000, the fraction of immigrants in 2000, the dummy for states with non-recourse
mortgage law, and the dummy of sand states. Observations are weighted by the number of households.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient estimates statistically distinct
from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



Panel A: The boom period

                                                          (1)                              (2)
                                               Construction employment         Non-construction employment
                                                  change in 2004-06                 change in 2004-06

 Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied                         2.543***                          0.624***
 Home Purchases in 2004-06                               (0.811)                           (0.239)

 Constant                                                 -0.676                          -0.477***
                                                         (0.513)                            (0.123)

 Controls                                                   Yes                              Yes

 Observations                                               3966                            3933
 R-squared                                                  0.104                           0.088




                                                       49
Panel B: The bust period

                                             (1)                        (2)
                                  Construction employment   Non-construction employment
                                     change in 2007-09           change in 2007-09

 Fraction of Non-Owner-Occupied         -3.422***                    -1.253***
 Home Purchases in 2004-06                (0.720)                      (0.330)

 Constant                                1.034***                    0.459***
                                          (0.345)                     (0.167)

 Controls                                    Yes                       Yes

 Observations                                3933                      3902
 R-squared                                   0.089                     0.065




                                        50
                        Table 8: Effect of Housing Speculation: Demand Channel
This table reports the two stage least squares regressions of the employment change in non-tradable and
tradable sectors in 2004-2006 (Panel A: The boom period) and in 2007-2009 (Panel B: The bust period) on
the fraction of non-owner-occupied home purchases in 2004-2006 instrumented with the state capital gains
tax rate for the median income. Columns 1 and 2 present the coefficients for non-tradable and tradable
industries respectively defined by Mian and Sufi (2014). Columns 3 and 4 present the results for retail and
restaurant sectors and industries other than these two sectors, respectively. All regressions control for the
supply elasticity measure, the fraction of subprime mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate in 2005,
the fraction of GSE mortgages in 2005, the mortgage denial rate for non-owner-occupied mortgages in
2005, the fraction of GSE mortgages for non-owner-occupied mortgages in 2005, population change in
2003-2006, per capita income change in 2003-2006, the change in the number of establishments in 2004-
2006, real payroll change in 2004-2006, employment change in 2004-2006, the natural logarithm of
population in 2000, the fraction of the college educated in 2000, the fraction of the employed in 2000, the
fraction of workforce in 2000, median household Income in 2000, poverty rate in 2000, urban rate in 2000,
the fraction of the white in 2000, the fraction of employment in arts, entertainment, and recreation in 2000,
the fraction of renters in 2000, the fraction of immigrants in 2000, the dummy for states with non-recourse
mortgage law, and the dummy of sand states. Observations are weighted by the number of households.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***, **, * indicate coefficient estimates statistically distinct
from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Panel A: The boom period

                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)                    (4)
                              Employment          Employment             Retail and           Employment
                             change in non-         change in            restaurant        change in industries
                                tradable             tradable           employment           other than retail
                              industries in       industries in          change in          and restaurant in
                                2004-06              2004-06              2004-06               2004-06

 Fraction of Non-
 Owner-Occupied Home            0.889***              0.558              0.904***                  0.448
 Purchases in 2004-06            (0.265)             (0.685)              (0.261)                 (0.274)

 Constant                        -0.404**            -0.143              -0.469***              -0.483***
                                  (0.163)            (0.327)               (0.155)                (0.142)

 Controls                          Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes

 Observations                     3969                3898                 3969                   3931
 R-squared                        0.078               0.015                0.075                  0.060




                                                       51
Panel B: The bust period



                                 (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)
                            Employment      Employment       Retail and      Employment
                           change in non-     change in      restaurant   change in industries
                              tradable         tradable     employment      other than retail
                            industries in   industries in    change in     and restaurant in
                              2007-09          2007-09        2007-09          2007-09

 Fraction of Non-
 Owner-Occupied Home         -1.534***        -0.297        -1.585***         -1.131***
 Purchases in 2004-06          (0.408)        (0.680)         (0.590)           (0.417)

 Constant                     0.577**         -0.467          0.569*           0.381**
                              (0.227)         (0.376)         (0.314)          (0.184)

 Controls                       Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes

 Observations                  3934            3851            3935              3899
 R-squared                     0.067           0.005           0.037             0.010




                                                52
