                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHY DO FIRMS BORROW DIRECTLY FROM NONBANKS?

                                        Sergey Chernenko
                                             Isil Erel
                                         Robert Prilmeier

                                       Working Paper 26458
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26458


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2019, Revised August 2020


We thank especially Rene Stulz for his valuable suggestions and also Gus De Franco, Daniel
Green, Rustom Irani, Ivan Ivanov, Jessica Jeffers, Candace Jens, Elena Loutskina, Ben
McCartney, Don Morgan, Philipp Schnabl, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, Adi Sunderam, Mike
Weisbach, and seminar participants at 2019 AFA Meetings and Cavalcade, 2018 EFA Meetings,
2018 FDIC-JFSR Banking Research Conference, Boston College, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland, HEC Paris, Koc University, NBER Corporate Finance Meeting, Peking University
GSM, Tsinghua PBCSF, Tulane University, and UMass Amherst for helpful comments. This
research has been funded in part by the National Center for the Middle Market. Emily
Braverman, Daniel Brennan, Alex Denman-Still, Yifeng Gu, Farrah Kharche, Yimeng Li,
Kateryna Parke, Bianca Pelletti, Mutian Rui, and Shiyao Zhang provided excellent research
assistance. An older version of this paper was distributed with the title "Nonbank Lending."

Internet Appendix is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/jxy8iuzsy1fmxn5/NonbankLendingInternetAppendix.docx?dl=0.

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sergey Chernenko, Isil Erel, and Robert Prilmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Do Firms Borrow Directly from Nonbanks?
Sergey Chernenko, Isil Erel, and Robert Prilmeier
NBER Working Paper No. 26458
November 2019
JEL No. G21,G23,G30,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

Analyzing hand-collected credit agreements data for a random sample of middle-market firms
during 2010-2015, we find that a third of all loans is extended directly by nonbank financial
intermediaries. Nonbanks lend to less profitable and more levered firms that undergo larger
changes in size around loan origination. The probability of borrowing from a nonbank jumps by
34% as EBITDA falls below zero, an effect that is largely due to bank regulation. Controlling for
firm and loan characteristics, nonbank loans carry 190 basis points higher interest rates,
suggesting that access to funding, rather than prices, is why firms borrow from nonbanks.


Sergey Chernenko                                Robert Prilmeier
Krannert School of Management                   Tulane University
Purdue University                               A.B. Freeman School of Business
403 W. State Street                             7 McAlister Drive
West Lafayette, IN 47907                        New Orleans, LA 70118
schernen@purdue.edu                             rprilmei@tulane.edu

Isil Erel
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
erel@fisher.osu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26458
1.      Introduction

        Direct commercial and industrial (C&I) lending by nonbank financial intermediaries has
grown dramatically over the last ten years, generating popular press headlines such as "Who Needs
a Bank? Why Direct Lending is Surging"1 and "Bank Said No? Hedge Funds Fill a Void in
Lending"2. According to Preqin, over the 2009-2017 period, assets under management of direct
lending funds quadrupled from $39 to $181 billion.3 The growth in nonbank lending has generated
significant interest among industry participants, regulators, and academics in understanding the
causes of this growth as well as the costs and benefits of nonbank lending. Nevertheless, we still
know little about why firms borrow directly from nonbank lenders. Do nonbanks provide funding
to firms in market segments less served by banks? Are nonbanks able to offer more favorable
terms? Answers to these questions are important in light of the literature arguing that bank loans
have various advantages for borrowers due to banks' expertise in screening and monitoring
informationally-opaque borrowers (e.g., Diamond 1984 and Fama 1985), as well as their efficiency
in dealing with borrowers in distress (Berlin and Loyes 1988 and Chemmanur and Fulghieri 1994).

        In this paper, we examine a novel hand-collected data set of loans to middle-market firms
during the period of 2010-2015 to provide some of the first systematic evidence on firms' decision
to borrow directly from nonbanks. Defined as firms with sales between $10 million and $1 billion,
middle-market firms make up the middle 50% of firm revenues in Compustat and account for
about one third of all U.S. jobs and of private sector GDP.4 Being subject to significant information
and moral hazard problems, these firms generally lack access to public debt markets (Faulkender
and Petersen 2005) and rely on privately placed debt with lenders who engage in significant
screening and monitoring (Diamond 1991a). At the same time, because they are listed on a stock
exchange, these firms are required to disclose their financial statements and credit agreements,
which we use in hand collecting the data.




1
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/why-direct-lending-is-a-booming-part-of-private-
debt/2019/12/18/db88e0ae-21cc-11ea-b034-de7dc2b5199b_story.html
2
   https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2011/06/08/bank-said-no-hedge-funds-fill-a-void-in-lending/
3
   https://docs.preqin.com/newsletters/pd/Preqin-Private-Debt-Spotlight-August-2018.pdf
4
  http://www.middlemarketcenter.org/Media/Documents/NCMM_InfoSheet_2017_web_updated.pdf


                                                                                                   2
        We start by documenting the prevalence of direct nonbank lending, cases where a nonbank
financial intermediary, referred to as a nonbank for brevity, negotiates directly with a borrower
rather than participating in a syndicate led by a commercial bank. Such nonbank lending is
widespread: about one third of all loans in our data were extended by nonbanks. These lenders
represent a variety of financial intermediaries including finance companies (FCOs), private
equity/venture capital (PE/VC) firms, hedge funds, bank-affiliated finance companies (bank
FCOs), investment banks, insurance companies, business development companies (BDCs), and
investment managers. Strikingly, we find that even for publicly-traded firms, standard databases
such as DealScan cover only about half of the bank and almost none of the direct nonbank loans.

        We then ask who borrows from nonbanks and why. Compared to bank borrowers, nonbank
borrowers are less profitable, have higher leverage, higher stock return volatility, lower stock
returns prior to loan origination and experience larger changes in their book assets (either positive
or negative) around loan origination. Having negative EBITDA is a particularly important
determinant of borrowing from a nonbank. Concentrating on firms with EBITDA between -$5 and
+$5 million, firms with small negative EBITDA are 34% more likely to borrow from a nonbank
than are firms with small positive EBITDA. We argue that this result is likely driven by bank
regulation that makes it costly for banks to lend to negative EBITDA firms, as the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) Handbook classifies loans to unprofitable firms as "substandard" and these
substandard loans may result in larger loan loss allowances and lower CAMELS ratings.5 One
exception to the emphasis on profitability and cash flow coverage are asset-based loans, for which
the primary source of repayment is liquidation of accounts receivables and inventory. Consistent
with the distinction drawn by regulators, we also find that the effect of negative EBITDA on the
decision to borrow from a nonbank lender is concentrated among cash-flow loans.

        To provide more direct evidence on the effects of bank regulation, we take advantage of
the variation in leniency across bank regulators documented by Agarwal et al (2014). They show
that federal regulators (e.g., the OCC) are significantly stricter in their examinations and assign


5
  CAMELS are a rating system used by bank supervisors to evaluate banks on their capital adequacy, asset quality,
management, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity. The OCC Handbook can be accessed at
https://www.occ.treas.gov/publications-and-resources/publications/comptrollers-handbook/index-comptrollers-
handbook.html. The FDIC examination manual can be accessed at
https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/safety/manual/manual_examinations_full.pdf



                                                                                                               3
lower CAMELS ratings than state regulators. We first show that OCC-supervised banks are
significantly less likely to lend to negative EBITDA firms than state-chartered ones and that this
effect is driven by cash-flow loans. We then measure the share of OCC-supervised commercial
banks in the borrowing firms' local banking markets and show that, controlling for local economic
conditions and firm characteristics, negative EBITDA firms in markets dominated by OCC-
supervised banks are significantly more likely to turn to nonbank lenders for funding.
Furthermore, consistent with the regulation of cash-flow loans driving our results on negative
EBITDA firms, we find that the OCC share has no effect on asset-based loans to unprofitable
firms. Overall, our evidence suggests that bank regulation constrains the ability of commercial
banks to lend to negative EBITDA firms, forcing such firms to turn to nonbanks for funding.
Compustat data suggest that this side effect of bank regulation potentially applies to a large number
of firms as the share of publicly traded firms with negative EBITDA has fluctuated between 31%
and 43% during the 2000-2018 period.

       The choice to borrow from a bank versus nonbank lender could also be affected by
differences in loan terms. Different lenders may structure their loans differently due to differences
in their funding, lending technology, or regulations that they are subject to. These differences in
loan contracts may in turn appeal to different borrowers. We therefore study how the price and
nonprice terms vary across loans extended by different types of lenders.

       We start with loan pricing. Controlling for observable borrower and loan characteristics,
nonbank loans carry about 190 basis points higher interest rate than bank loans. Why would
nonbank borrowers pay higher interest rates on their loans than observationally similar bank
borrowers? Consistent with bank regulation inducing market segmentation and limiting
competition, we find a large positive coefficient on the interaction of the borrower's negative
EBITDA with the nonbank lender dummy. Thus, nonbanks charge higher interest rates when they
face less competition from banks. The fact that firms borrow from nonbanks despite the higher
costs suggests that provision of these loans is valuable for borrowers. Consistent with this
conjecture, origination of nonbank loans is associated with significantly higher positive abnormal
announcement returns than origination of bank loans. Moreover, our finding on significantly
higher interest rates suggests that higher cost of funding for borrowers with negative EBITDA is
an important unintended consequence of bank regulation.




                                                                                                   4
       Next, we examine a large number of other loan terms including security, priority, maturity,
presence of financial covenants, and warrants. Our results on security and priority are consistent
with nonbanks having greater risk appetite than banks and providing incremental funding in the
form of unsecured and/or subordinated loans. With the exception of insurance companies,
nonbanks lend at shorter maturities, but these results mostly disappear once we control for firm
characteristics. In other words, loan maturity is determined primarily by borrower's fundamentals,
with lenders and borrowers matching based on borrower characteristics (Diamond 1991b).

       Nonbank loans are 37% less likely to include financial covenants. Instead of ex-post
monitoring through financial covenants, which may be difficult to set accurately for unprofitable
firms, nonbank lenders align incentives through the use of warrants and appear to engage in
significant ex-ante screening. Consistent with the latter, we find that nonbanks lend to firms that
are either shrinking or expanding their balance sheets and that are therefore likely to require more
ex-ante screening.

       Despite our best efforts to control for observable firm characteristics, it may be that
borrowers interested in certain loan provisions, for example looser financial covenants, match with
nonbank lenders. To help identify the causal effect of lender type on loan terms we implement a
fuzzy regression discontinuity design (fuzzy RDD) using the jump at zero EBITDA in the
probability of borrowing from a nonbank. We find that our results go through. Thus, while some
firms may choose to borrow from nonbanks to eliminate financial covenants, our results suggest
that even for otherwise identical borrowers, bank and nonbank lenders utilize different lending
technologies. When forced to borrow from a nonbank, firms with small negative EBITDA get very
different loans than firms with small positive EBITDA. Fuzzy RDD also allows us to compare the
overall riskiness of nonbank and bank borrowers around the zero-EBITDA cutoff created by
regulation. We find that nonbank borrowers are not more likely to go bankrupt and do not exhibit
worse profitability or stock returns ex post, suggesting that the zero-EBITDA cutoff is somewhat
arbitrary and that bank regulation has an unintended effect of restricting access to credit for
negative EBITDA firms. In addition, these findings are inconsistent with an increased risk appetite
as the only reason for nonbanks' willingness to provide capital to risky firms and instead point to
specialization in the form of different lending technology that relies more on ex ante screening and
less on traditional monitoring through covenants.




                                                                                                  5
        Overall, our findings show that nonbanks improve access to capital for firms that are
observably risky. Bank regulation is a significant, though not the only, driver of nonbank lending.
Our results also point to nonbanks' willingness to assume a riskier position in the borrower's debt
structure as well as to different lending technologies as ways in which nonbanks enhance access
to capital for their borrowers. Our analysis of loan terms shows that nonbank loans are expensive,
and important non-price terms such as financial covenants and warrants appear to be driven by
nonbanks' preferences. These results are not consistent with borrowers seeking out nonbanks to
get better terms and instead suggest that firms borrow from nonbanks when (additional) bank debt
is not available.

        Our paper contributes to a growing empirical literature on the role of the shadow banking
system in providing credit to firms. A number of papers have looked at the participation by
nonbanks in loans arranged and syndicated by banks (Jiang et al. 2010, Ivashina and Sun 2011,
Massoud et al. 2011, Nadauld and Weisbach 2012, Lim et al. 2014, Berlin et al. 2020, Biswas et
al. 2018) or at sales of loans by banks to nonbanks (Irani et al. 2017). More recent work has started
studying direct lending by nonbank financial intermediaries. A number of papers ­ Chen et al.
(2017), Cortes et al. (2018), and Gopal and Schnabl (2020) ­ document that banks, especially the
top four, have pulled back from lending to small firms and that finance companies and online
lenders have been filling the void. Kim et al. (2017) show that after US regulators issued
interagency guidance on leveraged lending in 2013, nonbanks increasingly acted as lead arrangers
in the syndicated loan market, while funding themselves with bank loans. Davydiuk et al (2020)
study lending by Business Development Companies (BDCs) and aim to identify the causal effects
of BDC lending on real economic activity at the county level. Most of these papers have no or very
limited borrower characteristics such as location and industry. Compared to these papers, our hand-
collected dataset on publicly traded middle-market firms allows us to study the matching between
borrowers and lenders and how the choice of lender may affect loan structure.

        In focusing on the source of incremental debt financing, our paper is related to Denis and
Mihov (2003) who study firms' decision to issue public bonds, borrow from banks or from
nonbank private lenders. They find that firms with the highest credit quality borrow from public
sources while firms with the lowest credit quality borrow from nonbank private lenders. Their
sample of private nonbank debt consists of larger issues with longer maturities and is therefore




                                                                                                   6
quite different from our sample covering the post crisis period.6 Furthermore, Denis and Mihov
(2003) do not know the identity of nonbank lenders, which we show to be an important determinant
of lending terms. In particular, lending by insurance companies, who were the main source of
private nonbank debt financing in the 1980s and 1990s, looks very different from other types of
nonbank loans. Carey et al. (1998) use DealScan data to study loans arranged by banks versus
finance companies and find that the latter lend to observably riskier borrowers. Our paper studies
other types of nonbank lenders, including hedge funds and PE/VC firms, covers the more recent
period, and includes many non-syndicated loans that are not included in the DealScan database.


2.      Sample Construction and Summary Statistics

        We now describe our sample construction and provide summary statistics on borrowers
and loans in our data.

2.1 Sample Construction

        With the exception of investment banks and a small number of finance companies, nonbank
lenders generally do not report their commercial loans to providers of standard databases such as
DealScan or Leveraged Commentary and Data (LCD). As a result, our loan data are largely hand
collected and supplemented with DealScan whenever loans are in fact reported in DealScan.

        We draw a random sample of 750 publicly-traded US-based middle market firms that
appear in Compustat at least once during the 2010-2015 period.7 The sample period is limited by
the high cost of manual data collection. As a result, we focus on documenting the extent of nonbank
lending during the post-crisis period and on exploring the cross-sectional patterns in matching
between borrowers and lenders and in the price and non-price terms. While the limited sample
period has less to say about any time series changes in this market, we think that our results on the
economic forces behind matching between different types of borrowers and lenders are unlikely
to be specific to the post-crisis period. Furthermore, in discussing our results, we compare them




6
  The average nonbank private debt borrower in Denis and Mihov (2003) borrows $126 million for almost 8.5 years.
The average nonbank borrower in our data borrows $74 million for a bit less than 4 years.
7
  Detailed discussion of sample construction and data extraction can be found in Appendix A.



                                                                                                              7
with prior studies such as Denis and Mihov (2003) and Carey, Post, and Sharpe (1998), who looked
at the characteristics of firms borrowing from nonbank lenders in the 1990s.

        Following the definition used by the National Center for the Middle Market, middle market
firms are firms with revenues between $10 million and $1 billion.8 Unlike EBITDA-based
definitions frequently used by lenders in the leveraged loan market, this revenue-based definition
allows us to include unprofitable firms in the analysis. Consequently, our sample is a more
heterogeneous and representative set of mid-sized, publicly-traded firms than one could obtain
from extant databases that typically focus on the leveraged loan market. We exclude larger firms
because most of them have credit ratings and thus access to public debt markets.9 Compustat firms
with revenues of less than $10 million are excluded because they are generally pre-revenue
development-stage firms that, whenever they borrow, rely on sponsor support.10 To focus on firms
that are likely to have entered into significant debt contracts, we require our firms to report book
leverage of at least five percent at some point during the 2010-2015 period. Financial firms and
utilities are excluded.

        Internet Appendix Table IA4 shows summary statistics for the annual panel of our sample
firms compared with the annual panel of all domestic mid-size Compustat firms excluding
financials and utilities. Panel A shows that our leverage criterion does result in our sample having
higher leverage and lower current ratios than the full population. Our sample also has slightly
lower market-to-book ratios, research expenses and slightly higher PP&E. However, most of these
differences are smaller than 0.2 standard deviations. Panel B imposes the leverage criterion on the
Compustat population and shows that while some differences are statistically detectable in a large
panel, the drawn sample is economically very similar to the undrawn sample of mid-size
Compustat firms that have at least 5% leverage. Importantly, our drawn sample comprises about
34% of all eligible firms.

        Regulation S-K requires firms to file material contracts, including loan and credit
agreements, as exhibits to the SEC filings. We obtain lists of debt related agreements from Capital


8
  http://www.middlemarketcenter.org.
9
   About 70% of Compustat firms with revenue greater than $1 billion have a credit rating from S&P. This
underestimates the fraction of large firms with access to public debt markets because some firms borrow through rated
subsidiaries without the parent holding company having a credit rating.
10
   Almost half of Compustat firms with revenue less than $10 million are biotech and mining firms.



                                                                                                                   8
IQ. Because Capital IQ's coverage of key documents has improved over time, we focus on a recent
sample of debt contracts filed between 2010 and 2015. We exclude documents related to bonds
underwritten by investment banks and placed with multiple investors, but retain all other debt
contracts such as lines of credit, term loans, and promissory notes. To avoid capturing minor
renegotiations and maturity extensions, we restrict our sample to original contracts as well as
amended and restated agreements. We exclude simple amendments, covenant waivers, and joinder
agreements.

         To economize on manual data collection, we first attempt to match all contracts to
DealScan based on the origination dates and identities of borrowers and lead lenders. Note that our
sample includes bank loans, for which the match rate is still only 53% of the total number of bank
loans in our sample. For nonbank loans, the match rate to DealScan drops to 19.3%, with most of
the matched loans arranged by investment banks (see Panel B of Table 1). For hedge funds and
PE/VC firms the match rates are 5.88% and zero.

         For matched contracts, we extract loan characteristics from DealScan. For the remaining
contracts, we read the credit agreements and record their characteristics, including amount,
maturity, interest rate, fees, priority, security, convertibility, presence of financial covenants,
performance pricing, warrants, and the tranche structure if it exists. Interest rates are recorded as
follows. For fixed-rate loans, we record the interest rate as stated in the contract. For floating-rate
loans, we record the spread over the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR). We then calculate
the initial interest rate as either the fixed rate specified in the contract or the level of LIBOR as of
origination plus the stated spread.11 If a contract stipulates an interest rate floor, we use the greater
of the calculated interest rate and the floor. Appendix A provides more detail on sample
construction and coding of credit agreements.

         We classify lenders into the following types: bank, bank-affiliated finance company,
finance company, investment bank, insurance company, hedge fund, private equity/venture capital,




11
   Whenever the contract allows the borrower to choose between several base rates, most commonly LIBOR and
prime, we record the spread over LIBOR. In about 13% of the loans, the contract provides for a different base rate
such as the bank's prime rate. In these cases, the initial interest rate is the level of the alternative base rate plus the
stated spread.



                                                                                                                         9
business development company (BDC), and investment manager.12 In doing so, we rely on
lenders' business descriptions in Capital IQ as well as lists of business development companies
(from Capital IQ), private equity funds (from Preqin), and hedge funds (from SEC form ADV).
Although it can be somewhat subjective, our classification is meant to capture broad differences
across lenders in funding stability and lending strategies. The Internet Appendix discusses the
results of cluster analysis that attempts to identify clusters of loans that are similar to each other
but different from loans in other clusters. The results of cluster analysis are broadly consistent with
our lender classification scheme. If the lender is an individual, a nonfinancial corporation, or a
government entity, we exclude the contract from the sample. Syndicated loans are classified
according to the identity of the lead arranger.

        We measure borrower characteristics as of the quarter preceding loan origination. For
balance sheet variables, we use the most recent quarterly data, while income and cash flow
statement items are calculated on a trailing twelve months basis. Borrower financials, as reported
in the original filings and thus seen by lenders at the time of loan origination, are from Capital IQ.
A detailed description of all variables used in the analysis can be found in Appendix B. All
financial ratios are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Because our sample includes many
relatively small firms, winsorization does not remove all outliers. To deal with this problem, we
cap at one the debt-to-assets ratio, the R&D-to-assets ratio, sales growth, and the level and change
in the ratio of EBITDA to assets. The final sample consists of 1,269 debt contracts entered into by
579 borrowers. The remaining firms either do not raise new debt financing during the 2010-2015
period or borrow through public bond markets.

        Lastly, we define banking markets as Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) or non-MSA
county and use Summary of Deposits (SOD) data for total deposits, regulatory capital ratios, share
of OCC-supervised banks, and the share of largest commercial banks in these local banking
markets. Moreover, we use various economic indicators from Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) as banking-market level controls. See Appendix B
for a list of these variables and their definitions.




12
  The investment manager category consists of assets managers that are not primarily in the business of managing
hedge funds, private equity, or venture capital funds.



                                                                                                             10
2.2 Summary Statistics

        Panel A of Table 1 reports the number of bank and nonbank loans taken out by our sample
firms during the 2010-2015 period. We report one observation per deal as we aggregate across
multiple tranches within each deal, using the sum for tranche amounts and the average value for
each other variable across tranches. Nonbank lenders extend almost one third of all loans in our
data.13 Panel B shows the different types of nonbank lenders in our sample: finance companies
(FCOs), bank finance companies (bank FCOs), investment banks, insurance companies, business
development companies (BDCs), private equity (PE) and/or venture capital (VC) funds, hedge
funds, investment managers, and others.14 FCOs (23%), PE/VC firms (19%), and hedge funds
(17%) account for the largest share of nonbank lending in our sample. An important note to
emphasize from Table 1 is that only about 19% of nonbank loans are tracked in DealScan. In
particular, DealScan rarely covers loans extended by asset managers.15


3.      Who Borrows from Nonbanks?

        In this section, we explore the characteristics of firms that borrow from banks versus
nonbanks. Table 2 reports the means, medians, and standard deviations of various firm and loan
characteristics for nonbank and bank loans. We test for differences in means and medians between
bank and nonbank loans, allowing for unequal variances across the two groups.

        Nonbank borrowers are significantly smaller than bank borrowers in terms of their book
assets and EBITDA. The mean (median) nonbank borrower has book assets of $367 (126) million
and EBITDA of $29 (1) million. Interestingly, 48% of nonbank borrowers, but only 14% of bank
borrowers, have negative EBITDA. The mean (median) bank borrower has book assets of $623
(314) million and EBITDA of $74 (30) million. These results are in contrast to Denis and Mihov
(2003), who study debt issuance during 1995-1996 and find that nonbank private borrowers used
to be larger than bank borrowers. In their sample, the median nonbank private borrower has total
assets of $220 million, while the median bank borrower has total assets of $145 million. These

13
   Nonbank deals are on average about half as big as bank deals; therefore, the value-weighted fraction for nonbank
loans is 16% overall. Among negative EBITDA borrowers, however, even the value-weighted nonbank lending ratio
amounts to 51%.
14
   Others include collateralized loan obligations, mutual funds and real estate investment trusts.
15
   We also checked whether nonbank loans show up as private placements in SDC. The vast majority of nonbank loans
in our data are not reported in SDC.



                                                                                                               11
results are also in contrast to Carey, Post, and Sharpe (1998), who compare DealScan loans
originated by banks versus finance companies. Carey, Post, and Sharpe (1998) do not find any
differences in book assets or sales between bank and finance company borrowers. These
differences in the characteristics of bank versus nonbank borrowers indicate that the commercial
lending market has changed dramatically over time and underscore the importance of studying
nonbank lending.

       Figure 1 further emphasizes the importance of EBITDA in determining lender type. We
sort firms into twenty equal-sized bins based on their trailing twelve months EBITDA at loan
origination and report the fraction of loans in each bin extended by nonbanks. The fraction of loans
originated by nonbanks drops sharply from around 60% to the left of zero EBITDA to 26% to the
right of zero EBITDA. The existing literature provides mixed evidence on the role of profitability.
While Carey, Post, and Sharpe (1998) find differences in profitability, as measured by the EBITDA
margin, between bank and finance company borrowers in DealScan, Denis and Mihov (2003) do
not find any differences in profitability, as measured by EBITDA-to-assets ratio, between bank
and nonbank borrowers.

       Compared to bank borrowers, firms that borrow from nonbanks are younger (27 vs. 37
years), spend a larger fraction of their sales on R&D (9% vs. 4%), experience greater stock return
volatility (77% vs. 53%), and have poorer past returns (-10% vs. 5%).

       Along with being smaller, nonbank borrowers get smaller loans ($74 vs. $186 million), but
report higher leverage prior to loan origination (36% vs. 25%) than bank borrowers. They also
expand or shrink their balance sheet much more than bank borrowers in the quarter of loan
origination (33% vs. 15%). The interest rate on nonbank loans is 463 basis points higher than the
interest rate on bank loans, although the results above suggest that a large part of this difference is
due to nonbank borrowers being riskier. Nonbank loans also carry larger upfront fees.
Interestingly, nonbanks loans are less likely to include financial covenants or performance pricing,
but they are significantly more likely to use warrants and convertible debt. Nonbank loans are also
more likely to be junior and unsecured. Although mean loan maturity is not significantly different
between bank and nonbank loans, median maturity is significantly shorter for nonbank loans.




                                                                                                    12
         We next turn to multivariate regression analysis of the characteristics of bank and nonbank
borrowers. Table 3 reports estimates from a linear probability model of borrowing from a nonbank
lender. Firm size, as captured by the natural log of the firm's assets, has no effect in any of the five
specifications. EBITDA and negative EBITDA in particular are important determinants of whether
a firm borrows from a nonbank lender. Consistent with the results in Figure 1, the effect of
EBITDA is driven largely by whether a firm has positive EBITDA.

         Why do we see a jump in the propensity to borrow from a nonbank lender at zero EBITDA?
As shown in Section 3.1, the answer is mostly bank regulation. The Comptroller of the Currency
(OCC) Handbook on Rating Credit Risk (2001)16 provides guidance on how banks should design
their internal credit risk rating systems for the loans that they extend. The handbook spells out
clear definitions of nonpass credits, which would attract special regulatory scrutiny. According to
the OCC Handbook, "[t]he primary consideration in examiners' credit risk assessment is the
strength of the primary repayment source." Because for most loans the primary repayment source
is operating cash flow, the handbook places significant emphasis on cash flow coverage ratios and
says that "[s]ubstandard assets are generally characterized by current or expected unprofitable
operations..." Moreover, the OCC Handbook on Leveraged Lending (2008) specifies EBITDA as
"a good metric to evaluate profitability." In other words, according to the regulatory guidance,
loans to firms with negative EBITDA are to be adversely classified as "substandard."17 Banks are
reluctant to extend loans to these firms as the classification of loans as substandard results in larger
loan loss allowances and lower CAMELS ratings. In sum, we expect the probability of nonbank
lending to jump as EBITDA turns negative. This jump is apparent in Figure 1 and Table 3.

         Relatedly, higher leverage is associated with a significantly higher probability of
borrowing from a nonbank lender. A 10% increase in leverage is associated with 3-4% increase in
the probability of borrowing from a nonbank lender. In contrast, in their multivariate analyses,
Denis and Mihov (2003) do not find any difference in book leverage between bank and nonbank
borrowers. We also find that the change in leverage from the quarter prior to loan origination to


16
       https://www.occ.treas.gov/publications/publications-by-type/comptrollers-handbook/rating-credit-risk/pub-ch-
rating-credit-risk.pdf
17
   In addition, the Interagency Guidance on Leveraged Financing of 2001 and the Interagency Guidance on Leveraged
Lending of 2013 both emphasize the importance of cash flows in making lending decisions. The 2001 guidance takes
an adverse view towards credits to borrowers with insufficient cash flow to meet their debt service obligations and the
2013 guidance tightens this view.



                                                                                                                   13
the end of the quarter of loan origination has a significant coefficient of similar magnitude. In other
words, nonbank borrowers not only have higher existing leverage but also add on significant
leverage. We also include the absolute value of asset growth from the quarter prior to loan
origination to the end of the quarter of loan origination to account for acquisitions and divestitures,
and find a positive and significant coefficient. These findings suggest that nonbanks make
information-sensitive loans to risky borrowers that require screening. Finally, we find that firms
with a higher current ratio are significantly less likely to borrow from a nonbank lender.

        Column 2 adds controls for the market-to-book ratio, sales growth, volatility, and past
returns. Only volatility and past returns are statistically significant, with firms whose stocks
experienced higher volatility in the months before loan origination being significantly more likely
to borrow from a nonbank lender. Firms that experienced positive buy-and-hold returns prior to
loan origination are less likely to borrow from a nonbank lender.

        One important exception to the regulators' emphasis on profitability and cash flow
coverage is asset-based loans, for which the primary source of repayment is liquidation of accounts
receivables and inventory. The Comptroller's Handbook on Accounts Receivable and Inventory
Financing (ARIF), for example, says that "it is not appropriate to assign an adverse risk rating
simply because an ARIF borrower has low or deficit net worth or occasional losses."18 For asset-
based loans, bank examiners emphasize evaluation of collateral quality, collateral controls in the
loan agreement, and lender's systems for monitoring collateral. Therefore, we would expect the
relationship between negative EBITDA and borrowing from a nonbank to be driven by cash-flow
loans. In column 3, we add the interaction between negative EBITDA and asset-based loan dummy
(ABL). The interaction is negative, statistically significant and of similar magnitude to the
coefficient on negative EBITDA. The sum of the coefficients on negative EBITDA and its
interaction with ABL measures the effect of negative EBITDA on nonbank lender for asset-based
loans. This sum is only 0.05 and is not statistically different from zero. These results are consistent
with bank regulators classifying cash-flow loans, but not necessarily asset-based loans, to negative
EBITDA firms as substandard.




18
      https://www.occ.gov/publications-and-resources/publications/comptrollers-handbook/files/accts-rec-inventory-
financing/pub-ch-accts-rec-inventory-financing.pdf



                                                                                                              14
          In column 4, we remove two forward-looking variables ­ change in leverage and absolute
value of the asset growth ­ and show that including them does not affect the coefficients on the
other variables. Finally, columns 5 and 6 add borrower fixed effects. Although some coefficients
are slightly smaller, within-borrower variation in profitability, change in leverage, asset growth,
and volatility have similar, significant, effects on the probability of borrowing from a nonbank
lender.

3.1.      Leniency of Bank Regulators and Nonbank Lending

          Bank regulation seems to be a key driver of the matching between unprofitable borrowers
and nonbank lenders. However, the importance of positive EBITDA for bank lending is also
consistent with banks lacking expertise in maximizing the value of collateral and therefore relying
on cash flow as the principal source of loan repayment (Habib and Johnsen 1999). Therefore, in
this section, we provide direct evidence on the role of bank regulation in nonbank lending to
unprofitable firms by exploring variation in the leniency of regulation for banks under their
supervision.

          We know that some banks are chartered at the federal level and, therefore, the OCC ends
up being their main regulator while other banks are chartered at the state level. Prior literature
shows clear evidence on federal regulators (e.g., the OCC) being less lenient than state regulators
(Agarwal, Lucca, Seru, and Trebbi (2014)).19

          Building on the prior findings on the leniency of regulators, we first test whether OCC-
supervised banks are significantly less likely to lend to negative EBITDA firms than state-
chartered ones. Results from a linear probability model of whether or not a bank borrower has
negative EBITDA are presented in Table 4. All specifications include year and industry fixed
effects. 20 Column 1 includes only our explanatory variable of interest: a dummy variable that takes
on a value of one if the bank is regulated by the OCC and zero otherwise. We get a negative and
highly significant coefficient both statistically and economically: OCC-supervised banks are 20%



19
   In fact, nationally chartered banks are always examined by the OCC while examination of state-chartered banks
rotates between state and federal regulators. Because we do not have data on the rotation of examiners, we focus on
the difference between nationally-chartered banks supervised by the OCC and state-chartered banks.
20
   Industry fixed effects are based on Fama-French 12 industries. Results are similar with Fama-French 17 and 48
industries.



                                                                                                               15
less likely to lend to negative-EBITDA firms. In columns 2 and 3, when we add borrowing firm-
level controls, the coefficient remains significant at an economic value of 10%-12%.

           In columns 4 and 5, we include the asset-based loan dummy (ABL) and its interaction with
the OCC dummy since regulators do not necessarily treat asset-based loans to negative EBITDA
firms as substandard. The interaction is positive and has similar magnitude as the coefficient on
the OCC dummy. The sum of the coefficients on the OCC dummy and its interaction with ABL is
close to zero and not statistically significant, indicating that being supervised by the OCC has no
effect on bank's propensity to extend asset-based loans to negative EBITDA firms. The coefficient
on the OCC dummy itself retains its magnitude and statistical significance indicating that the
results are driven by cash-flow loans, as expected.

           Next, we study the banking markets (i.e., MSA or non-MSA county) where nonbank
borrowers operate. Specifically, we explore whether the share of OCC-supervised banks in these
local banking markets affects the borrower's propensity to borrow from nonbanks when they have
negative EBITDA. This OCC share is identified using the deposit share of each bank, whose
primary asset specialization is "commercial lending" according to the Summary of Deposits
database.

           Table 5 reports the results of a linear probability model of a firm's propensity to borrow
from a nonbank lender on the share of the OCC-chartered banks in the borrower's local banking
market- i.e., where borrower's headquarters are located. Each regression includes the share of the
OCC banks and its interaction with the negative-EBITDA dummy. To help alleviate concerns that
the results could be driven by differences in other characteristics of local markets, we control for
a wide range of local economic conditions: unemployment, the level and change in per capita
income, population, total deposits, capitalization of local banks (as measured by the Tier 1 leverage
ratio), and the share of largest four commercial banks (Bank of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan
Chase and Wells Fargo) in these markets. In columns 3 and 6, we also control for the interaction
of negative EBITDA with local market-level controls.21 Firm-level controls include asset size,
profitability, negative EBITDA, firm age, leverage, research expense, PP&E, current ratio, market-
to-book, sales growth, stock return volatility, and past return. To make sure that the results are not


21
     For brevity, the full table displaying all these coefficients is relegated to the Internet Appendix Table IA5.



                                                                                                                      16
driven by time series trends in the propensity to borrow from nonbanks, we include year fixed
effects. We also include industry fixed effects to make sure that the results are not driven by
variation across industries in the propensity to borrow from banks (due to, for example, differences
in the composition of assets that can be used as collateral) and spatial concentration of industries
in certain geographies.

         We present results in two panels: results for cash flow loans vs. asset-based loans.
Remember that one important regulatory exception to the emphasis on positive profitability is
asset-based loans. For asset-based loans, bank examiners emphasize evaluation of collateral
quality rather than firm profitability. Therefore, we expect the role of EBITDA to manifest itself
in cash-flow loans only. Indeed, we find that, for cash flow loans, the positive and significant effect
of negative EBITDA on the propensity to borrow from a nonbank lender is significant when OCC-
supervised banks have a larger share in the borrower's local banking markets. Remember from
Table 3 that, borrowers with negative EBITDA are about 30% more likely to borrow from a
nonbank lender than borrowers with positive EBITDA. The effect of negative EBITDA on the
probability of borrowing from a nonbank becomes insignificant in markets with low OCC share,
controlling for local economic conditions and firm characteristics. A one-standard-deviation
increase in the OCC share of 20% increases the effect of negative EBITDA by about 10%.
Furthermore, consistent with regulation of cash-flow loans driving our results on negative
EBITDA, we find that the OCC share has no effect on asset-based loans to negative EBITDA
firms.

         Overall, the results of Table 5 point to an important driver of the propensity to borrow from
nonbank lenders: strictness of bank regulation in the borrower's banking markets. The regulation
constrains the ability of banks to lend to negative EBITDA firms, forcing them to turn to nonbanks
for funding. Moreover, consistent with the distinction drawn by regulators, we find that the effect
of negative EBITDA on the decision to borrow from a nonbank lender is concentrated among cash-
flow loans.

3.2.     Which Firms Borrow from Different Types of Nonbank Lenders?

         So far, we have treated all nonbank loans as being similar, but there are likely to be important
differences in the characteristics of firms that borrow from different types of nonbank lenders. To




                                                                                                      17
investigate matching between firms and different types of nonbank lenders, Table 6 reports relative
risk ratios from multinomial logit regressions predicting lender type. We present the results of
three models, with bank loans being the base outcome. Where the models differ is in how they
aggregate lender types into larger groups.

       In model 1, the four outcomes are 1) borrowing from an independent finance company or
a bank-affiliated financed company, 2) borrowing from an investment bank, 3) borrowing from an
insurance company, and 4) borrowing from a business development company, private equity,
venture capital, hedge fund, or other investment manager. We refer to this last outcome as
borrowing from an asset manager. Compared with bank borrowers, firms borrowing from FCOs,
investment banks, or asset managers are more likely to have negative EBITDA and higher
leverage.

       Borrowers from investment banks and FCOs are on average larger than bank borrowers,
and investment banks and asset managers are more likely to lend to firms that seek to increase
their leverage. All nonbanks are more likely than banks to lend to firms that experience a change
in size around loan origination. FCOs and asset managers lend to firms with higher stock return
volatility and firms that have had poor stock returns recently.

       Model 2 separates bank FCOs and unaffiliated FCOs. The differences in lending by these
two types of FCOs are likely to be very informative in further understanding the role of bank
regulation in lending to riskier, unprofitable firms as unaffiliated FCOs are much more lightly
regulated than bank FCOs. Firms that borrow from bank FCOs actually look broadly similar to
firms that borrow from banks, with just a few exceptions. Bank FCO borrowers experience larger
changes in their assets but smaller increases in leverage than bank borrowers. Bank FCO borrowers
also have lower market-to-book ratios than bank borrowers. Unaffiliated FCO borrowers, on the
other hand, are significantly more likely to have negative EBITDA, high leverage, high stock
return volatility, and lower past returns. That bank FCOs borrowers look similar to bank borrowers
and, in particular, have similar profitability and leverage is consistent with bank FCOs being
ultimately subject to similar regulations as their parent banks. Unaffiliated FCOs, on the other
hand, lend to riskier borrowers.




                                                                                                18
        In model 3, we split asset managers into two groups: 1) business development companies,
private equity, and venture capital, and 2) hedge funds and investment managers.22 Model 3
uncovers some interesting differences among these lenders. Highly levered firms are significantly
more likely to borrow from hedge funds and investment managers than from business development
companies, private equity, or venture capital (Wald test p-value for difference in relative risk
ratios: 0.056). The latter group is more likely to lend to firms that engage in a lot of R&D (p-value:
0.008) and have higher sales growth (p-value: 0.019). Firms that borrow from hedge funds and
investment managers, on the other hand, do not appear to spend more on R&D than bank
borrowers. These differences are in line with hedge funds specializing in leveraged lending and
PE/VC/BDCs specializing (relatively more) in lending to growth firms.


4. Loan Terms

        The propensity to borrow from a nonbank lender, rather than from a bank, could also be
affected by differences in price and non-price terms of bank versus nonbank loans. Different
lenders may structure their loans differently due to differences in their funding, lending
technology, or regulations that they are subject to. These differences in loan contracts may in turn
appeal to different borrowers. In this section we study how the price and nonprice terms vary
across loans extended by different types of lenders and also explore whether differences in contract
terms persist once we control for firm characteristics. In other words, when firms that are similar
on observable characteristics borrow from different types of lenders, do they obtain similar or
different terms?

4.1.    Initial Interest Rate

        In Table 7, we present the results of the analysis of the initial interest rate charged on bank
versus nonbank loans. The initial interest rate is set to the fixed interest rate for fixed-rate loans
and to the value at loan origination of the one-month London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)
plus the applicable spread for floating-rate loans. Because other loan terms are determined


22
  In the Internet Appendix, we perform cluster analysis on our sample loans and find strong separation of bank-like
loans from loans made by asset managers. FCOs and bank FCOs straddle both. We also examine which of the asset
managers are most similar to each other in their lending behavior. This allows us to subsume investment managers
and BDCs, both of whom have few observations, into larger groups. As the Internet Appendix shows, investment
managers are most similar to hedge funds, and BDCs are most similar to PE/VCs.



                                                                                                                19
simultaneously with the interest rate, we present the results with and without loan level controls.
We include the following firm level characteristics: log total assets, profitability (EBITDA divided
by total assets), negative EBITDA dummy, leverage, change in leverage, absolute value of the
asset growth, research expense, property, plant & equipment (PP&E), and log firm age as well as
volatility, past return, growth, and market-to-book ratio. Since many of these borrower
characteristics can be thought of as proxies for lenders' risk exposures, we can think of the
coefficients as pricing risk (see Koijen and Yogo 2019).

         Column 1 presents a univariate comparison of the interest rates charged on nonbank versus
bank loans. The difference of 450 basis points is large and highly statistically significant. Once we
add firm level controls in column 2, the coefficient on the nonbank dummy is reduced to 299 basis
points. The coefficients on firm characteristics are broadly consistent with theory. Smaller and
unprofitable firms pay significantly higher interest rates. The coefficient on the negative EBITDA
dummy is particularly large at 107 basis points. Firms with high pre-existing leverage or for which
the new loan increases leverage (as opposed to refinancing an existing loan) pay significantly
higher interest rates. A ten percentage points increase in leverage is associated with a 24 basis
points higher interest rate. As expected, firms with poor past stock returns and high stock price
volatility pay significantly higher interest rates.

         In column 3, we add controls for the other loan terms: amount, performance pricing,
seniority, security, etc. The coefficient on the nonbank dummy is reduced further from 299 basis
points to 190 basis points, indicating that a large part of the difference in interest rates charged on
bank versus nonbank loans to borrowers with similar characteristics is due to differences in the
types of loans extended by different lenders.23

         In column 4, we decompose the effect of nonbank lending into different lender types.
Controlling for firm and loan characteristics, loans from bank-affiliated finance companies carry
69 basis point lower interest rates. Independent finance companies and investment banks charge


23
   In an unreported regression, we add the upfront fee and annual fee as additional controls. The fees are missing for
15% of loan contracts since they are spelled out in separate fee letters that are not filed with the SEC. Adding these
fees has little effect on most of the other coefficients. While the upfront fee does not correlate with the interest rate in
this regression, a ten basis point higher annual fee is associated with a nine basis point higher interest rate, suggesting
that lenders include annual fees in riskier loans. See Berg, Saunders, and Steffen (2015) for a discussion of the
importance of fees in loan contracts.



                                                                                                                        20
about 172 and 261 basis points higher interest rates, while various types of asset managers charge
about 410 basis points higher interest rates. The significant difference between bank-affiliated and
independent finance companies in terms of rates charged is again worth emphasizing.

       In column 5 we include borrower fixed effects to control for time-invariant unobserved
heterogeneity across borrowers. The results are similar to column 3, where we include industry
fixed effects: the difference in interest rates between bank loans and nonbank loans is 228 basis
points in column 5 versus 190 basis points in column 3. Furthermore, within borrower variation in
firm and loan characteristics appears to have similar effects on the initial interest rate as variation
across borrowers.

       Results in columns 2-5 show that negative EBITDA borrowers pay 80-110 basis points
higher interest rates. In column 6 we interact the negative EBITDA dummy with the nonbank
lender dummy. The coefficient on this interaction is a statistically significant 157 basis points. The
coefficients on the nonbank dummy drops from 190 to 151 basis points, while the coefficient on
the negative EBITDA dummy drops from 78 to 37 basis points and is no longer statistically
significant. These results are consistent with nonbanks charging higher interest rates when they
face less competition from banks.

       Another potential explanation of the interest-rate difference is that nonbanks make a
different trade-off between loan terms than banks. Although we control for loan characteristics in
our regressions, it may be that the pricing of different types of loans depends in different ways on
the control variables or that adding loan characteristics as controls is insufficient due to the
simultaneous nature of the choice of contract terms (e.g., the covenant strictness). We run (but do
not report to save space on the table) various specifications using subsets of the sample created
based on non-price terms (e.g., including only loans with no covenants or only senior secured loans
with covenants) and find that the coefficient on the nonbank dummy remains similar.

       Lastly, for robustness, we also explore (but do not report) whether simultaneous equity
ownership could explain differences in interest rates (Lim, Minton, and Weisbach 2014). Using
Capital IQ, we gathered information on each borrower's top 25 holders as of the quarter prior to
loan origination. Matching these equity holders with our nonbank lenders, we find that significant
equity ownership in borrowing firms by our nonbank lenders is rare. In only 5.5% of nonbank




                                                                                                    21
loans is the lender a blockholder with at least a 5% stake. Thus, simultaneous equity ownership is
unlikely to explain our results.

         Overall, we do not find evidence that firms borrow from nonbanks due to favorable loan
rates. Consistent with bank regulation inducing market segmentation and limiting competition, we
find a large positive coefficient on the interaction of the borrower's negative EBITDA with the
nonbank lender dummy. Thus, nonbanks charge higher interest rates when they face less
competition from banks. This finding also suggests higher cost of funding for borrowers with
negative EBITDA is an important unintended consequence of bank regulation.

         The fact that firms borrow from nonbanks despite the higher costs suggests that provision
of these loans is valuable for borrowers. Announcement returns presented in Internet Appendix
Table IA6 support this conjecture. To analyze announcement returns around origination of bank
versus nonbank, we calculate cumulative abnormal returns from loan origination through the day
on which an 8-K SEC filing discloses the terms of the new loan. We find that nonbank loans
experience announcement returns that are 3% higher than the announcement returns for bank
loans.

4.2.     Other Loan Terms

         Nonbank borrowers do not get favorable pricing in terms of lower interest rates in their
loans. What about other loan terms? Table 8 reports the results of OLS regressions of various non-
rate terms on lender type dummies.24 We present the results with and without firm controls to show
how much of the difference in lending terms is due to matching between firms and lender types.
Although we control for the same set of firm characteristics as in column 2 of Table 3, for brevity
we only report the coefficients on log assets, profitability, negative EBITDA and leverage.25

         Panel A explores basic non-price terms such as amount, maturity, and seniority. With the
exception of investment banks, nonbank lenders make significantly smaller loans than banks.


24
   To address the concern that our results may be driven by nonlinearities and systematic differences between bank
and nonbank borrowers, in the Internet Appendix, we use nonparametric matching techniques to achieve better
covariate balance between bank (control) and nonbank (treated) borrowers. The results, reported in the Internet
Appendix Table IA12, show that differences in loan terms are unlikely to be due to nonlinearities or lack of covariate
balance between bank and nonbank borrowers.
25
   We exclude the change in leverage and asset growth as controls because of potential reverse causality concerns,
especially when studying the loan amount.



                                                                                                                  22
Naturally, firm size and leverage are important determinants of differences in loan size. Column 2
shows that these and other firm characteristics explain a large part of the difference in loan amounts
between banks and independent finance companies as well as asset managers.

         In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is maturity. Although banks finance themselves
with demand deposits, such deposits tend to be stable with deposit rates not very sensitive to short-
term interest rates (Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny (2015) and Drechsler et al. (2017). This
allows banks to extend relatively long maturity loans. Relative to banks, loans by asset managers
have 0.7-1.1 year shorter maturity, but this is mostly due to asset managers lending to small,
unprofitable firms. Thus, given their less stable funding, asset managers, hedge funds in particular,
lend to firms for which short-term debt is likely to provide more discipline and thus more optimal
than long-term debt. Consistent with insurance companies having very stable funding, loans by
insurance companies have more than five years longer maturity than bank loans. This is true even
when we control for firm characteristics. Investment banks also appear to syndicate longer
maturity loans although this result is only marginally significant.26 Columns 5 and 6 indicate that
loans by asset managers are 30% less likely to be senior after controlling for firm characteristics.
As shown in column 8, asset managers and insurance companies are less likely to require collateral
than banks.

         In Panel B we turn our attention to what we refer to as performance-related non-price terms:
presence of financial covenants, performance pricing, warrants, and convertibility features. With
the exception of insurance companies, nonbank loans are significantly less likely to include
financial covenants than bank loans. This is especially the case for loans by asset managers, which
are 29-45% less likely to include financial covenants. Given that these lenders lend to riskier
borrowers, it is somewhat surprising that they do not include financial covenants. It may be the
case that nonbank loans are less likely to include financial covenants because these loans are junior
to bank loans that do include financial covenants (Park 2000, Rauh and Sufi 2010). However, in
unreported analyses, we find very similar effects of lender type dummies on financial covenants
when we restrict the sample of loans to senior secured loans and to firms that during our sample
period borrow exclusively from banks or nonbanks. Our results are consistent with Rajan and


26
  Our results on the relationship between funding stability and loan maturity are similar in spirit to Li, Loutskina, and
Strahan (2019) who show that banks with more stable funding extend longer maturity loans.



                                                                                                                     23
Winton's (1995) prediction that lenders with short-term liabilities should make short-term loans
without covenants and lenders with long-term liabilities should make long-term loans with
covenants.

       Part of the explanation behind negative coefficients for asset managers is that loans to firms
with negative EBITDA are less likely to have financial covenants. This may be due to standard
EBITDA and EBIT based covenants not being particularly meaningful for unprofitable firms.
Rather than relying on ex-post monitoring through financial covenants, asset managers may
engage in more ex-ante screening to identify creditworthy borrowers. Panel B also shows that
nonbank lenders, with the exception of bank FCOs, are about 18-61% less likely than banks to use
performance pricing in their loans. Note that fixed rate loans are excluded from this regression
since performance pricing is a feature unique to floating rate loans and we address the choice
between fixed and floating rates below.

       Columns 5-6 on Panel B show that most nonbanks, except for investment banks and
insurance companies, are significantly more likely than banks to use warrants. The use of warrants
by finance companies and asset managers is strongly driven by the types of firms they lend to.
Adding firm characteristics reduces the size of most coefficients although they remain statistically
significant. Most nonbanks also use convertible debt more frequently, although we do not find any
loans with a convertibility feature made by bank FCOs or insurance companies. Overall, by not
including financial covenants in their loans, nonbank lenders provide borrowers with greater
flexibility, but impose discipline through shorter maturity and align incentives through the
inclusion of warrants. Therefore, these findings are inconsistent with an increased risk appetite as
the only reason for nonbanks' willingness to provide capital to risky firms and instead point to
specialization in the form of different lending technology that relies more on ex ante screening and
less on traditional monitoring through covenants.

       Finally, Panel C of Table 8 examines other loans terms: whether the loan is fixed rate or
floating, presence of upfront and annual fees, and whether or not the loan is secured by a second
lien. It is interesting that the choice of fixed versus floating rates is driven exclusively by lender
type and not by firm characteristics. Turning to the upfront fees in columns 3-4, finance companies
and investment banks charge 41 and 33 basis points higher upfront fees after controlling for firm
characteristics. The higher upfront fees charged by asset managers can be explained by the



                                                                                                   24
characteristics of their borrowers. There are no significant differences in terms of the propensity
of different lender types to charge annual fees, except for loans by independent finance companies.
It is worth noting though that only 7% of sample loan contracts contain an annual fee. Finally,
almost all nonbank lenders except for insurance companies are marginally more likely than banks
to make loans secured by a second lien.

       Overall, the results in Table 8 suggest that nonbanks are willing to take up a riskier position
in borrowers' capital structure, but use different lending technology when holding priority
constant.


5. Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD) around zero EBITDA

       While the analyses on loan terms presented so far control for observable firm
characteristics, there could be unobservable differences between firms that borrow from banks
versus nonbanks and it could be these differences in unobservable characteristics that are driving
differences in price and non-price terms across loans extended by different lenders. To estimate
the causal effect of borrowing from a nonbank lender, we use fuzzy regression discontinuity design
taking advantage of regulatory constraints on banks' ability to lend to negative cash flow
borrowers.

        As we discussed in Section 3, the OCC adversely classifies cash-flow loans to unprofitable
firms as "substandard". Such loans trigger additional regulatory reporting and loan loss reserve
requirements and, therefore, we see a significant jump -discontinuity- in the probability of
borrowing from a nonbank as firms' EBITDA turns negative. This jump is apparent in Figure 1
and Table 3 presented above. The analyses in Section 3 show that the jump can be explained by
the presence of OCC regulated banks in the borrower's location. Internet Appendix Figure IA3
shows that the discontinuity continues to be there as we zoom in closer to the neighborhood around
zero EBITDA for these cash-flow loans. To formally test for the existence of a discontinuity in the
probability of borrowing from a nonbank lender, we follow Gelman and Imbens (2014) in using
local linear polynomials of EBITDA. Appendix Table IA7 reports the results for neighborhoods
of $100, $50, $25, $10, $5, and $2.5 million around zero EBITDA. We consistently find that firms
with negative EBITDA are 36-59% more likely to borrow from a nonbank than firms with positive
EBITDA.



                                                                                                   25
           We check whether there are any other firm characteristics, such as firm size, age, or
research expenses that change around zero EBITDA (Internet Appendix Table IA8). We do not
find any consistently significant jumps in any of the covariates. Importantly, among bank
borrowers we do not find a discontinuity in the propensity to borrow from a relationship bank.

           A common concern with regression discontinuity designs is the possibility that firms could
manipulate the running variable, in our case EBITDA, which determines assignment to treatment.
Note however that what is important for identification is not whether agents have some control
over the running variable but whether they can precisely manipulate it (Lee and Lemieux 2010).
As long as firms cannot precisely manipulate their EBITDA, assignment to treatment is locally
randomized around zero EBITDA (Lee and Lemieux 2010). To alleviate the concern that firms
may be able to precisely manipulate their EBITDA, Figure 2 shows the histogram of EBITDA
with a bin width of half a million dollars. The mode of EBITDA bins is just below zero, contrary
to what one would expect if firms were manipulating their EBITDA.27 Visually, the distribution
appears smooth around zero. In the Internet Appendix, we use local polynomial density estimation
following McCrary (2008) and Cattaneo, Jansson, and Ma (2017) to formally test for a
discontinuity in the EBITDA distribution. The tests fail to reject the null hypothesis that the
distribution is smooth.

           A unique challenge with our regression discontinuity design is that our sample observations
are contingent on a firm choosing to obtain a loan. If a firm's choice to borrow at all is
discontinuous at zero EBITDA, the validity of the RDD would be in question. While
fundamentally different from manipulation, empirically this concern is similar. In a histogram,
EBITDA manipulation would shift probability mass from the left of zero to the right, creating a
discontinuity. If a certain fraction of negative EBITDA firms chooses not to borrow and if that
choice is discontinuous at zero EBITDA, we would overestimate the causal effect of nonbanks on
the cost of debt if the firms that opt out are of unobservably higher quality than the firms that do
borrow. However, this choice will cause probability mass to disappear to the left of zero in the
histogram, which would be detected in the same way as manipulation. We observe no such
evidence. It is also important to note that the most plausible reason for high quality negative
EBITDA firms not to borrow is that they prefer other sources of financing to expensive nonbank

27
     The second mode in the figure is $3.5-4 million.



                                                                                                   26
debt, an argument that presupposes the existence of the causal effect we intend to show and thus
only pertains to the magnitude of the effect.

       A more complicated concern is that for some reason some firms with small positive
EBITDA choose not to borrow and that those firms are of unobservably low quality. We do not
find it easy to think of plausible reasons why this might happen. But if one accepts the possibility,
that choice would cause probability mass to disappear to the right of zero in the EBITDA
distribution. This effect could be offset by other firms manipulating their EBITDA so that some
probability mass moves from the left of zero to the right. With some luck, the EBITDA distribution
could look smooth even though there is both a discontinuity in the choice of borrowing as well as
manipulation. We can address this issue by examining more broadly whether firms manipulate
their EBITDA around zero in an annual panel of our sample firms that does not condition on
whether or not the firm borrows in a given year. In Internet Appendix Figure IA5, we show that
the distribution of EBITDA is smooth around zero in that panel. One may also wonder whether it
is a lucky coincidence that manipulation cannot be detected in our random sample. Internet
Appendix Figure IA5 shows that the distribution of EBITDA is smooth around zero when
considering the annual panel of all Compustat firms that meet our sample selection criteria.

       It is also worth considering that the regulation from which we derive our RDD cutoff
specifically pertains to cash flow loans, but not to the same extent asset-based loans. Perhaps firms
with positive EBITDA obtain cash flow loans, firms with negative EBITDA that have suitable
collateral (i.e. higher credit quality than other negative EBITDA firms) obtain asset-based loans,
and firms with negative EBITDA that do not have such collateral obtain loans from nonbanks. If
such an effect were to occur, it would be noticeable in the data in two ways. First, asset-based
loans typically use inventory and/or accounts receivable as their borrowing base. With the
aforementioned concern, we should find a discontinuity in these two covariates around zero
EBITDA. Internet Appendix Table IA8 shows no evidence of such a discontinuity. Second, we
should see a discontinuity in the EBITDA distribution around zero for asset-based loans. Internet
Appendix Figure IA6 shows that the distribution is smooth. We conclude that there is no evidence
of either manipulation or self-selection around zero EBITDA. For self-selection to be present, but
undetectable, there would have to be two distinct effects that cause observations to disappear from
the left of zero and the right of zero in such a way that the effects on the EBITDA distribution




                                                                                                  27
cancel out yet produce a large discontinuity in nonbank borrowing without producing a
discontinuity in any other covariate.

       Having shown that zero EBITDA allows us to utilize a fuzzy regression discontinuity
design, we now present the results for the causal effect of borrowing from a nonbank lender on
various loan terms using zero EBITDA as an instrument for nonbank lending. Table 9 uses the
nonparametric estimation methodology of Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014) to estimate
treatment effects. The optimal neighborhood bandwidth is chosen using the coverage error-rate
(CER)-optimal bandwidth selector (Calonico, Cattaneo, and Farrell, 2017), which is more
conservative than traditional mean squared error bandwidth selectors. Because the bandwidth
selector uses the structure of all the data, it needs to be re-estimated for each outcome variable.
Internet Appendix Table IA9 shows that the results are robust to using ad-hoc neighborhoods
around zero EBITDA. The optimal bandwidth around zero EBITDA for the initial interest rate as
the outcome variable is [-32.5, 32.5]. In the second stage, we find an interest rate differential of
584 basis points with a z-statistic of 2.98. While this difference is larger than the coefficient on the
nonbank lender dummy in Table 7, it is important to recognize that RDD focuses on the interest
rate differential right below and above the zero-EBITDA boundary. Causal effects for firms further
away from the boundary cannot be estimated using RDD and are likely to be smaller for firms
whose EBITDA is well above zero.

       Nonbank loans are 68 percentage points less likely to include financial covenants and 51
percentage points less likely to be secured by some type of collateral. These differences are again
somewhat larger than the ones in the OLS regressions of Table 8. There is also some evidence that
nonbank loans have shorter maturity (3.2 years) and carry higher fees. There is no evidence that
nonbank borrowers differ from bank borrowers in their propensity to go bankrupt, or in their
profitability or stock returns subsequent to loan origination.


   6. Future Borrower Performance

       Fuzzy RDD provides causal evidence on the effect of nonbank lending on loan terms. One
drawback of this design is to focus on loans to borrowers with a small positive or negative
EBITDA. What about the larger universe of bank and nonbank borrowers? We also test whether
an average nonbank borrower is riskier on dimensions that are not observable to us as



                                                                                                     28
econometricians but are observable to lenders who price their loans accordingly. If nonbanks do
charge higher interest rates as compensation for such unobservable risk, then we should expect
nonbank borrowers to perform worse than observationally similar bank borrowers. Therefore, we
also study borrower performance after loan origination. Given space constraints, we provide
results of these tests in the Internet Appendix. We report findings on whether nonbank borrowers
are more likely to file for bankruptcy than bank borrowers over the three years following loan
origination in Appendix Table IA10 and we report results on post-origination borrower
performance- year-over-year changes in profitability (Panel A), whether a firm's subsequent stock
return in a given year is below the 10th percentile (Panel B), changes in profitability by lender type
(Panel C) and subsequent stock returns (Panels D and E) in Appendix Table IA11.

       For these tests, we first collect bankruptcy dates, as of April 30, 2019, from Capital IQ and
estimate a linear probability model of bankruptcy over the three years following loan origination.
Overall, controlling for the full set of firm characteristics, the relation between bankruptcy and the
nonbank dummy is small and not statistically significant. To support these results, we also conduct
power analysis (presented in Internet Appendix Figure IA7) and conclude that we have ample
power to detect the difference in bankruptcy rate needed to fully explain the observed price
differences. Next, we ask whether nonbank borrowers have worse operating performance, as
measured by year-to-year changes in profitability or stock returns, after loan origination.
Controlling for firm characteristics at loan origination, we do not find any significant differences
in performance between bank and nonbank loans.

       These results indicate that conditional on firm characteristics, bank and nonbank borrowers
perform similarly following loan origination. We do not find any evidence that nonbank borrowers
are doing worse than bank borrowers in terms of future profitability or the probability of
bankruptcy. Our finding that nonbank borrowers perform similarly to bank borrowers despite the
fact that nonbanks are less likely to use covenants to monitor suggests that nonbanks may
compensate effectively through either ex ante screening or monitoring in ways that do not rely on
financial covenants. We find, for example, anecdotal evidence of cases where nonbank lenders
receive board of directors observation rights.




                                                                                                   29
7. Conclusion

       Using novel, hand-collected data, we present systematic evidence on the terms of direct
lending by nonbank financial intermediaries to publicly-traded middle market firms post 2008
financial crisis. Such lending is widespread with about one third of all loans in our data being
extended by nonbanks. The extent of nonbank lending leads to an important question we answer
in this paper: Why do firms borrow directly from nonbanks?

       We find that bank regulation is a key driver. Unprofitable, highly levered firms are more
likely to borrow from nonbanks than are other firms. In fact, we see a regulation-driven
discontinuity in borrowing from nonbanks at zero EBITDA for firms. Borrowing firms with a
small negative EBITDA are 34% more likely to rely on nonbank lending than firms with a small
positive EBITDA. We also explore leniency of bank regulators as federal regulators (i.e., the OCC)
have been shown to be less lenient than state regulators for banks. We find that firms located in
banking markets with a larger share of OCC-supervised banks are more likely to borrow from
nonbanks when they have a negative EBITDA.

       Another natural question to ask is whether nonbanks are able to offer more favorable loan
terms. The answer is no in terms of loan pricing. We find that nonbank loans carry significantly
higher interest rates. Controlling for observable firm characteristics and other loan terms, the
average difference in interest rates is 190 basis points. Moreover, we provide causal evidence,
using a fuzzy regression discontinuity design (RDD), on the unintended consequence of bank
regulation leading to negative EBITDA firms borrowing from nonbanks and paying larger prices
for these loans. Despite higher prices, these nonbank loans must be valuable for borrowing firms.
Larger abnormal announcement returns for nonbank loans, compared with bank loans, are also
consistent with this interpretation.

       Nonbank lenders also appear to use different lending techniques. They are significantly
less likely than banks to include financial covenants but more likely to include warrants in their
loans. Thus, rather than relying on financial covenants to monitor borrowers' ex-post performance,
nonbank lenders engage in alignment of incentives and ex-ante screening. Consistent with this
idea, we find that, controlling for observable borrower characteristics, bank and nonbank




                                                                                               30
borrowers perform similarly ex post despite nonbanks not using financial covenants for early
intervention.

        Finally, our findings suggest that further theoretical work modeling credit market
equilibrium with different types of borrowers and lenders would be a fruitful avenue for future
theoretical research.28 Moreover, with the COVID-19 pandemic reducing revenues of small and
medium enterprises in an unprecedented way, how these mostly unprofitable firms will be able to
find liquidity over the short term and how much nonbank financial institutions will help these firms
survive is an open question for future empirical research.




28
  One example is Donaldson et al. (2017) who show that nonbanks' higher funding costs can act as a commitment
device for information production.



                                                                                                          31
Appendix A. Details on Sample Construction

       We randomly sample a set of 750 firms from the domestic population of publicly-traded
Compustat firms during the period of 2010-2015 with revenues between $10 million and $1 billion.
We require firms to have book leverage of at least 5% and exclude financial firms and utilities.
We also exclude ADRs and firms that are incorporated or have their headquarters outside the US.
A small number of firms move from abroad to the US or vice versa during the sample period. We
include such firms only for the period during which both the location of their headquarters as well
as their incorporation are in the US.
        Next, we use Capital IQ to obtain a list of each firm's debt agreements during the period
from 2010-2015. We include credit agreements, debt & loan agreements, notes agreements and
securities purchase agreements. We exclude bonds and supplemental filings such as guarantee
agreements, loan modifications, covenant waivers, etc.
       To avoid having to manually exclude a large number of bonds, we limit our download of
credit documents to instruments for debt amounts of less than $250 million. We obtain syndicated
loans in excess of $250 million from DealScan, as described further below.
       Loan amendments are not necessarily filed as exhibits, but might simply be described in a
short paragraph in a company's 10-Q or 10-K filing and are thus much more difficult to track
consistently than contracts that are stated in full. Since this paper focuses on sources of funds and
initial contract terms rather than renegotiations, we drop all simple amendments and retain only
original debt contracts as well as amended and restated debt contracts, which presumably represent
more substantial changes. We also exclude promissory notes that are issued pursuant to an existing
credit agreement, such as notes evidencing a drawdown of a line of credit. Finally, we drop 14
debtor-in-possession credit agreements.
       We obtain the identity of the borrower, the lead lender, and the origination date and match
loans to DealScan. Because firms sometimes borrow through their subsidiaries, we obtain a list of
subsidiaries for our sample firms from Exhibit 21 of their 10-K filings and cross-reference these
entities with DealScan as well. Where possible, we obtain data on loan characteristics for the
matched loans from DealScan. Importantly, we do not include in our sample contracts from
DealScan that do not have a match in our data extract from Capital IQ/EDGAR. Manually
searching for 25 of these observations in Capital IQ and EDGAR, we verify that the majority of
these DealScan observations are amendments rather than originations. The remaining observations



                                                                                                  32
involve either relatively small loans issued by sample firm subsidiaries that were not filed with the
SEC, presumably due to lack of materiality, or loans issued after a company had ceased to file. We
conclude that coverage of debt contracts in Capital IQ appears reliable during the sample period.
        Since we exclude instruments larger than $250 million from the Capital IQ search, we
obtain a list of all deals in excess of $250 million from DealScan. Because DealScan contains a
large number of amendments, we search Capital IQ for any debt contracts originated at the same
time as the DealScan contract and exclude DealScan observations that correspond to amendments
in Capital IQ or that cannot be found in Capital IQ (e.g. because they are amendments that are not
filed in an exhibit or because the firm is no longer public). Among the DealScan observations that
can be matched to Capital IQ, 43% are amendments.
        We manually code debt contracts that could not be matched to DealScan. Each loan is
assigned a lender type based on the identity of the lender or, in the case of multi-lender loans, the
lead lender. The lead lender is assumed to be first lender mentioned in the header of the contract.
If lender roles are assigned, we take the first lender that is named as administrative agent, lead
arranger, or agent. For observations from DealScan, we identify lender as the institution that is
given lead arranger credit in DealScan or has one of the lender roles designated above. There are
a few cases in which an administrative agent has a purely administrative role without actually
lending to the borrower. For example, some hedge funds rely on an investment bank to administer
a deal. In cases in which the first mentioned lender is an administrative agent, we verify that this
institution also acts as a lender. If it does not, we record the identity of the first institution that is
listed as a lender on the signature page or commitment schedule.
        Lenders are classified into the following types: bank, bank-affiliated finance company,
finance company, investment bank, private equity/venture capital, hedge fund, insurance company,
investment manager, business development company, other collective investments (such as
collateralized loan obligations or mutual funds), government, individual, and nonfinancial
corporations. We first cross-reference lenders against lists of business development companies
(from Capital IQ), hedge funds (from SEC form ADV), and private equity funds (from Preqin). If
a lender is not on one of these lists, we use the business description in Capital IQ. Loans from
government entities (such as the Export-Import Bank), individuals, and "other" lenders are
excluded from the analysis. Contracts entered into with nonfinancial corporations are typically
related to a business transaction, primarily seller financing, or are loans between affiliated firms.




                                                                                                       33
Appendix B. Variable Definitions
Variable                Definition                                                 Source
Loan characteristics
Annual fee              Fee the borrower has to pay to lender annually,            Manual collection, DealScan
                        expressed in basis points of the entire commitment.

Convertible             Indicator equals one if the debt is convertible, zero      Manual collection
                        otherwise

Financial covenants     Indicator equals one if the debt contract contains any     Manual collection, DealScan
                        financial covenants, zero otherwise

Fixed rate loan         Indicator equals one if debt is fixed rate, zero if debt   Manual collection, DealScan
                        is floating rate

Initial interest rate   Equals fixed rate for fixed rate debt, level of 1-month    LIBOR levels obtained from
                        LIBOR (adjusted for interest rate floors) at               Federal Reserve Bank of St.
                        origination plus spread for floating rate debt             Louis FRED database

Loan size               Total size of the commitment                               Manual collection, DealScan

Ln(amount)              Natural log of loan size                                   Manual collection, DealScan

Maturity                Maturity of the debt expressed in years                    Manual collection, DealScan

Nonbank                 Indicator equals one if the lender is a nonbank, zero      Capital IQ, Preqin, Form
                        otherwise                                                  ADV

Performance pricing     Indicator equals one if debt has a performance             Manual collection, DealScan
                        pricing provision, zero otherwise

Second lien             Indicator equals one if the loan is second lien, zero if   Manual collection, DealScan
                        it is first lien or unsecured

Security                Indicator equals one if the debt is secured by             Manual collection, DealScan
                        collateral, zero otherwise

Seniority               Indicator equals one if debt is senior, zero otherwise     Manual collection, DealScan

Upfront fee             Fee the borrower has to pay to lender at origination,      Manual collection, DealScan
                        expressed in basis points of the entire commitment

Warrants                Indicator equals one if the lender receives warrants       Manual collection, DealScan
                        in conjunction with the debt issue, zero otherwise

Firm characteristics

Current ratio           Current assets divided by current liabilities.             Capital IQ

EBITDA                  Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and          Capital IQ
                        amortization (EBITDA).

EBITDA < 0              Indicator equals one if EBITDA is negative, zero           Capital IQ
                        otherwise.




                                                                                                              34
Firm age                Number of years since the firm was founded.              Capital IQ, 10-K

Leverage                Long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities          Capital IQ
                        divided by total assets.

 Leverage               The change in leverage from the quarter prior to loan    Capital IQ
                        origination to the end of the quarter of loan
                        origination.

Market-to-book          Common shares outstanding times stock price plus         Capital IQ
                        preferred stock plus long-term debt plus debt in
                        current liabilities, divided by total assets

Profitability           Ratio of EBITDA to total assets.                         Capital IQ

 Profitability          Annual change in the ratio of EBITDA to total assets.    Capital IQ

Research expense        Research expense divided by sales.                       Capital IQ

Sales growth            Sales in year t divided by sales in year t-1 minus one   Capital IQ

PP&E                    Net property, plant and equipment scaled by total        Capital IQ
                        assets.

Total Assets            Total book assets. We also added the absolute of         Capital IQ
                        asset growth from the quarter prior to loan
                        origination to the end of the quarter of loan
                        origination to account for acquisitions/divestments.

Abs (Asset Growth)      Absolute value of asset growth from the quarter prior    Capital IQ
                        to loan origination to the end of the quarter of loan
                        origination.

Volatility              Standard deviation of daily stock returns measured       CRSP, OTC Markets, Capital
                        over 180 calendar days ending 20 days prior to loan      IQ
                        origination, multiplied by the square root of 252. We
                        supplement CRSP with daily stock returns from OTC
                        Markets and Capital IQ.

Past return             Buy-and-hold stock return measured over 180              CRSP, OTC Markets, Capital
                        calendar days ending 20 days prior to loan               IQ
                        origination. We supplement CRSP with daily stock
                        returns from OTC Markets and Capital IQ.



MSA/non-MSA county characteristics

OCC share               Share of deposits in branches of OCC_supervised          Summary of Deposits
                        banks. The sample of banks is limited to banks
                        whose primary asset specialization according to the
                        Summary of Deposits data is commercial lending.
Tier 1 leverage ratio   Deposit-weighted average of the Tier 1 leverage ratio    Summary of Deposits, Y9-C
                        of bank holding companies with branches in the
                        MSA/non-MSA county..




                                                                                                         35
 Top 4 share                  Share of deposits in branches of the four largest       Summary of Deposits
                              banks: Bank of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan
                              Chase and Wells Fargo.
 Ln(Total deposits)           Natural logarithm of the aggregate value of deposits    Summary of Deposits
                              in the MSA/non-MSA county.

 Ln(Per capita income)        Natural logarithm of the per capita personal income     BEA Regional Economic
                              in the MSA/non-MSA county.                              Accounts

 Per capita income growth     Annual growth rate in per capita personal income in     BEA Regional Economic
                              the MSA/non-MSA county.                                 Accounts

 Unemployment rate            Unemployment rate in the MSA/non-MSA county.            BLS Local Area
                                                                                      Unemployment Statistics

The following variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile: leverage, current ratio, PP&E, market-to-book,
research expense, sales growth, and past return. Volatility is winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentile due to a large
number of outliers in the right tail. In addition, the leverage, sales growth, research expense, profitability, and 
profitability measures are capped at a maximum value of one and the minimum value for profitability and 
profitability is set to minus one to eliminate outliers that persist after winsorization.




                                                                                                                   36
References
Agarwal, Sumit, David Lucca, Amit Seru, Francesco Trebbi, 2015, Inconsistent Regulators:
      Evidence from Banking, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 889­938.
Berg, Tobias, Anthony Saunders, and Sascha Steffen, 2015, The total cost of corporate borrowing
       in the loan market: Don't ignore the fees, Journal of Finance 71, 1357-1392.
Berlin, Mitchell and Jan Loyes, 1988, Bond Covenants and Delegated Monitoring, Journal of
        Finance 43, 397-412.
Berlin, Mitchell, Greg Nini, and Edison Yu, 2020. Concentration of Control Rights in Leveraged
        Loan Syndicates, Journal of Financial Economics 137, 249-271.
Biswas, Swarnava, Neslihan Ozkan, and Junyang Yin, 2018, Real Effects of Non-bank Lending,
       University of Bristol Working Paper.
Carey, Mark, Mitch Post, and Steven A. Sharpe, 1998, Does corporate lending by banks and
       finance companies differ? Evidence on specialization in private debt contracting, Journal
       of Finance 53(3), 845-878.
Chemmanur, Thomas J., and Paolo Fulghieri, 1994, Reputation, renegotiation, and the choice
     between bank loans and publicly traded debt, Review of Financial Studies 7, 475-506.
Chen, Brian, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy Stein, 2017, The decline of big-bank lending to small
      business: Dynamic impacts on local credit and labor markets, Harvard University Working
      Paper.
Cortes, Kristle, Yuliya Demyanyk, Lei Li, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan, 2018, Stress
       tests and small business lending, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper.
Denis David and Vassil Mihov, 2003, The choice between bank debt, non-bank private debt and
       public debt: Evidence from new corporate borrowings, Journal of Financial Economics
       70, 3-28.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review of
      Accounting Studies 51, 393­414.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1991a, Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans and
      directly placed debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689-721.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1991b, Debt maturity structure and liquidity risk, Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 106(3), 709-737.
Donaldson, Jason, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor, 2017, Intermediation variety,
      Washington University Working Paper.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2017, The deposit channel of monetary
       policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4), 1819-1876.

Fama, Eugene F, 1985, What's different about banks? Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 29­39.



                                                                                             37
Faulkender Michael and Mitchell Petersen, 2005, Does the Source of Capital Affect Capital
       Structure? Review of Financial Studies 19, 45­79.
Gopal Manasa and Philipp Schnabl, 2020, The Rise of Finance Companies and FinTech Lenders
      in Small Business Lending, New York University Working Paper.
Habib, Michel A., and D. Bruce Johnsen, 1999, The financing and redeployment of specific assets,
       The Journal of Finance 54, 693-720.
Hanson, Samuel G, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C Stein, and Robert W Vishny, 2015, Banks as patient
      fixed-income investors, Journal of Financial Economics 117, 449-469.
Irani, Rustom, Rajkamal Iyer, Ralf Meisenzahl, José-Luis Peydró, 2017, The rise of shadow
        banking: Evidence from capital regulation, University of Illinois Working Paper.
Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun, 2011, Institutional demand pressure and the cost of corporate
       loans, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 500­522.
Jiang, Wei, Kai Li, and Pei Shao, 2010, When shareholders are creditors: Effects of the
       simultaneous holding of equity and debt by non-commercial banking institutions, Review
       of Financial Studies 23, 3595­3637.
Kim, Sooji, Matthew C. Plosser, and João A. C. Santos, 2017, Macroprudential policy and the
      revolving door of risk: Lessons from leveraged lending guidance, Journal of Financial
      Intermediation, forthcoming.
Koijen, Ralph and Motohiro Yogo., 2019, A demand system approach to asset pricing, Journal of
       Political Economy, 127, 1475­1515.
Li, Lei, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan, 2019, Deposit market power, funding stability and
        long-term credit, Working paper.
Lim, Jongha, Bernadette A Minton, and Michael S Weisbach, 2014, Syndicated loan spreads and
       the composition of the syndicate, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 45­69.
Massoud, Nadia, Debarshi Nandy, Anthony Saunders, and Keke Song, 2011, Do hedge funds trade
      on private information? Evidence from syndicated lending and short-selling, Journal of
      Financial Economics 99, 477­499.
Nadauld, Taylor D., and Michael S. Weisbach, 2012, Did securitization affect the cost of corporate
      debt? Journal of Financial Economics 105, 332­352.
Park, Cheol, 2000, Monitoring and Structure of Debt Contracts, Journal of Finance 55, 2157-2195.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Andrew Winton, 1995, Covenants and Collateral as Incentives to Monitor,
       Journal of Finance 50, 1113-1146.
Rauh, Joshua and Amir Sufi, 2010, Capital structure and debt structure, Review of Financial
       Studies 23, 4242­4280.




                                                                                               38
Figure 1: Fraction of loans obtained from nonbanks by EBITDA bin
This figure shows the fraction of loans obtained from nonbanks at different levels of EBITDA. Loans are
allocated into twenty bins based on borrower's trailing twelve months EBITDA at loan origination. The x-
axis shows the upper limit of EBITDA for each bin. The choice of bin limits roughly follows the distribution
obtained by splitting EBITDA into twenty quantiles, rounded to multiples of five.




                                                                                                         39
Figure 2: Histogram of trailing twelve months EBITDA
This figure shows the histogram of trailing twelve months EBITDA for borrowers with EBITDA in the -
$25 million to $25 million range. Bin width is half a million dollars. The sample includes all borrowings of
a random sample of 750 middle-market firms originated and filed with the SEC during the 2010-2015
period.




                                                                                                         40
Table 1: Number of loans originated, lender types and DealScan match rates
Panel A reports for each year the total number of loans originated and the share extended by nonbanks.
Panel B reports for each nonbank lender type, the number loans originated and the percentage included in
the DealScan database. The sample includes all borrowings of a random sample of 750 middle-market firms
originated and filed with the SEC during the 2010-2015 period. Multiple tranches within a given package
are treated as a single observation.


                                     Panel A: Loans originated per year

                                                     Obs.        % nonbank
                          2010                        233          32.19
                          2011                        268          30.22
                          2012                        244          33.61
                          2013                        200          35.00
                          2014                        202          29.70
                          2015                        122          34.43
                          Total observations         1,269         32.31


                             Panel B: Lender types and DealScan match rates

                                                            % of         % tracked
                                             Obs.         nonbank            in
                                                           deals         DealScan
                  Bank                         859                         52.97
                  Nonbanks:
                  Bank FCO                      52            12.68         26.92
                  FCO                           93            22.68         25.81
                  Investment bank               42            10.24         73.81
                  Insurance                     22             5.37          4.55
                  BDC                           17             4.15         11.76
                  PE/VC                         78            19.02          0.00
                  Hedge fund                    68            16.59          5.88
                  Investment manager            34             8.29          5.88
                  Other                         4              0.98         25.00
                  Total observations           410           100.00         19.27




                                                                                                     41
Table 2: Summary statistics for bank vs. nonbank loans
This table reports firm and loan characteristics for bank and nonbank loans. The sample includes all non-
bond borrowings of a random sample of 750 middle-market firms originated during the 2010-2015 period.
Observations are aggregated to the deal level using the average value of each variable across tranches in a
deal. Variable definitions are in Appendix B. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance for differences
between bank loans and nonbank loans at 10%, 5%, and 1%. Statistical significance for differences in means
is assessed using t-tests that allow for unequal variances across groups. Statistical significance for
differences in medians is assessed using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test.

                                      Nonbank loans                               Bank loans
                              Obs.   Mean   Median     St.dev.      Obs.      Mean      Median        St.dev.

Total assets                  389    366.87   125.92   718.46       834     622.48***   313.58***    1082.95
EBITDA                        394     28.49     0.80    98.91       832      73.75***    30.22***     158.78
EBITDA < 0                    394      0.48     0.00     0.50       832       0.14***     0.00***       0.35
Profitability                 388     -0.11     0.01     0.33       830       0.08***     0.11***       0.17
Leverage                      389      0.36     0.29     0.29       834       0.25***     0.21***       0.22
Leverage                      384      0.03     0.03     0.21       822        0.02      0.01***        0.13
|Asset growth|                384      0.33     0.10     0.62       822      0.15***     0.06***        0.27
Market-to-book                362      1.75     1.19     1.59       792        1.61        1.20         1.27
Research expense              389      0.09     0.00     0.19       834       0.04***     0.00***       0.10
PP&E                          387      0.24     0.15     0.24       827        0.27**      0.19**       0.26
Current ratio                 389      1.87     1.39     1.71       834       2.46***     1.89***       1.92
Firm age                      410     27.07    20.00    25.81       859      36.86***    27.00***      32.44
Sales growth                  362      0.15     0.07     0.40       800        0.14        0.08         0.31
Volatility                    366      0.77     0.66     0.41       803       0.53***     0.46***       0.28
Past return                   366     -0.10    -0.07     0.46       803       0.05***     0.06***       0.35
Deal size                     410     74.01    20.41   181.42       858     185.49***    75.00***     333.18
Maturity                      407      3.93     3.55     2.54       844        3.96      4.30**         1.91
Fixed rate loan               402      0.56     1.00     0.49       836       0.04***     0.00***       0.19
Initial interest rate (bps)   394    790.49   800.00   387.00       787     327.85***   290.52***     165.14
Senior                        410      0.86     1.00     0.35       859       1.00***     1.00***       0.01
Second lien                   410      0.06     0.00     0.23       859       0.00***     0.00***       0.06
Secured                       410      0.80     1.00     0.40       859       0.87***     1.00***       0.34
Performance pricing           410      0.06     0.00     0.22       859       0.37***     0.00***       0.47
Upfront fee (bps)             335     51.44     0.00   122.31       749      17.57***     0.00***      40.24
Annual fee (bps)              334      5.36     0.00    31.07       751        2.68        0.00        11.97
Financial covenants           409      0.51     1.00     0.50       858       0.87***     1.00***       0.33
Warrants                      410      0.25     0.00     0.43       856       0.02***     0.00***       0.15
Convertible                   410      0.16     0.00     0.36       856       0.00***     0.00***       0.06




                                                                                                           42
Table 3: Probability of borrowing from a nonbank lender
This table reports the results from linear probability models of whether a loan is extended by a nonbank
lender. The sample includes all non-bond borrowings of a random sample of 750 middle-market firms
originated during the 2010-2015 period. Observations are aggregated to the deal level using the average
value of each variable across the tranches in a deal. Industry fixed effects are based on Fama-French 12
industries. t-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
   Ln(Assets)                       0.01          0.03        0.03*          0.02       -0.01        -0.02
                                   (0.55)       (1.59)        (1.76)       (1.39)     (-0.12)      (-0.34)
   EBITDA                          -0.00*        -0.00         -0.00        -0.00       -0.00        -0.00
                                  (-1.75)      (-1.36)       (-1.49)      (-1.39)     (-0.52)      (-0.18)
   EBITDA < 0                     0.33***      0.26***       0.39***      0.40***     0.30**        0.23*
                                   (7.85)       (5.68)        (6.74)       (6.86)      (2.53)       (1.96)
   EBITDA < 0 * ABL                                         -0.34***     -0.37***       -0.19        -0.13
                                                             (-4.95)      (-5.42)     (-1.64)      (-1.11)
   ABL                                                         -0.05        -0.05     -0.20**      -0.20**
                                                             (-1.30)      (-1.31)     (-2.58)      (-2.39)
   Leverage                       0.39***      0.30***       0.25***      0.22***     0.37**          0.23
                                   (4.78)       (3.41)        (2.97)       (2.76)      (2.12)       (1.44)
   Leverage                       0.37***      0.26**        0.22**                    0.30*        0.29*
                                   (4.32)       (2.56)        (2.28)                   (1.95)       (1.79)
   |Asset growth|                 0.15***      0.15***      0.12***                       0.08         0.09
                                   (4.98)       (4.62)       (3.56)                     (1.43)       (1.45)
   Research expense                 0.00          0.13         0.18       0.20*          -0.10         0.39
                                   (0.02)       (0.89)       (1.48)       (1.66)       (-0.24)       (0.65)
   Tangibility                      -0.06        -0.04        -0.05        -0.04         -0.05        -0.14
                                   (-0.63)     (-0.47)      (-0.57)      (-0.49)       (-0.19)      (-0.43)
   Current ratio                  -0.03***     -0.02**      -0.03**      -0.02**         -0.02        -0.02
                                   (-3.15)     (-2.25)      (-2.56)      (-2.10)       (-1.32)      (-0.90)
   Ln(Firm age)                     -0.02        -0.01        -0.01        -0.01        -0.23        -0.20
                                   (-0.82)      (-0.44)      (-0.52)      (-0.47)      (-1.06)      (-0.75)
   Market-to-book                                -0.01        -0.02        -0.01                     -0.02
                                                (-1.12)      (-1.24)      (-0.79)                   (-0.63)
   Sales growth                                  0.05         0.05         0.06                      -0.01
                                                (1.14)       (1.14)       (1.42)                    (-0.08)
   Volatility                                  0.22***      0.21***      0.22***                    0.24**
                                                (3.74)       (3.77)       (3.92)                    (2.08)
   Past return                                 -0.12***     -0.12***     -0.11***                    -0.08
                                                (-3.44)      (-3.46)      (-3.25)                   (-1.31)
   Constant                         0.16         -0.07        -0.03        -0.01        1.13         1.01
                                   (1.64)       (-0.47)      (-0.22)      (-0.04)      (1.20)       (0.84)
   Year effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
   Industry effects                 Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          No           No
   Borrower effects                  No            No           No           No         Yes          Yes
   N                                1193         1121         1105         1112         1176         1105
   R2                               0.23          0.25         0.29         0.27        0.73         0.73




                                                                                                              43
Table 4: Probability that a bank borrower has negative EBITDA
This table reports the results from linear probability models where the dependent variable equals one if the
borrower has negative EBITDA and zero otherwise. The sample consists of loans extended by domestic
banks. OCC is an indicator variable that equals one if the bank is regulated by the OCC and zero otherwise.
ABL is an indicator variable that equals one for asset-based loans and zero for cash flow loans. Year and
Fama-French 12 industry fixed effects are included in all specifications. t-statistics adjusted for clustering
by firm are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                  (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
         OCC                   -0.20***      -0.10***       -0.12***       -0.13***       -0.15***
                                (-5.19)       (-2.74)        (-3.05)        (-3.36)        (-3.83)
         ABL x OCC                                                          0.11*           0.11
                                                                            (1.67)         (1.62)
         ABL                                                                 0.01           -0.01
                                                                            (0.18)         (-0.09)
         Ln(Assets)                          -0.06***        -0.03*        -0.05***        -0.03*
                                              (-4.12)        (-1.74)        (-3.65)        (-1.66)
         Leverage                               0.03          -0.06          -0.01          -0.08
                                               (0.41)        (-0.71)        (-0.09)        (-0.98)
         Leverage                              -0.03          -0.22          -0.03          -0.19
                                              (-0.24)        (-1.56)        (-0.23)        (-1.32)
         |Asset growth|                        -0.05           0.01          -0.04          0.01
                                              (-0.98)         (0.32)        (-0.87)        (0.21)
         Research expense                     1.02***        0.90***       0.99***        0.88***
                                               (5.08)         (3.48)        (5.11)         (3.48)
         Tangibility                          -0.15**       -0.21***         -0.12        -0.19**
                                               (-2.00)       (-2.92)        (-1.60)        (-2.56)
         Current ratio                          0.01           0.01          0.01           0.01
                                               (0.90)         (1.19)        (0.90)         (1.16)
         Ln(Firm age)                        -0.04***        -0.04**       -0.04***       -0.03**
                                              (-2.73)         (-2.27)       (-2.64)        (-2.11)
         Market-to-book                                        0.01                         0.02
                                                              (0.61)                       (0.88)
         Sales growth                                        -0.11**                      -0.10**
                                                              (-2.09)                      (-2.04)
         Volatility                                          0.23***                      0.22***
                                                              (3.18)                       (2.89)
         Past return                                        -0.11***                      -0.12***
                                                             (-2.83)                       (-2.90)
         Constant              0.46***        0.66***        0.38***       0.64***        0.38***
                                (7.57)         (6.33)         (2.73)        (5.73)         (2.73)
         Year effects            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
         Industry effects        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
         N                       769            755            719           744            709
         R2                      0.15           0.30           0.33          0.31           0.34




                                                                                                           44
Table 5: Nonbank lending and leniency of regulators supervising local banks
This table reports the results from linear probability models of whether a loan is extended by a nonbank
lender on the share of OCC-supervised banks in the firm's local banking market and other measures of local
economic conditions. Local banking market is either MSA or non-MSA county. The sample of banks
consists of banks whose primary asset specialization according to the Summary of Deposits is commercial
lending. Top 4 share is the share of local deposits held by the four largest banks: Bank of America,
Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, and Wells Fargo. Interactions of negative EBITDA with all local market
controls are included in columns (3) and (6) but are not reported for brevity. All firm-level controls used in
column (3) in Table 3 are included in all specifications but are not reported for brevity. Full regression
output is reported in Table IA5 in the Internet Appendix. t-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                            Cash-flow loans                       Asset-based loans
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
     EBITDA < 0                     0.11        0.08         2.53         0.04          0.01        -7.08
                                   (1.12)      (0.85)       (0.52)       (0.39)        (0.14)      (-1.58)
     EBITDA < 0 * OCC share       0.56***     0.60***      0.52**         0.19          0.25        -0.14
                                   (2.84)      (3.05)      (2.44)        (0.98)        (1.25)      (-0.45)
     OCC share                     -0.03        -0.00       -0.01         -0.18         -0.18       -0.10
                                  (-0.35)      (-0.04)     (-0.06)       (-1.28)       (-1.16)     (-0.63)
     Unemployment                               -0.01       -0.01                       0.01        0.01
                                               (-0.35)     (-0.53)                     (0.39)      (0.41)
     Per capita income growth                   -0.17        0.23                       0.13        0.06
                                               (-0.24)      (0.33)                     (0.13)      (0.06)
     Ln(Per capita income)                      0.03        -0.00                       0.04        0.04
                                               (0.22)      (-0.01)                     (0.24)      (0.21)
     Ln(Population)                            0.11**        0.00                       -0.06       0.03
                                               (2.18)       (0.04)                     (-0.83)     (0.27)
     Tier 1 leverage ratio                      -0.03       -0.02                       -0.03      -0.08*
                                               (-0.87)     (-0.56)                     (-0.67)     (-1.79)
     Ln(Deposits)                             -0.11**       -0.03                       0.06        -0.05
                                              (-2.57)      (-0.65)                     (0.84)      (-0.53)
     Top 4 share                                           0.35**                                   -0.22
                                                           (2.21)                                  (-1.20)
     Constant                       0.11        -0.36        0.52         0.09          0.09        0.50
                                   (0.56)      (-0.21)      (0.25)       (0.44)        (0.04)      (0.21)
     Year effects                   Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
     Industry effects               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
     Firm controls                  Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
     Interaction of EBITDA < 0
                                    No          No           Yes           No            No         Yes
     with local market controls
     N                              761         761         761           342           342         342
     R2                             0.35        0.36        0.37          0.23          0.23        0.26




                                                                                                             45
Table 6: Multinomial logit regression for borrowing from a specific type of nonbank lender
This table reports relative risk ratios from multinomial logit regressions predicting lender type. Bank loans are the base outcome in all models. Model
1 aggregates nonbank lenders into 1) finance companies (FCOs) and bank-affiliated FCOs; 2) investment banks; 3) asset managers; and 4) insurance
companies. Model 2 splits FCOs into bank-affiliated versus unaffiliated ones. Model 3 splits asset managers into BDC/PE/VC versus hedge
fund/investment manager. For models 2 and 3, the full model is estimated, but only results for the labeled categories are tabulated. Year and Fama-
French 12 industry fixed effects are included in all specifications. z-statistics adjusted for clustering by firm are reported in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%. Total number of observations is 1,117.
                                            Model 1                                                    Model 2                        Model 3
                              FCO /            Investment     Asset                                        Unaffiliated     BDC / PE / Hedge fund /
                                                                           Insurance          Bank FCO
                            Bank FCO               bank     managers                                            FCO             VC               IM
Ln(Assets)                        1.40**         2.20***       0.97           1.43               1.32         1.42**            1.02            0.95
                                   (2.49)         (2.84)     (-0.25)         (1.09)             (1.45)         (2.15)          (0.13)         (-0.31)
EBITDA                             0.99*           1.00      0.99***          1.00               1.00        0.99***           0.99*          0.99**
                                  (-1.87)        (-0.48)     (-2.71)        (-0.09)            (-0.91)        (-2.80)         (-1.80)         (-2.38)
EBITDA < 0                         1.83*         5.63***     4.62***          4.68               0.66         2.61**          3.75***         5.79***
                                   (1.87)         (2.84)      (4.97)         (1.40)            (-0.71)         (2.39)          (3.13)          (4.40)
Leverage                           3.84*         8.31**     12.48***          0.67               1.12        7.25***          5.80**         18.60***
                                   (1.72)         (2.14)      (3.45)        (-0.25)             (0.10)         (2.82)          (2.05)          (4.01)
Leverage                            1.43       129.50***     9.58**           0.17             0.04**           5.57         13.44***          7.12*
                                   (0.33)         (2.66)      (2.50)        (-0.70)            (-2.26)         (1.30)          (2.62)          (1.84)
Abs (asset growth)                 1.99*         4.93***     2.47***         3.83*             3.63***          1.57          2.07**          2.43***
                                   (1.89)         (3.85)      (3.46)         (1.73)             (2.74)         (0.94)          (2.51)          (2.80)
Research expense                    2.22           0.00        2.66           0.00               0.03           2.82          13.40**           0.30
                                   (0.58)        (-1.50)      (0.96)        (-1.31)            (-0.81)         (0.66)          (2.23)         (-0.85)
PP&E                                0.49           0.60        0.69          16.55               0.62           0.40            0.46            1.03
                                  (-1.25)        (-0.43)     (-0.51)         (1.63)            (-0.56)        (-1.23)         (-0.89)          (0.03)
Current ratio                     0.82**           0.88      0.84**           0.95               0.80          0.85*          0.75**            0.89
                                  (-2.02)        (-1.31)     (-2.16)        (-0.38)            (-1.47)        (-1.72)         (-2.21)         (-1.22)
Ln(Firm age)                        0.86           0.75        0.89           1.31              0.58*           1.21            1.09            0.79
                                  (-0.58)        (-1.11)     (-0.60)         (1.00)            (-1.78)         (0.96)          (0.30)         (-1.07)
Market-to-book                      0.90           0.76        0.92           0.88             0.41***          1.03            1.06           0.79*
                                  (-0.83)        (-0.99)     (-0.92)        (-0.33)            (-2.89)         (0.28)          (0.61)         (-1.94)
Sales growth                        0.94           1.77       2.03*           0.54               1.13           0.93          3.75***           1.29
                                  (-0.17)         (0.84)      (1.93)        (-0.58)             (0.23)        (-0.15)          (3.25)          (0.56)
Volatility                        3.58***          2.24      3.82***          0.19               1.02        5.69***          3.79**          3.78***
                                   (2.98)         (1.02)      (3.43)        (-0.53)             (0.02)         (3.21)          (1.98)          (3.27)
Past return                       0.43***          1.34      0.38***          2.01               0.69        0.33***          0.37**          0.42***
                                  (-2.81)         (0.63)     (-3.56)         (0.62)            (-0.75)        (-3.45)         (-2.34)         (-2.82)
Non-zero obs. in category          125             36          162            21                  49            76                68             94


                                                                                                                                                      46
Table 7: Initial interest rate charged on bank versus nonbank loans
This table reports the results of regressions of the initial interest rate on lender type indicators, firm and
loan characteristics. Initial interest rate is equal to the fixed rate for fixed rate loans and to 3-month LIBOR
plus spread for floating rate loans. Industry fixed effects are based on Fama-French 12 industries. Columns
1-6 use all sample loans. Column 7 only uses loans originated by borrowers with positive EBITDA and a
Debt/EBITDA ratio of less than six. Column 8 limits the sample to loans without financial covenants.
Column 9 uses only first lien senior secured floating rate loans with financial covenants that do not have
warrants and are not convertible to equity. t-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                          (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
 Nonbank               449.54***     298.60***      190.26***                      227.53***      150.81***
                        (14.51)       (11.52)         (7.56)                         (4.23)         (5.63)
 Nonbank x                                                                                        157.21***
 EBITDA < 0                                                                                         (3.76)

 Bank FCO                                                            -69.18**
                                                                       (-2.42)
 FCO                                                               260.99***
                                                                        (6.58)
 Investment Bank                                                   171.79***
                                                                        (4.60)
 PE/VC/BDC                                                         411.14***
                                                                      (10.41)
 Hedge fund/IM                                                     407.00***
                                                                        (8.38)
 Insurance                                                             75.77*
                                                                        (1.69)
 Ln(Amount)                                              10.72           -6.85         7.40             7.07
                                                        (1.16)         (-1.01)        (0.37)          (0.81)
 Performance                                         -45.81***      -39.87***         -32.45       -51.04***
 pricing                                               (-3.94)         (-3.83)       (-1.03)         (-4.59)
 Warrants                                              94.83**          48.11          20.05        81.08**
                                                        (2.36)          (1.41)        (0.17)          (2.04)
 Convertible debt                                   -226.48***     -281.45***        -234.47      -236.15***
                                                       (-3.79)         (-4.58)       (-1.60)         (-3.91)
 Financial covenants                                     11.49         32.22*          48.90          19.43
                                                        (0.51)          (1.67)        (0.96)          (0.89)
 Security                                              40.30*        49.57***          3.45         47.00**
                                                        (1.81)          (2.63)        (0.06)          (2.14)
 Second lien                                         382.92***     322.00***       343.56***      394.80***
                                                        (8.00)          (6.74)        (4.27)          (8.28)
 Maturity                                               -6.44*           -1.99         2.05            -5.17
                                                       (-1.69)         (-0.54)        (0.26)         (-1.43)
 Fixed rate loan                                     169.40***     142.13***        163.64**      163.06***
                                                        (4.10)          (4.26)        (2.29)          (4.05)
 Seniority                                          -212.69***        -99.70*        -178.69      -206.58***
                                                       (-3.99)         (-1.90)       (-1.34)         (-3.68)
 Ln(Assets)                          -34.78***        -29.08**        -14.88*          22.38        -25.93**
                                       (-4.59)         (-2.35)         (-1.69)        (0.46)         (-2.19)
 Profitability                         -76.71           -84.47         -59.40        -158.35         -68.36
                                       (-1.03)         (-1.27)         (-0.92)       (-1.25)         (-1.03)
 EBITDA < 0                          107.22***       104.60***       78.23***       112.07*           36.71
                                        (3.26)          (3.75)          (3.03)        (1.79)          (1.43)



                                                                                                              47
Leverage                         240.11***   178.99***   177.01***   116.40    182.32***
                                    (5.82)      (4.78)      (5.40)    (0.96)      (4.85)
Leverage                         235.54***    152.13**    126.30**   113.39     154.68**
                                    (3.60)      (2.06)      (2.10)    (0.62)      (2.11)
Abs (asset growth)                56.55***     47.67**    63.53***     76.01     45.91**
                                    (2.68)      (2.42)      (3.65)    (1.30)      (2.35)
Research expense                    50.61       -48.24     -89.97    279.67       -37.74
                                    (0.59)     (-0.64)     (-1.37)    (0.78)     (-0.52)
PP&E                                -16.24       -5.98     -19.40     -26.20       -9.48
                                   (-0.41)     (-0.16)     (-0.65)   (-0.14)     (-0.26)
Current ratio                        0.52        -0.94       -1.65   -22.06*       -0.47
                                    (0.11)     (-0.21)     (-0.47)   (-1.88)     (-0.11)
Ln(Firm age)                        -11.64      -10.32    -15.72**    -24.08      -10.30
                                   (-1.04)     (-0.92)     (-2.08)   (-0.18)     (-0.98)
Market-to-book                   -15.07***   -14.63***   -16.45***     -6.31   -15.40***
                                   (-2.66)     (-2.98)     (-3.49)   (-0.38)     (-3.12)
Sales growth                        19.02        37.06      18.71     -44.47       39.61
                                    (0.61)      (1.37)      (0.76)   (-0.83)      (1.49)
Volatility                         98.12**     98.89**     65.55*      57.13     99.06**
                                    (2.24)      (2.40)      (1.78)    (0.77)      (2.42)
Past return                      -61.06***   -73.44***   -55.08***    -46.66   -72.30***
                                   (-2.76)     (-4.00)     (-3.11)   (-1.40)     (-3.93)
Constant             433.39***   497.25***   649.14***   530.11***   472.77    632.42***
                      (15.91)       (7.11)      (7.52)      (6.46)    (0.72)      (7.10)
Year effects            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
Industry effects        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes          No
Firm effects            No            No           No          No       Yes          No
N                      1181          1040        1027        1023      1027        1027
R2                     0.45          0.60         0.68        0.73      0.86        0.68




                                                                                           48
Table 8: Non-price terms of bank versus nonbank loans
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of non-price terms on lender type indicators, loan and firm characteristics. The sample includes all
borrowings of a random sample of 750 middle-market firms originated during the 2010-2015 period. Fixed rate loans are dropped from the
performance pricing regressions. Even-numbered columns include research expense, PP&E, current ratio, log firm age, market-to-book, sales
growth, volatility and past returns as additional controls. The coefficients on these variables are not reported to save space. Variable definitions are
in Appendix B. Industry fixed effects are based on Fama-French 12 industries. t-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                           Panel A: Basic non-price terms
                            (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
                       Ln(Amount)      Ln(Amount)        Maturity         Maturity        Seniority       Seniority        Security        Security
 Bank FCO               -1.02***         -1.10**             0.53             0.56            0.00           -0.00          0.09***          0.07**
                         (-2.93)         (-2.56)           (1.09)           (1.42)          (0.10)         (-0.16)           (2.79)           (2.04)
 FCO                    -0.98***         -0.29**           -0.42*             0.17           -0.01           -0.01             0.04             0.01
                         (-4.45)         (-2.06)          (-1.78)           (0.78)         (-1.00)         (-0.57)           (1.03)           (0.13)
 Investment bank           0.54             0.07            0.63*           0.50*            -0.06           -0.05            -0.03            -0.02
                          (1.14)          (0.26)           (1.79)           (1.90)         (-1.46)         (-1.28)           (-0.44)         (-0.26)
 PE/VC/BDC              -1.92***          -0.30*         -0.74***          0.56**         -0.26***        -0.27***            -0.07         -0.13**
                         (-8.64)         (-1.93)          (-3.06)           (2.03)         (-4.13)         (-4.30)           (-1.32)         (-2.34)
 Hedge fund/IM          -1.73***           -0.18         -1.10***             0.24        -0.30***        -0.30***         -0.22***        -0.29***
                         (-7.05)         (-1.03)          (-4.14)           (1.04)         (-3.39)         (-4.14)           (-3.10)         (-4.22)
 Insurance                 0.16          -0.64**          5.73***         5.34***            -0.00           -0.01          -0.25**          -0.22*
                          (0.50)         (-2.44)           (7.56)           (8.62)         (-0.41)         (-0.57)           (-2.14)         (-1.95)
 Ln(Assets)                              0.88***                          0.32***                            0.02*                          -0.03**
                                         (23.91)                            (5.42)                          (1.82)                           (-2.01)
 Profitability                              0.06                              0.43                          -0.11*                             -0.03
                                          (0.19)                            (1.07)                         (-1.77)                           (-0.26)
 EBITDA < 0                               -0.29*                          -0.74***                           -0.02                             -0.02
                                         (-1.89)                           (-3.61)                         (-0.76)                           (-0.56)
 Leverage                                0.51**                              -0.20                           -0.10                              0.08
                                          (2.48)                           (-0.65)                         (-1.59)                            (1.06)
 Constant                3.58***        -1.57***          3.51***         1.66***          0.99***         0.91***         0.84***         1.11***
                         (24.62)         (-4.56)          (23.34)           (3.29)         (84.04)         (15.06)         (29.45)            (9.55)
 Additional controls        No              Yes              No               Yes             No              Yes             No                Yes
 Year effects              Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes                Yes
 Industry effects           No              Yes              No               Yes             No              Yes             No                Yes
 N                        1123             1123            1108              1108           1124             1124           1124               1124
 R2                        0.15             0.69            0.18              0.33           0.24             0.28           0.04               0.10



                                                                                                                                                       49
                                         Panel B: Performance-related non-price terms
                          (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
                      Financial   Financial   Performance   Performance     Warrants    Warrants   Convertible   Convertible
                      covenants   covenants      pricing      pricing
Bank FCO               -0.19**      -0.18*        -0.10         -0.05          0.02         0.04      -0.00         -0.01
                        (-2.08)    (-1.96)       (-1.24)       (-0.61)        (0.67)      (1.18)    (-1.08)       (-1.16)
FCO                   -0.21***      -0.11*     -0.38***      -0.26***        0.12***     0.09**      0.04*           0.03
                        (-3.39)    (-1.82)      (-12.25)       (-6.37)        (2.67)      (2.29)     (1.65)        (1.12)
Investment bank         -0.15*     -0.17**       -0.16*       -0.18**          0.04         0.05    0.11**         0.11*
                        (-1.87)    (-2.30)       (-1.89)       (-2.14)        (0.95)      (1.19)     (1.99)        (1.93)
PE/VC/BDC             -0.44***    -0.29***     -0.43***      -0.31***        0.39***    0.26***     0.21***       0.19***
                        (-6.61)    (-4.14)      (-16.13)       (-6.22)        (6.30)      (4.00)     (4.03)        (3.33)
Hedge fund/IM         -0.60***    -0.45***     -0.28***       -0.23**        0.25***     0.16**     0.31***       0.26***
                       (-10.65)    (-6.79)       (-2.93)       (-2.06)        (4.21)      (2.48)     (6.62)        (5.63)
Insurance                -0.06       -0.11     -0.47***      -0.61***          0.02         0.04      -0.00          0.01
                        (-0.85)    (-1.52)       (-9.76)       (-8.90)        (0.51)      (1.22)    (-0.36)        (0.88)
Ln(Assets)                         0.03**                     0.07***                      -0.00                    -0.01
                                    (2.49)                     (4.98)                    (-0.63)                  (-0.72)
Profitability                        0.08                        0.05                   -0.26***                    -0.03
                                    (0.74)                     (0.39)                    (-3.02)                  (-0.39)
EBITDA < 0                         -0.11**                      -0.02                      -0.00                     0.01
                                   (-2.00)                     (-0.37)                   (-0.03)                   (0.33)
Leverage                             0.01                     -0.21**                      -0.01                    -0.00
                                    (0.08)                     (-2.51)                   (-0.22)                  (-0.08)
Constant              0.84***      0.78***      0.36***          0.04          0.02         0.08      0.00           0.09
                      (28.67)       (6.81)       (9.10)        (0.29)         (1.63)      (1.18)     (0.09)        (1.38)
Additional controls      No           Yes          No            Yes            No          Yes        No            Yes
Year effects            Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes       Yes            Yes
Industry effects         No           Yes          No            Yes            No          Yes        No            Yes
N                      1123          1123         866            866           1121        1121       1121          1121
R2                      0.21         0.28         0.07           0.15          0.19         0.27      0.21           0.25




                                                                                                                               50
                                                    Panel C: Other loan terms
                          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)
                      Fixed rate   Fixed rate   Upfront fee    Upfront fee      Annual fee   Annual fee   Second lien   Second lien
                         loan          loan         (bp)           (bp)             (bp)         (bp)
Bank FCO               0.33**       0.33**         -2.40          -0.40           -1.80**       -1.16        0.04            0.04
                        (2.00)       (2.11)      (-0.34)        (-0.07)           (-2.12)     (-0.94)       (1.24)         (1.31)
FCO                    0.23***      0.20***      61.11**        41.33**          20.42**      18.31*         0.04*         0.05*
                        (3.91)       (3.37)       (2.38)         (2.14)            (2.01)      (1.90)       (1.83)         (1.96)
Investment bank        0.22***      0.22***      40.90**        33.47*            -1.81**       -1.53        0.08*         0.08*
                        (2.61)       (2.86)       (2.24)         (1.80)           (-1.99)     (-0.89)       (1.67)         (1.75)
PE/VC/BDC              0.66***      0.59***      18.54*          -18.92             1.18        -2.77       0.08**        0.12**
                       (10.78)       (8.93)       (1.76)        (-1.26)            (0.41)     (-0.69)       (2.14)         (2.52)
Hedge fund/IM          0.80***      0.73***      49.05**         16.28              1.58        -2.04        0.03*        0.05**
                       (19.31)      (14.48)       (2.39)         (0.72)            (0.70)     (-0.63)       (1.66)         (2.12)
Insurance              0.86***      0.90***        -0.56           3.39          -2.86***       -1.66        0.04            0.03
                       (18.27)      (19.31)      (-0.04)         (0.32)           (-3.22)     (-0.93)       (0.92)         (0.58)
Ln(Assets)                          -0.02**                     -4.53**                         -0.16                        0.00
                                    (-1.98)                     (-2.18)                       (-0.22)                      (0.38)
Profitability                         -0.06                      -37.11                          7.93                      0.06*
                                    (-0.68)                     (-0.98)                        (1.20)                      (1.65)
EBITDA < 0                            -0.01                      10.52                         7.98*                        -0.01
                                    (-0.34)                      (0.76)                        (1.96)                     (-0.69)
Leverage                              -0.01                      16.39                          -2.46                        0.03
                                    (-0.19)                      (0.91)                       (-1.16)                      (1.07)
Constant              0.07***       0.27***      19.22***        31.23           5.73**         -0.13        0.00           -0.07
                       (3.33)        (2.89)       (3.75)         (1.28)          (2.46)       (-0.02)       (0.17)        (-1.24)
Additional controls      No            Yes          No             Yes             No            Yes          No             Yes
Year effects            Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
Industry effects         No            Yes          No             Yes             No            Yes          No             Yes
N                       1095          1095         952             952             955           955         1124           1124
R2                      0.49           0.52        0.07            0.13           0.06           0.10        0.04            0.08




                                                                                                                                    51
Table 9: Fuzzy RDD using the coverage error-rate-optimal bandwidth selector
The table reports the results of fuzzy RDD estimation using local linear polynomials for various outcome
variables, using cash-flow loans only. The treatment is borrowing from a nonbank. The running variable is
trailing twelve-month EBITDA, with a discontinuity at zero. The slope of the effect of the running variable
on the probability of treatment is allowed to differ to the left and right of the discontinuity. The estimators
are constructed using a triangular kernel. Symmetric bandwidths around zero are determined using the
coverage error-rate-optimal (CER) bandwidth selector of Calonico et al. (2016). The CER bandwidth
selector depends on the structure of all the data and must be re-estimated for each outcome variable. The
table reports bandwidth, the number of observations included to the left and right of the discontinuity, the
first-stage effect of an indicator for negative EBITDA on the treatment probability, and the second-stage
estimate of the treatment effect on the outcome variables. z-statistics using bias-adjusted standard errors
from Calonico et al. (2016) that adjust for clustering at the firm level are reported in parentheses. The
following covariates are included, with coefficients omitted for brevity: log of total assets, leverage, market-
to-book, sales growth, R&D, PP&E, cash, receivables, inventory, log of firm age, volatility, past stock
returns, the year of loan origination, and industry effects. The estimation for performance pricing omits
fixed rate loans. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                   Bandwidth     Left obs.     Right obs.      1st stage       2nd stage
     Initial interest rate           26.97         139            177          -0.33***       584.41***
                                                                                (-3.47)          (2.98)
     Ln(Amount)                       25.97         147           196          -0.31***           -0.71
                                                                                (-3.20)         (-0.88)
     Maturity                         30.73         144           214          -0.34***         -3.18*
                                                                                (-3.89)         (-1.79)
     Seniority                        31.28         149           222          -0.31***           -0.11
                                                                                (-3.49)         (-0.26)
     Security                         28.58         148           208          -0.31***         -0.51*
                                                                                (-3.35)         (-1.70)
     Second lien                      31.12         149           221          -0.31***           -0.05
                                                                                (-3.30)         (-0.83)
     Financial covenants              26.22         147           196          -0.31***         -0.68*
                                                                                (-3.21)         (-1.89)
     Performance pricing              25.14         50            132            -0.09            0.15
                                                                                (-0.57)          (0.39)
     Warrants                         25.44         145           194          -0.32***           0.17
                                                                                (-3.35)          (0.63)
     Convertible                      24.43         143           193          -0.32***           -0.06
                                                                                (-3.30)         (-0.58)
     Fixed rate loan                  41.57         149           253          -0.32***          0.49*
                                                                                (-3.90)          (1.77)
     Upfront fee                      36.92         138           208          -0.34***       155.67**
                                                                                (-4.12)          (2.48)
     Annual fee                       34.90         138           206          -0.30***          22.63
                                                                                (-3.47)          (1.07)
     Bankruptt+3                      25.18         146           194          -0.31***           -0.14
                                                                                (-3.16)         (-0.87)
      Profitabilityt+1                25.34         136           183          -0.29***           0.09
                                                                                (-2.78)          (0.04)
     Stock return [t,t+3]             24.15         140           182          -0.32***           0.09
                                                                                (-3.12)          (0.82)




                                                                                                             52
