                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              HOW DO HOSPITALS RESPOND TO PAYMENT INCENTIVES?

                                     Gautam Gowrisankaran
                                        Keith A. Joiner
                                          Jianjing Lin

                                       Working Paper 26455
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26455


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We have received helpful comments from Sebastian Fleitas, Mike Geruso, Josh Gottlieb, Ben
Handel, Kelli Marquardt, Jeff McCullough, Jessamyn Schaller, Bob Town, and seminar
participants at several institutions. This paper includes material from and supersedes "Does
Hospital Electronic Medical Record Adoption Lead to Better Information or Worse Incentives?"
and "Does Health IT Adoption Lead to Better Information or Worse Incentives?'" The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26455.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gautam Gowrisankaran, Keith A. Joiner, and Jianjing Lin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How do Hospitals Respond to Payment Incentives?
Gautam Gowrisankaran, Keith A. Joiner, and Jianjing Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 26455
November 2019
JEL No. H51,I11,I13,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

A literature has found that medical providers inflate bills and report more conditions given
financial incentives. We evaluate whether Medicare reimbursement incentives are driven more by
bill inflation or coding costs. Medicare reformed its payment mechanism for inpatient
hospitalizations in 2007, increasing coding costs. We first examine whether increased extra
reimbursements from reporting more diagnoses lead hospitals to report more high bill codes. We
find that increases in reimbursements within narrow patient groups led to more high bill codes
before 2007 but not after. Using the payment reform, we then test for costly coding by comparing
hospitals that adopted electronic medical records (EMRs) to others. Adopters reported relatively
more top bill codes from secondary diagnoses after the reform, exclusively for medical patients,
with a negative effect for surgical patients. This is consistent with EMRs lowering coding costs
for medical discharges but increasing them for surgical ones. We further use a 2008 policy where
Medicare implemented financial penalties for certain hospital-acquired conditions. EMR
hospitals coded relatively more of these conditions following the penalization, lowering revenues.
Together, this evidence is contrary to bill inflation but consistent with costly coding. Reducing
coding costs may increase inpatient Medicare costs by $1.04 billion annually.

Gautam Gowrisankaran                                      Jianjing Lin
Department of Economics                                   Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
University of Arizona                                     110 8th St
P.O. Box 210108                                           Troy, NY 12180
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108                                     jianjingz@gmail.com
and HEC Montreal
and also NBER
gowrisankaran@eller.arizona.edu

Keith A. Joiner
College of Medicine and Department of Economics
University of Arizona
kjoiner@email.arizona.edu
1         Introduction
Over the past several decades, the complexity of reimbursement mechanisms for healthcare
has increased dramatically in the U.S. and many other countries. In 1983, Medicare intro-
duced the inpatient Prospective Payment System, which reimbursed hospitals based on the
primary diagnosis or procedure performed, instead of on a fee-for-service basis. The goal of
this system was to move towards reimbursement for optimal care. More recently, Medicare
and other payors have implemented a series of payment reforms including bundled payments,
hospital readmission reduction programs, and hospital value-based purchasing programs, all
with the intention of reimbursing quality over quantity.1 These payment innovations have
enormously increased the costs to providers of documenting and coding patient visits ac-
curately. Over the past ten years, in the U.S., membership in the American Academy of
Professional Coders has more than doubled,2 while in Australia, the demand for clinical
coders has risen 62% (Healthcare Australia, 2017).
        Starting more recently, most hospitals in the U.S. have adopted electronic medical records
(EMRs), spurred in part by the HITECH Act of 2009. EMRs facilitate patient quality
and safety (Parente and McCullough, 2009; Miller and Tucker, 2011; McCullough et al.,
2016; Freedman et al., 2018), improve productivity (Lee et al., 2013), and can reduce costs
(Dranove et al., 2014). Yet, a fundamental reason why hospitals adopt EMRs is to optimize
reimbursements.3 EMRs can facilitate the task of capturing the hospital course that in turn
can be translated into bills or claims, through a process called coding. The value of EMRs
in facilitating billing increases with the complexity of the reimbursement system.
        A recent literature shows that medical providers document diagnoses more thoroughly
when they have a financial incentive to do so (Brown et al., 2014; Geruso and Layton,
2018). However, an important issue is whether this difference in reporting is more due to
    1
     While the initial focus of complex, prospective payments had been for inpatient stays, Medicare and
other payors have shifted towards such reimbursement incentives for outpatients, including under the 2015
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA).
   2
     By 2017, there were more than 170,000 members (https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/29/magazine/those-
indecipherable-medical-bills-theyre-one-reason-health-care-costs-so-much.html).
   3
     https://www.revenuexl.com/does-emr-ehr-increase-revenues



                                                   2
bill inflation --where providers report inaccurate or inadequately documented diagnoses in
order to add revenues--or to costly coding --where providers report diagnoses incompletely
when coding costs are high. In the presence of bill inflation, providers inappropriately code
conditions that are not present when there are incentives to do so. In the case of costly
coding, providers appropriately code conditions that are present but were previously too
costly to code completely in the absence of tools or incentives. A number of papers provide
evidence of bill inflation (Silverman and Skinner, 2004; Dafny, 2005; J¨
                                                                       urges and K¨
                                                                                  oberlein,
2015) by hospitals and evidence that EMRs lead to bill inflation (Li, 2014; Ganju et al.,
2018),4 while others find evidence of costly coding (Ibrahim et al., 2018; Sacarny, 2018; Ody
et al., 2019) facilitated by EMRs (Edwardson et al., 2017).
       The purpose of this paper is to test for and separate the bill inflation and costly coding
models for Medicare inpatient admissions. We use changes to Medicare payments and hospital
EMR adoption to separate these two explanations. While it is accepted that hospitals aim to
maximize their revenues from Medicare, net of the costs of complete coding and the negative
financial and reputational consequences from bill inflation, the balance between these two
effects is less understood. Is bill inflation widespread or have updated payment mechanisms
reduced bill inflation and instead resulted in hospitals leaving revenue on the table due to
the high costs of coding completely?
       It is important to separate these two explanations both because very different policy
implications underlie them and also because of the large dollar values at stake: Medicare
admissions account for $146 billion in revenues in 2018 and, more generally, many private
payors follow Medicare in their billing practices (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2017). If bill inflation
is important, hospitals as well as the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) should
increase billing enforcement and/or penalties for inaccurate reporting. If costly coding is
important, then this is likely to generate more distortions and costs over time as payors
continue to increase reimbursement complexity in order to reward quality over quantity.
Many countries have increased the complexity of their hospital reimbursement systems by
   4
    A number of hospitals have been found guilty of fraudulent Medicare billing under the False Claims Act
(https://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/enforcement/criminal/), implying that some bill inflation does exist.



                                                    3
moving to DRG-based payment systems (Mathauer and Wittenbecher, 2013; Hopfe et al.,
2018). This has led to concerns that changes in billing incentives were leading to changes in
coding practices in Switzerland (F¨
                                  assler et al., 2015) and France (Or, 2014).
      Our study uses a 100% sample of Medicare inpatient claims from 2005-9. We base our em-
pirical specifications on the differences in reimbursement within a base DRG --which records
the patient's primary diagnosis or procedure--and the presence of hospital EMRs. To explain
the concept of a base DRG further, Medicare reimburses hospitals a single amount for each
admission. The amount is based on the patient's diagnosis related group (DRG), which is a
set of diagnoses or procedures with similar treatment costs. Specifically, each DRG has an
associated weight, and the payment to the hospital is proportional to this weight. Medicare
groups DRGs into base DRGs based on the patient's primary diagnosis or procedure. Medi-
care then issues lists of secondary diagnoses that, when present, allow coding the admission as
a "with complications/comorbid conditions (CC)" or a "with major complications/comorbid
conditions (MCC)" DRG, both of which have higher weights and hence higher reimburse-
ments. Documenting CCs and MCCs requires more specificity than documenting the base
diagnosis or procedure used in the bottom bill code, which may incur costs.
      We develop a simple model of bill inflation and costly coding that we then take to data.
Our model conditions on a patient at a given hospital and with a given base DRG, who can
be coded into one of two bill codes. We distinguish between the bottom and top bill codes,
where the bottom bill code requires less specificity.
      Our bill inflation model regards the subset of patients who do not qualify for the top
bill code. Hospitals may choose to report the top bill code for some of these patients,
thereby inflating their bills.5 The decision to inflate bills for these patients is driven by the
extra revenue that the hospital would gain from bill inflation net of the extra costs. The
extra revenue is a function of the spread, or difference in DRG weights between the top and
bottom codes. The costs are largely driven by expected penalties and stigma from being
discovered to have inflated bills. Changes in the spread over time for a given base DRG
provide identifying variation for this model.
  5
      We view bill inflation as any coding that would be reversed by a sufficiently thorough audit.


                                                       4
       Our costly coding model regards the remainder of the patients, who do qualify for the top
bill code. The decision to correctly select the top bill code for these patients is again driven
by the extra revenue that the hospital would gain from coding completely net of the extra
costs. This model emphasizes that coding is complex, requires substantial effort, and that
in the absence of financial incentives and tools such as EMRs, hospitals may only capture
a part of the allowable charges. Thus, hospitals may code incompletely for some of these
patients if the documentation costs are higher than the revenue gain.6 Unlike with revenues,
we do not directly observe the extra costs of coding completely, but EMR adoption provides
identifying variation because EMRs are a tool that may help reduce the costs of complete
coding under complex payment mechanisms.
       We estimate four main specifications that together distinguish between bill inflation and
costly coding. All our main specifications have the same unit of observation, the hospital
/ base DRG / quarter, and all include hospital / base DRG fixed effects, so that our spec-
ifications test for differences within a hospital and base DRG. Our dependent variables all
generally indicate the percent of discharges with a top bill code within each cell.
       First, we use variation in the spread between bottom and top bill codes across time within
base DRGs. Specifically, CMS changes the weights of the DRGs within a base DRG on an
annual basis. Similarly to Silverman and Skinner (2004) and Dafny (2005), this variation
provides differing financial incentives to report top bill codes for a given hospital and base
DRG across time. We evaluate whether a higher spread leads to more reported top bill codes,
controlling for hospital / base DRG fixed effects and time fixed effects. A Medicare payment
reform in Q4:2007 increased billing complexity. We estimate this specification separately
before and after the reform. We find evidence that prior to Q4:2007, increases in spread led
to increases in the top bill code, with a unit increase in spread corresponding to an increase
of 0.6 percentage points in reported top codes. Following Q4:2007, increases in spread had no
significant effect (and indeed the point estimate is negative). This suggests that changes in
revenues were an important driver of coding prior to the payment reform but not afterwards.
   6
    This model includes the possibility that hospitals may perform more tests and procedures on patients in
order to better document secondary conditions.



                                                    5
The difference in results may be due to the increased complexity of billing post-reform leading
coding costs to be more important. While the pre-reform positive impact of spread provides
evidence that hospitals responded to revenues in coding, it is consistent with both our bill
inflation and costly coding models, since under both models, hospitals may invest more in
coding top bill codes when the revenues for doing so increase.
       Second, we directly use the Q4:2007 Medicare payment reform. Before the reform, many
chronic diseases qualified for a CC, while after the reform, the acute manifestation of the
chronic disease or a new acute disease were often necessary to obtain a CC or MCC. Since
EMRs facilitate the specificity of coding medical information and since the reform resulted
in this specific information being necessary to obtain a top bill code, we hypothesize that
hospitals with EMRs had relatively lower costs of complete coding in the post-reform period
to the pre-reform period. We estimate whether hospitals with EMRs had an increase in top
bill codes after the reform relative to before the reform.7 We find that EMR adopters had
1.64 percentage points more top bill codes post-reform than pre-reform, relative to non-EMR
adopters. This is consistent with complete coding being costly and with EMRs lowering
this cost. While a positive impact of EMR hospitals on top bill codes post-reform provides
evidence that hospitals respond to the coding costs in their billing decisions, it is still possible
that this response is part of a bill inflation strategy, i.e., that those additional patients did
not quality for a top bill code.
       Third, to address this, we further consider the above result could be part of a bill infla-
tion strategy, using never events. In Q4:2008, CMS started penalizing certain preventable
complications that are specifically acquired during the course of hospital treatment; these
are colloquially known as never events, since they are preventable with appropriate care. An
example of a never event is a catheter-associated urinary tract infection acquired in-hospital.8
For never events, the top bill code--which is the code with more specificity--actually leads
   7
     To avoid having heterogeneity in the comparison groups over time, we use hospitals which had adopted
EMRs prior to the start of our estimating sample for these regressions (Borusyak and Jaravel, 2017; Abraham
and Sun, 2018; de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille, 2019).
   8
     In addition to the lower reimbursement from never events, there was a general fear that the presence
of a never event would lead to a greater risk of patient litigation and legal judgment. See, for instance
http://www.neildymott.com/never-events-hospital-aquired-conditions-hacs.



                                                    6
to lower reimbursements. To understand whether a condition was acquired during the course
of a hospital treatment, Medicare mandated the disclosure and underlying documentation of
a "present on admission" field. We find that EMR adopters responded to the penalization of
never events by reporting more never events in the post-reform period than the pre-reform
period, relative to non-EMR adopters. This was primarily because they were better at
documenting whether a condition was present on admission. In other words, EMR hospitals
reported that more of these conditions were acquired in-hospital, justifying the CMS penalty.
Since EMR hospitals responded to never events by reporting more top bill codes, this implies
that their costs from reporting these codes are lower; it cannot be part of a bill inflation
strategy because it decreases revenues.
   Finally, we separately consider the impact of the 2007 payment reform on medical and
surgical DRGs, in order to further substantiate our findings that costly coding is the domi-
nant incentive post-reform. It is well appreciated that surgeons interact with EMR systems
less than medical physicians (see, e.g., Gawande, 2018). Moreover, the 2007 payment re-
form created financial incentives relating to diagnoses, rather than to procedures performed.
Specifically, the factors justifying a CC or MCC are exclusively medical conditions (such as
heart failure, pneumonia, or kidney failure). For these reasons, EMRs will have a different
impact for surgeons than for medical physicians, with them lowering the cost of coding more
for medical DRGs.We therefore evaluate whether top bill codes are more impacted by this
reform for medical than for surgical DRGs. We find that top bill codes for EMR adopters
increase only for medical DRGs, with EMR adopters reporting 2.21 percentage points more
top codes for medical DRGs in the post-reform period than in the pre-reform period, relative
to non-EMR adopters. In contrast, the impact on surgical DRGs is negative, with EMR
adopters reporting 2.03 percentage points fewer top codes. This result is consistent with
EMRs increasing the coding costs for surgical DRGs, likely due to surgeons' relative lack of
interaction with the EMR systems and fixed costs of using EMRs to document completely.
   The magnitude of our results suggests that the 2007 reform would lead to $1.04 billion an-
nually in extra Medicare hospital claims costs if all hospitals acted liked early EMR adopters.
This figure did not enter into the payment reform calculations, which were intended to be

                                              7
budget neutral. Thus, the extent of variation in billing created by costly coding is large as
an absolute number, though moderate as a function of overall Medicare hospital billing.
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background on
the market. Section 3 discusses our analytic framework and testable hypotheses. Section 4
discusses our data. Section 5 provides our results and implications. Section 6 concludes.



2         Background

2.1        Medicare billing for hospitalized patients

In 1983, the Health Care Financing Administration (now CMS, the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services), developed a flat-rate payment system for inpatient admissions, known as
the Prospective Payment System (PPS). Under PPS, a hospital assigns a single diagnostic
related group (DRG) for each patient stay using the primary diagnosis, additional diagnoses,
primary procedure, additional procedures, and discharge status. Each DRG has a weight,
which is set by CMS to reflect the average resources used to treat Medicare patients in that
DRG. Medicare then reimburses the hospital a flat rate for the admission, calculated as the
hospital's base rate multiplied by the DRG weight. Each hospital's base rate varies based on
the costs in the area. For instance, in 2008, a hospital may receive anywhere from $2,991.79
to $7541.39 for treating a patient with DRG weight 1, depending on its area cost factor.9 By
moving hospitals away from cost-based reimbursements, PPS aimed to reward efficiency and
lower expenditure growth.
        DRGs can be either medical or surgical. Essentially, surgical DRGs are for patients who
underwent surgery and medical DRGs are for patients who did not undergo surgery.10 The
coding of an inpatient admission into a DRG uses the following logic: diagnoses are identified
by ICD-9 diagnosis codes. Surgical procedures are identified by ICD-9 procedure codes.11
Using the ICD-9 codes, an admission is first coded into a base DRG using the primary
    9
     Authors' calculations based on FY2008 data.
  10
     While a patient who underwent a surgical procedure can qualify for a medical DRG based on her illness,
the surgical DRG will almost always have a higher payment.
  11
     Starting in October, 2015, both diagnoses and procedures are identified with ICD-10 codes.


                                                    8
diagnosis code (for medical DRGs) or the primary procedure code (for surgical DRGs). An
example of a medical base DRG is "Heart Failure and Shock" while "Spinal Fusion Except
Cervical" is an example of a surgical base DRG. Subsequently, the admission is coded to an
exact DRG, based exclusively on the presence or absence of complicating/comorbid conditions
(CCs) and major CCs (MCCs). Each base DRG has one to three associated DRGs (also called
severity subclasses ), which differ only in the presence of CCs and MCCs. In some cases, a
CC will be lumped with an MCC into one severity subclass. CCs and MCCs all indicate
the presence of secondary diagnoses, all of which are medical conditions, and not secondary
procedures.12
       The severity subclass system with separate CCs and MCCs described above was imple-
mented by CMS starting in Q4:2007, and is known as Medicare Severity DRGs (MS-DRGs).
CMS reformed the reimbursement system in 2007 in order to better align payments with the
resources used by a hospital. A realignment was deemed necessary because many conditions
that previously needed costly and lengthy hospitalizations could then be managed in an out-
patient setting using drug or other therapies. Prior to the reform, the presence of a chronic
disease was sufficient to justify a CC. Following the reform, a new acute manifestation of a
chronic disease or a new acute disease--both of which reflect a more severe illness--generally
became necessary to justify a CC or MCC.13 Overall, the intent of the 2007 reform was to
lower the fraction of admissions that would qualify for a CC or MCC. Using the universe of
2006 patients, 77.7% of admissions had at least one CC under the pre-reform criteria, while
only 40.3% had a CC or MCC under the post-reform criteria.14


2.2       Coding and EMRs

We now discuss the process of coding patient stays into bills and how this is affected by
EMRs, with a diagrammatic representation in Figure 1. Based on an initial assessment and
  12
     This is an important distinction, since medical physicians are more likely than surgeons to recognize and
document the CCs and MCCs, given their role in the healthcare production process.
  13
     There are exceptions to this rule including, most prominently, for heart failure. See Office of the Federal
Register and National Archives and Records Service (2007) p. 47,153 and Sacarny (2018).
  14
     See Office of the Federal Register and National Archives and Records Service (2007), p. 47,153-4.



                                                       9
past medical history, the clinical staff at a hospital will note the primary and secondary
diagnoses upon admission. They will also make treatment and management decisions and
order tests, procedures, and medications. Results from these tests and interventions will in
turn lead them to potentially update the primary and secondary diagnoses and treatment
and management decisions.

                       Figure 1: An Overview of the Coding Process
                               Past medical                 Initial
                                 history                 assessment



                                   Primary, secondary diagnoses



                                 Treatment / Management decisions



                                  Tests / Procedures / Medications


                                              Clinical staff

                                              Coding staff

                                 Transformation into substantiated
                                  diagnosis and procedure codes


                                                      Grouper software


                                                 DRG




   All of the clinical information from these processes will be recorded on the patient chart.
The patient chart starts with the admission note, which describes the status of the patient
and the diagnoses that are known upon admission. The chart also includes patient progress
notes, which are made on a daily basis. These list the patient's course, test results, changes
in medication, and other relevant information. For surgical admissions, the patient chart also
includes an operative note. This note documents in significant detail the procedure(s) that
were performed.
   Finally, the chart includes the discharge summary, which provides a brief synopsis of the

                                                    10
patient's stay and disposition. Usually dictated after discharge by the attending physician or
by a resident who was involved in the care of the patient, the discharge summary is mostly
based on the patient progress notes. The discharge summary lists the primary and secondary
diagnoses, summarizes the status of the patent on admission, the hospital course, and the
disposition, including medications, pertinent laboratory data, and plans for follow-up care.
   The coding of an inpatient admission is then done by the hospital's coding staff (or
outsourced to coders at a health analytics firm). The primary role of the coding staff is
to create substantiated diagnosis and procedure codes that can be used in billing, and to
remove unsubstantiated codes from consideration. The coding staff will rely principally on the
discharge summary and operative note. CMS (and other payors) require substantiation from
the patient chart for each billed secondary diagnosis, that typically includes a combination
of results from the patient history, physical examination, laboratory tests, medical imaging,
specialty consultations, hospital course, and more. Finally, since roughly the 1990s, coders
feed the substantiated codes and other information into grouper software. For each admission,
this software outputs the highest-weight DRG that can be billed to Medicare.
   As an example of the necessary substantiation, to document a secondary condition of
diabetes, the patient record would generally need to show results in a clinically defined range
for fasting blood glucose, a glucose tolerance test (GTT), or a marker of elevated glucose
(HbA1c) (American Diabetes Association, 2015). The test would need to be done during
the current admission unless the results were in the medical record of the patient from a
prior clinical visit. If none of these diagnostic tests nor prior documentation of diabetes
were present in the medical record, coders would be instructed to disallow the diagnosis of
diabetes. One role of EMRs is to provide order sets that are specific to particular patients
based on their known conditions. These order sets both help ensure medical compliance and
optimize reimbursements by uncovering and documenting related conditions.
   Previous research has noted that coding staff may try to code more aggressively when
faced with financial incentives. For instance, Dafny (2005) interviewed a medical resident who
was asked by coding personnel "to reconsider her diagnosis of `urinary tract infection' and
replace it with `septicemia' ... as the hospital is `underpaid' and `needs' the funds to provide

                                              11
care for the uninsured." Medicare has required much more stringent documentation in the
interim. In the current environment, the coder would have to document septicemia with spe-
cific criteria or face penalties and/or reversal upon audit. Under the False Claims Act, both
civil and criminal penalties can be assessed for billing fraud and penalties can be, and often
are, severe.15 Providers and coders are now acutely aware of the these consequences, which
serve as strong disincentives for bill inflation. Moreover, as Figure 1 illustrates with a dotted
line, the coding staff is separate from the clinical staff and generally will not communicate
with the former except for clarification requests.

       Having discussed the coding process in general, we now consider how EMRs affect cod-
ing. According to the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS),
the following components are key to perform the meaningful use of EMRs: Clinical Data
Repository (CDR), Clinical Decision Support Capabilities (CDS), and Computerized Physi-
cian/Provider Order Entry (CPOE) (McCullough et al., 2010). CDR is a centralized database
that collects, stores, accesses, and reports health information, including demographics, lab
results, radiology images, admissions, transfers, and diagnoses. Its goal is to provide a full
picture of the care that is received by a patient.
       CDS uses individual data including biometric information to guide and simplify patient
management. It assists clinicians with diagnostic support and setting treatment plans. For
instance, it provides prompts for specific interventions and assessments and for the docu-
mentation that is necessary to justify particular diagnoses. CPOE is a more advanced type
of electronic prescribing. It is generally connected with CDS to offer more sophisticated
drug safety features such as checks for drug allergies, cross-drug interactions, or dosage ad-
justments.16 Both CDS and CPOE require physician training and involvement to provide
real-time support.
       Typically, physicians interact with CDS and CPOE--rather than CDR, for instance--
when making treatment decisions or ordering tests. Nonetheless, CDS and CPOE rely on
  15
     In 2018, the Department of Justice collected $2.5 billion in fines in the healthcare sector.
See https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-recovers-over-28-billion-false-claims-act-cases-fiscal-
year-2018.
  16
     See https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primers/primer/6/computerized-provider-order-entry.


                                                     12
CDR for the underlying databases of patient information. For this reason, we rarely see CDS
or CPOE adoption without CDR adoption.
      The EMR system will generally record the hospital course, providing templates to aid the
physician in documentation. At the time of admission, assuming the patient being admitted
has previously been seen in the system, a list of pre-existing diagnoses populates a window in
the EMR. The admitting physician, or person entering information on her behalf, can choose
any or all of those diagnoses, along with any new diagnoses prompting the admission. The
latter are chosen from a pop-up list organized by organ system or functional abnormality,
which appears after text is entered by the physician. The EMRs can also be used to "clone"
information, including diagnoses and patient status, across different notes for a given patient,
so that the physician does not need to reenter the information.17 Returning to the diabetes
example, test results from previous encounters with the medical system may be more likely
to be accessible by the provider with EMRs.
      In the absence of EMRs, the patient chart will be on paper. In this case, the attending
physician or resident preparing progress notes must refer back to previous notes to ensure
that diagnoses are carried through the record so that they end up in the discharge summary.
The EMR largely obviates the need to refer back to progress notes to ensure completeness
of the list of diagnoses in the discharge summary.
      With or without EMRs, it is costly to obtain and accurately document information on sec-
ondary diagnoses. Sometimes, the admitting physician can learn about comorbidities (such
as conditions that justify a CC or MCC) from previous medical encounters, but this informa-
tion is not always available, and particularly undependable, laborious, and prone to omissions
with paper charts. Consultations from specialty services, often related to comorbidities, are
included in the body of the patient chart, but may or may not be entered into the patient's
list of diagnoses. Even if the physician knows of a secondary diagnosis, the substantiation of
this diagnosis in a way that conforms to CMS guidelines can require substantial effort.
 17
      http://www.hcca-info.org/Portals/0/PDFs/Resources/Rpt_Medicare/2016/rmc022216.pdf




                                               13
2.3       Never events

Medicare began penalizing hospitals for preventable adverse events in 2008. This followed a
series of reports, including the landmark Institute of Medicine (IOM) study "To Err is Human:
Building a Safer Health System" (Donaldson et al., 2000), that documented the large number
of medical errors during hospitalizations. Initial estimates in the IOM study suggested that up
to 98,000 deaths from medical errors occurred annually.18 A separate analysis suggested that
one quarter of Medicare beneficiaries were harmed during their hospitalizations (Levinson,
2010). In 2002, the National Quality Forum generated a list of 28 serious events that were
unambiguously defined and usually preventable when they occurred during a hospitalization;
these were coined never events. These never events generated additional expenses during
hospitalization and were estimated to cost at least $4.5 billion annually.
       In 2007, CMS initially selected eight of these events for non-payment during hospital-
ization, arguably the first time that Medicare withheld payment in an effort to improve the
quality of care. Subsequent and continued expansion of this initiative now includes the hospi-
tal value-based purchasing program (VBP), the hospital acquired conditions (HAC) program,
and the hospital readmission reduction program (HRRP).19 These programs are all intended
to improve the quality of care delivered in hospitals. They contain a mixture of carrots and
sticks, with hospitals at risk of losing up to 6% of total Medicare reimbursements in any
given year for non-compliance (Kahn et al., 2015).
       Starting in Q4:2007, Medicare mandated that claims data designate whether diagnoses
on a defined HAC list were present on admission (POA) or not. Non-compliant claims were
supposed to be returned to the provider for clarification.20 The main decision-maker for
determining whether a secondary diagnosis can be coded as POA is the coder. Coders des-
ignate a condition as POA if it is either a) explicitly documented as such by the provider,
b) a chronic condition documented prior to admission, or c) determined at some point fol-
  18
     A more recent study puts the number at 250,000, accounting for 10% of all deaths and the third leading
cause of death in the U.S. (Makary and Daniel, 2016).
  19
     Ibrahim et al. (2018) and Ody et al. (2019) find that incomplete coding of secondary diagnoses has led
to a substantial overstating of the benefits of the HRRP.
  20
     See https://www.optum360coding.com/CodingCentralArticles/?id=699.



                                                    14
lowing admission to have been POA, based on additional information collected during the
hospitalization. Improper coding of a never event can lead to higher reimbursement that is
not justified (Saint et al., 2009).21
       In situations where the above information is missing and uncertainty exists, coders can
query the provider, who are then supposed to provide appropriate documentation of a POA
condition in the record. This process imposes additional costs and is "burdensome for both
the coder and the clinician" (Saint et al., 2009, p. 5), which may ultimately lead to coders
providing inaccurate or incomplete information. As is the case for coding more generally,
CMS instructs coders to be vigilant in verifying that clear and complete documentation is
included in the record and to not submit claims without such documentation.22



3        Analytic framework and testable hypotheses

3.1       Model

We develop a model to characterize a hospital's decision regarding the assignment of top bill
codes for each of its Medicare patients. For ease of notation, our model conditions on base
DRGs with exactly two bill codes, though some of our empirical work extends to base DRGs
with three bill codes. Top bill codes correspond to more specific diagnosis, which are the high
severity subclass DRG or never events, depending on the context. We take as given the set of
patients at each hospital and base DRG.23 Denote patient by i, hospital by j , base DRG by d,
time (quarter) by t, and the number of patients in each cell--hospital/base DRG/time--by
Njdt . Assume that some fraction of patients jdt qualify for a top bill code. We allow jdt
to vary across hospitals, base DRGs, and time, to account for variation across hospitals and
base DRGs in patient severity and variation across time in coding requirements. Denote the
  21
     While Saint et al. (2009) exclusively analyze one diagnosis on the HAC list, catheter-associated urinary
tract infections, the points that they discuss hold for the HAC list more broadly.
  22
     See             https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/
MLNProducts/downloads/fraud_and_abuse.pdf.
  23
     Our model considers coding decisions and not treatment decisions. Hence, we do not consider hospitals
shifting patients across base DRGs based on financial incentives, which might occur if, for instance, hospitals
performed a different surgery if the reimbursement for that procedure increased relative to another procedure.


                                                      15
                               H                                              L
set of qualifying patients as Njdt and the set of non-qualifying patients as Njdt .
   We model two potential actions by hospitals: bill inflation and costly coding. We start by
describing our model of bill inflation, which pertains to the coding of high severity subclass
DRGs. For this model, a hospital might assign some of its (1 - jdt ) Njdt patients who do not
qualify for a top bill code to a top bill code, in order to increase its revenues. Let uBI
                                                                                        ijdt denote

the net utility from coding one such patient i to the top bill code. uBI
                                                                      ijdt will be increasing in

the revenue gained from obtaining the top bill code. It will also be decreasing in the cost of
bill inflation, which might include penalties and stigma when caught. A hospital will report
a top bill code if the net utility of this action is positive. Thus, we write

                                        BI
                                       Dijdt = 1 uBI
                                                  ijdt  0 ,



       BI                                                                  BI
where Dijdt is an indicator for bill inflation. We let the expectation of Dijdt take the following
form:
                              BI
                           E Dijdt = f BI (Revjdt ) - g BI CostBI
                                                               ijdt .                          (1)

In (1), f BI (·) is a function of Revjdt , which denotes the extra revenue from a top bill code
for patients within the same base DRG, hospital, and time period; g BI (·) is a function of
CostBI
    ijdt , which denotes the extra cost of bill inflation for a patient belonging to a given

base DRG at hospital j at period t. Unlike Revjdt , CostBI
                                                        ijdt might vary across patients. We

aggregate equation (1) across patients within a hospital, base DRG, and time period:


                      Inf latejdt =           f BI (Revjdt ) - g BI CostBI
                                                                        ijdt   .               (2)
                                        L
                                      iNjdt



where Inf latejdt is the total expected number of patients who do not qualify for the top bill
code but are assigned to the top bill code.
   Much of the literature on bill inflation has focused on the revenue side (Silverman and
Skinner, 2004; Dafny, 2005; Li, 2014; Geruso and Layton, 2018), examining how changes
in spread lead to changes in reported top codes. A smaller set of papers that analyzes bill
inflation has considered the cost side. For instance, Ganju et al. (2018) focus on Medi-

                                                  16
care's Recovery Audit Program, which increased the penalties from bill inflation. Our model
captures both sides.

       We now describe our model of costly coding, which pertains to both high severity subclass
DRGs and never events. Under this model, a hospital might assign some of its jdt Njdt
patients who do qualify for the top bill code to the low bill code, due to the cost of complete
coding. Let uCC
             ijdt denote the net utility from coding one such patient i to the top bill code.

Similarly to uBI         CC
              i,j,d,t , ui,j,d,t is increasing in the revenue gained from obtaining the top bill code.

Note that in the case of never events, this revenue is negative. It will also be decreasing in the
cost of complete coding, which includes the time and effort that hospitals spend to document
completely.24 A hospital will completely document a patient's diagnoses and conditions for
the top bill code if the net utility is positive. We write

                                            CC
                                           Dijdt = 1 uCC
                                                      ijdt  0 ,



       CC
where Dijdt is an indicator for complete coding. As with bill inflation, we let the expectation
    CC
of Dijdt take the following form:

                                  CC
                               E Dijdt = f CC (Revjdt ) - g CC CostCC
                                                                   ijdt .                                (3)


The variables here are defined similarly to those in equation (1). We aggregate equation (3)
across patients within a hospital, base DRG, and time period to obtain:


                         Completejdt =            f CC (Revjdt ) - g CC CostCC
                                                                            ijdt     ,                   (4)
                                            H
                                          iNjdt



where Completejdt denotes the expected total number of patients who deserve and get as-
signed to the top bill code.
       The costly coding model focuses on the cost side. However, even under this model,
revenues can still affect the decision to report the top bill code. Thus, though the focus of
  24
       Dunn et al. (2019) find both substantial monetary and time costs of coding, across a number of payors.


                                                      17
the costly coding model is on the cost, the two models are similar in many ways.
   While we specify two potential models for generating top bill codes, our data only include
the total fraction of patients with a top bill code. We define this term:

                                          1
                        CodeF racjdt =        (Inf latejdt + Completejdt )                   (5)
                                         Njdt

CodeF rac is composed of an aggregation of both the bill inflation and costly coding effects.
Since the two explanations are similar and the data incorporate both explanations, we will
need variation that has a different effect across the two models to separately identify bill
inflation from costly coding. We discuss this variation below in the context of the testable
implications of the model.


3.2    Testable implications of the model

Specification 1: impact of spread
   We first analyze variation in spread --the difference in DRG weights between the top and
bottom codes within a base DRG. Replacing Inf latejdt and Completejdt in equation (5),
                                                                                                      
                  1 
CodeF racjdt =                f BI (Revjdt - g BI CostBI
                                                      ijdt ) +           f CC (Revjdt ) - g CC CostCC
                                                                                                   ijdt
                                                                                                        
                 Njdt   L                                          H
                      iNjdt                                      iNjdt


             = (1 - jdt ) f BI (Revjdt ) + jdt f CC (Revjdt )
                                                                   
                1 
             -             g BI CostBI
                                     ijdt +         g CC CostCC
                                                              ijdt
                                                                   .                         (6)
               Njdt     L                        H
                      iNjdt                   iNjdt



In general, Revjdt is proportional to the spread between the top and bottom codes plus some
constant. Let


                 f M (Revjdt ) - g M CostM                     M       M
                                         ijdt = Spreaddt - Costijdt + cjdt ,                 (7)


where M = {BI, CC }, denoting the type of the model;  measures the effect from spread


                                               18
on extra billing; cM
                   jdt includes the fixed revenue, fixed costs, and the residual in model M .

Plugging (7) into (6), we obtain
                                                                                                         
                  1 
CodeF racjdt =                 Spreaddt - CostBI      BI
                                              ijdt + cjdt +                   Spreaddt - CostCC      CC 
                                                                                             ijdt + cjdt
                 Njdt    L                                            H
                       iNjdt                                        iNjdt
                                                                                     
                                1                              1 
             = Spreaddt -                      CostBI
                                                   ijdt
                                                        -                     CostCC
                                                                                  ijdt
                                                                                       
                               Njdt      L
                                                              Njdt      H
                                       iNjdt                          iNjdt


             + (1 - jdt ) cBI         CC
                           jdt + jdt cjdt                                                          (8)


We condition on the pre- and post-reform period, so that costs of the top bill code are
relatively homogeneous across time. Thus, we parameterize the cost terms in (8), which is
                                                                
             1                          1 
        -                 CostBI
                              ijdt
                                   -                    CostCC
                                                            ijdt
                                                                  + (1 - jdt ) cBI         CC
                                                                                jdt + jdt cjdt ,
            Njdt    L
                                       Njdt       H
                  iNjdt                         iNjdt


          Q
as cH
    jd + ct + Xjt + jdt . Here, we have decomposed costs into a hospital/DRG fixed effect

and a time fixed effect. This results in:

                                                      Q
                     CodeF racjdt = Spreaddt + cH
                                                jd + ct + Xjt + jdt ,                              (9)

                                                          Q
where cH
       jd denotes the hospital / base DRG fixed effects; ct denotes the time (quarter) fixed

effects; Xjt denotes a set of other hospital controls;  measures the effect of these controls;
and jdt is the unobservable term.
   Equation (9) forms our first estimating equation. We perform all regressions with OLS.
Our unit of observation is a unique hospital, base DRG, and quarter cell. Our main dependent
variable is the fraction of patients within this unit who have reported top bill codes. Our
regressions all report standard errors calculated with two-way clustering at the hospital and
base DRG levels (Cameron et al., 2012; Thompson, 2011). This allows for dependence in the
residuals for different base DRGs across the same hospital and for different hospitals across
the same base DRG. We also weight our regressions by the mean number of patients over

                                                  19
time within a hospital/base DRG. Our controls Xjt include bed size, total outpatient visits,
total admissions, total number of births, the number of full-time physicians and dentists,
percentage of Medicare and Medicaid patients, profit status, and a teaching hospital indicator.
       Variation in revenues in our context will be given by the changes in the spread between the
top and bottom bill codes. Our data include such variation, as Spreaddt changes over time,
both before and after the 2007 payment reform. Under the bill inflation model, hospitals that
are inflating bills should move more patients to the top billing code if there is an increase in
the spread for a base DRG, all else equal, i.e.,  > 0. We estimate this regression separately
before and after the reform, during each of which the cost of coding can be captured by
the hospital/base DRG and time fixed effects.25 Our fixed effects capture the fact that
different hospitals may have different fractions of patients who qualify for top codes and
for variations across hospitals in the penalties from bill. For instance, Medicare's Recovery
Audit Program, which aims to identify and recover improper payments for the Medicare
Fee-For-Service program, was active in six states during 2005-2008. Its impact on the cost of
bill inflation and indirect effect on the cost of complete coding will be captured by the fixed
effects for hospitals in those six states.26
       Following the prior literature (Silverman and Skinner, 2004; Dafny, 2005; Li, 2014), we
further examine the effect from Spreaddt across different types of hospitals. Dafny (2005)
found that for-profit hospitals inflate bills more than government or not-for-profit hospitals
and that hospitals with a high debt-asset ratio exhibited a larger increase in percent top
bill codes. She concluded these subsets of hospitals respond more actively to the upcoding
incentive. Based on equation (9), we additionally interact Spreaddt with measures of financial
health--Distressed (the 25% with the highest debt-asset ratio) and F inHealthy (the 25%
with the lowest debt-asset ratio)--or with whether the hospital is for-profit or not-for-profit,
with the omitted category being public hospitals.
  25
      The effect on the documentation cost for percent top bill codes from the 2008 never event penalization
is negligible, as the number of never event is small. On average, there are only 0.31% of discharges within a
hospital and base DRG reporting never events.
   26
      The program was expanded from three to six states in July 2007. We view its shifting effect on costs as
minimal, because there are only three months overlapped with the pre-reform period. The national program
was mandated by January 2010, which is outside the post-reform period we examine.



                                                     20
      Importantly, while a positive  in the estimating equation (9) would be consistent with
bill inflation, it could also be consistent with costly coding. Specifically, hospitals that do
not always completely code all top bill code patients will code more of these patients as
top bill code patients if Spreaddt increases. Thus, the two models have observably identical
implications to variations in revenue, even though the causal mechanisms are very different.
Specification 2: impact of EMRs
      To separate the bill inflation model from the costly coding model, we next consider
variation in costs. Unlike for revenues, we do not directly observe hospital costs. However,
we do observe two events that generate variation in costs across different types of hospitals.
Specifically, we hypothesize that the costs of documentation are lower for EMR hospitals in
the post-reform period than for non-EMR hospitals, since EMRs help with the specificity
that was necessary to code completely during this period. Thus, we let the cost terms in
equation (6) take the following form:
                                                                        
                 1                                                      = t EM Rj + cQ
                               g BI CostBI
                                        ijdt +           g CC CostCC
                                                                  ijdt               t ,   (10)
                Njdt     L                         H
                       iNjdt                     iNjdt



where EM Rj indicates the presence of an EMR system at the hospital before 2007 and t is a
separate coefficient on this indicator for each quarter t. Here, we allow the effect from EMRs
to vary across time in order to capture the shifting effect on the cost of documentation due to
the payment reform. As our main goal here is to estimate how EMR adopters respond to the
change in the cost of coding from the reform, we assume that the variation in revenues can be
captured by hospital/base DRG fixed effects, time fixed effects, and hospital characteristics.
We then parameterize the revenue terms in equation (6), which are


                               (1 - jdt ) f BI (Revjdt ) + jdt f CC (Revjdt ) ,


as Xjt + cH
          jd + jdt .
                     27
                        Thus, an implication of our costly coding model is that the percent top
bill codes will be relatively higher in the post-reform period from in the pre-reform period
 27
      As we noted above, cQ
                          t will also capture variations in revenues across time.



                                                      21
among EMR hospitals. We define a regression specification based on this idea:


                      CodeF racjdt = t EM Rj + cQ    H
                                                t + cjd + Xjt + jdt ,                         (11)


Since the main policy change occurs in Q4:2007, we expect t starting in Q4:2007 to be
positive if EMR hospitals report relatively more top bill codes following the reform.
   Our unit of observation, dependent variable, controls Xjt , and clustering strategy are
the same as in Specification 1. However, our analysis here only includes hospitals that had
adopted EMRs prior to 2007 and hospitals that had not adopted EMRs by the end of 2009.
We focus on these two sets of hospitals to avoid imprecise estimates due to the shifting control
group over time (Borusyak and Jaravel, 2017; Abraham and Sun, 2018; de Chaisemartin and
D'Haultfoeuille, 2019).
   While a finding of positive t values post-reform is most consistent with costly coding,
we cannot rule out that positive coefficients on post-reform t values are driven by some
combination of bill inflation and costly coding. Specifically, while researchers typically assume
that the costs of bill inflation are the penalties, it is possible that the costs of bill inflation
include the coding costs. Thus, by lowering the documentation costs, a positive impact on t
values post-reform could also be consistent with bill inflation, if there are still coding costs.
Specification 3: impact of never events
   As another source of variation in costs, we turn to never events. Never events change the
costs of documentation in a similar way to the payment reform: they increase the specificity
of documentation and hence increase the value of EMRs in generating a top code. Similar to
(10), we allow for the change in the cost of coding from the 2008 penalization program by in-
teracting EMRs with time dummies. As with Specification 2, we assume that revenues can be
captured by hospital/base DRG fixed effects, time fixed effects, and hospital characteristics.
Thus, with the same parameterization as above, we obtain the third main specification. It
is almost the same as equation (11) except that the dependent variable becomes the percent
top bill codes of never events.
   The difference between never events and the payment reform is that a finding of positive


                                                22
coefficients on t post-penalization is not consistent with bill inflation. Specifically, a positive
coefficient indicates more top bill codes for EMR hospitals, in a circumstance where never
events were penalized. Since a top bill code gives a lower revenue to a hospital, a hospital
should never choose to increase reported never events following their penalization under the
bill inflation model. However, if their costs from reporting are lower, EMR hospitals may
report more never events under the costly coding model.
Specification 4: variation in EMR impact between medical and surgical DRGs
   Finally, to further substantiate our analysis, we also investigate whether there is any
difference in cost variation for medical versus surgical base DRGs. In this case, we allow
a more flexible specification for the costs terms than in (10), which led to Specification 2.
Specifically, we let the cost terms from equation (6) be:


                                     mt ) + 1{d = SU RG}(st EM Rj + cst ),
             1{d = M ED}(mt EM Rj + cQ                               Q
                                                                                              (12)


where M ED and SU RG are indicators for the base DRG being medical and surgical respec-
tively. In equation (12), both the base costs of coding the high bill code and the incremental
costs of coding the high bill code for EMR adopters post-reform vary across MED and SURG
base DRGs.
   We estimate a separate specification of (11) for MED and SURG base DRGs. This allows
us to examine whether hospitals' response to the 2007 payment reform differs between these
two types of base DRGs. If costly coding is the primary mechanism underlying variation in
billing top codes, we expect that the increase in reporting the top bill code will be relatively
greater among medical DRGs.
   In sum, from Specification 1, a positive finding on spread would indicate that hospitals
respond to increases in revenues by coding more high bill codes. However, this is consistent
with both the costly coding and bill inflation models. From Specification 2, a finding of an
increase in high bill codes for EMR hospitals post-reform would provide support for costly
coding model while not ruling out bill inflation. From Specification 3, a positive finding
on never events for EMR hospitals would support the costly coding model and not the bill


                                                23
inflation model. From Specification 4, a difference between MED and SURG DRGs that is
consistent with our priors on the relative cost of coding would lend additional support to the
costly coding model.


3.3       Identification

All specifications detailed in Section 3.2 include fixed effects at the hospital/base DRG level.
Hence, identification is based on variations within a hospital/base DRG across time. The key
identifying assumption for these analyses is that the main variables of interest--Spreaddt (the
difference between the high and low DRG weights within a base DRG) and EMR adoption
prior to the start of our sample interacted with quarter dummies--are mean independent
from the unobservable jdt .
       For Specification 1 in equation (9), identification is from changes in the spread and relative
changes in percent top bill codes within a hospital/base DRG cell. The central threats
to identification would have to come from correlations between changes in the spread and
changes in the unobservable. For example, a threat to identification would occur if base DRGs
where the spread increased were associated with relatively more complicating conditions for
those patients due to technological change. We believe that such association is unlikely
because changes in CCs/MCCs would occur slowly over time, if at all. Another threat would
come if CMS increased fraud enforcement for a base DRG when it increased the spread for
this base DRG. However, CMS enforcement initiatives, such as Medicare's Recovery Audit
Program, occur more broadly across base DRGs rather than changing targeting to base DRGs
in response to changes in spread.28
       For Specification 2, we identify costly coding from changes in the fraction of top codes
among EMR hospitals relative to changes in this fraction among the comparison group,29
  28
      For the Recovery Audit Program, Medicare first identified a set of claims and providers which it
had determined had a high propensity for error under a program called Comprehensive Error Rate Test-
ing (CERT) that dated back to 2003. Medicare then audited a random subset of the claims identi-
fied by CERT (https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Monitoring-Programs/
Medicare-FFS-Compliance-Programs/CERT/index.html?redirect=/Cert). The set of claims identified by
CERT did not vary with changes in the DRG spread for a given base DRG.
   29
      Because we compare early EMR adopters to a comparison group of hospitals that had not adopted by
the end of our sample, our results are not vulnerable to having different treatment groups over time.


                                                  24
from the pre- to post-reform period. One central threat to identification here derives from
changes in patient mix at EMR hospitals relative to other hospitals over time. For instance,
if relatively more patients with CCs seek care at EMR hospitals over time, this would make
EMR hospitals report relatively more top bill codes following the reform, even if EMRs did
not help with complete coding. We investigate whether there were differential pre-reform or
post-reform trends for EMR hospitals relative to other hospitals or whether changes following
the payment reform were sudden. We also examine other measures of patient mix, such as
distance traveled to a hospital, to see whether any effects reflect differential changes in patient
demand rather than coding, at EMR hospitals post-reform. In the absence of such effects,
we believe that the reform is the most likely causal impact of any effect that we find.
   Even if the relative difference in top bill codes was caused by the reform, another threat
to identification comes from non-time-varying differences across hospitals leading to coding
differences in the post-reform period. For instance, if EMR hospitals have relatively more
patients who merit a CC post-reform relative to the fraction of patients who merit a CC
pre-reform than does the comparison group, this would yield positive post-reform EMR
coefficients, even if EMRs did not help with complete coding. However, Specification 3 is not
vulnerable to this threat, since this specification considers the same criteria pre- and post-
reform. Also, Specification 4, which breaks down extra top bill codes by MED and SURG,
can mitigate this concern by adding supporting evidence to the complete coding story.
   For Specification 3, we identify the impact of never events based on how EMR hospitals
act differently in the penalization period from the pre-penalization period. Thus, the central
threat to identification will be similar to the first threat to identification from Specification
2. We will find evidence of bill inflation if there is a drop in reported never events for EMR
hospitals relative to other hospitals in the penalization period relative to the pre-penalization
period. However, as with Specification 2, a decreasing number of reported never events could
also result from different time trends at EMR hospitals relative to other hospitals. For
instance, if EMR hospitals improved their prevention of never events during the penalty
period relative to other hospitals, this would look similar to bill inflation for EMR hospitals.
To consider the possibility of differential changes in care, we will consider the source of the

                                                25
never events, whether they derive from fewer diagnoses that lead to never events or from
differential coding of the present on admission field.
       For Specification 4, we identify costly coding for MED relative to SURG DRGs from
changes in the fraction of top codes among EMR hospitals minus changes in this fraction
among non-EMR hospitals for MED DRGs relative to this difference for SURG DRGs. Thus,
the threats to identification are similar to Specification 2, but they would have to occur from
EMR hospitals having a different fraction of medical patients with CCs/MCCs post-reform
to pre-reform relative to surgical patients with CCs/MCCs. As with Specification 2, we
further examine these threats by considering pre-trends, presenting results graphically, and
examining whether there were sharp effects.



4        Data and Summary Statistics

4.1       Data sources

Our primary dataset is the Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MedPAR) data. For our
purposes, this dataset contains information on all inpatient hospital stays for Medicare bene-
ficiaries. Each observation in these data represents one patient stay and contains information
on the hospital, the beneficiary's home zip code, age, gender, dates of service, reimbursement
amount, dates of admission and discharge, Diagnostic Related Group (DRG), and principal
and secondary diagnosis and procedure codes. We drop admissions to Critical Access Hos-
pitals (CAHs) as these hospitals receive cost-based reimbursements from Medicare, instead
of prospective DRG-based payments (Gowrisankaran et al., 2018). We construct our main
dependent variable, the percent of patients with documented top bill codes within a partic-
ular base DRG, hospital, and quarter, from the MedPAR data. Our discharge data extend
from Q1:2005 through Q4:2009. However, most of our analyses use data over a shorter time
period, as we discuss below.30
  30
    We also construct other dependent variables using this dataset, including the distance traveled, length of
stay, mean DRG weight, and numbers of diagnoses and procedures. We calculate the distance between each
patient and the hospital based on the latitude and longitude of the patient and hospital zip codes.



                                                     26
       We merge our base data with information on DRGs from the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS). This information indicates whether the DRG is medical or surgical.
It also indicates the weight for each DRG. DRG weights change at the beginning of each fiscal
year, which corresponds to the fourth quarter of a calendar year. We use the DRG weight
data to calculate our measures of spread.
       We also create never event indicators using the MedPAR data. We first find whether
any of the secondary diagnoses reported in our main analysis are on the HAC list. If so,
we then define a never event if the event is not present on admission (POA). According
to the final rule published in 2009,31 the HAC list broadly includes 12 conditions, each of
which is associated with a series of ICD-9 codes and some with procedures. For most of
these conditions, the presence of a specified ICD-9 code as a secondary diagnosis determines
inclusion in the HAC list. For others, multiple conditions are required to identify inclusion.
For instance, the condition "Surgical Site Infection Following Bariatric Surgery for Obesity"
requires the presence of specified ICD-9 codes, procedures, as well as the primary diagnosis
being morbid obesity (ICD-9 code: 278.01).
       To further categorize a never event to be POA or not, the CMS mandated a new code,
"present on admission indicator," which requires hospitals to document whether each diagno-
sis occurred before or after hospital admission. This indicator can be coded as "Y" (present
at the time of admission), "N" (acquired at hospital), "W" (providers unable to determine),
"U" (insufficient documentation), "1" (unreported/not used, or undesirable blanks), and
other values. We define the admission as not POA when the field takes the values of "N" or
"U" as determined by Medicare rules.32 The dependent variable for never events is then the
percent of discharges with the POA field coded as not POA among discharges with at least
one HAC within a hospital/base DRG/quarter cell. We also examine a related outcome, the
frequency of missing values in the POA field. We define the POA field with a missing value if
the field takes the value of "1" or anything other than the specified values above (Cram et al.,
  31
     https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2008-Fact-sheets-items/2008-08-
042.html. Also see Office of the Federal Register and National Archives and Records Service (2008), p.
48,471-48,482.
  32
     See https://www.resdac.org/cms-data/variables/medpar-diagnosis-present-admission-indicator-code.



                                                 27
2014). The dependent variable for this outcome is the percent of discharges with missing
POA values among discharges with at least one HAC within a hospital/base DRG/quarter
cell.
    Our second main dataset provides information on EMR adoption. We merge in EMR
adoption data from the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS)
Analytics Database, which is the most comprehensive national source of hospital IT adoption
data. We use the Medicare provider number as a crosswalk to the MedPAR data. This dataset
is the most complete, detailed, and longest-running survey recording the choice and evolution
of a hospital's IT capacities.
    As noted in Section 2.2, there are several components of EMRs. We use the presence
of a live and operational CDS or CPOE within the organization as our measure of EMR
adoption, since physicians will interact most with these components. This is roughly consis-
tent with what has been done in the literature. For instance, Jha et al. (2009) divide EMR
systems into 32 functionalities, of which they view eight (including some parts of CPOE) as
necessary for "basic" EMR operation. Miller and Tucker (2009) measure EMR adoption by
whether a hospital has installed an "enterprise EMR" system, which they state is a "basic"
system that underlies CDR, CDS, and CPOE. Recent studies defined EMR capabilities by
either enterprise EMR, CDS, or CPOE (Lee et al., 2013; Agha, 2014; Dranove et al., 2014;
McCullough et al., 2016; Ganju et al., 2018). We also examine the robustness of our results
to alternate definitions of EMR adoption based on different components, and the results are
basically consistent.
    Finally, we use two other datasets. First, we merge in the American Hospital Association
(AHA) Annual Survey data, using the Medicare provider number as the primary crosswalk.
In cases where the Medicare provider number was missing, we merge the databases using
the hospital's name and exact address. We match approximately 3,200 non-CAH hospitals
across the three datasets. The AHA data provide us with hospital characteristics such as
number of beds, system affiliation, profit status, etc. In addition, to understand the impact
of hospital financial status on billing, we merge financial status data from the Medicare Cost
Reports, using the Medicare Provider Number field as the crosswalk. Following the literature

                                             28
(Dafny, 2005; Li, 2014), we use the debt-to-asset ratio as a measure of financial health. We
construct this measure by dividing current liabilities by total assets, both of which are listed
in the cost reports. We define a hospital as financially distressed if its debt-to-asset ratio is
above the 75th percentile and as financially healthy if this ratio is below the 25th percentile.


4.2    Timeframe for analysis

                     Figure 2: Timeline of data for different hypotheses

                                        Required
                       Medicare         documentation of           Penalization of
                       payment          POA indicators             never events
                       reform          for never events



  Data                                                                                   Data 
  starts                                                                                 ends


  Q1: 2005       Q1: 2006         Q1: 2007         Q1: 2008          Q1: 2009 


                                         Sample for Specification 2, 4


       Pre-reform sample for Specification 1         Post-reform sample for Specification 1

                                                            Sample for Specification 3



   Figure 2 provides timelines for the data used in different specifications and the underlying
policy changes that motivate the timelines. In Specification 1, we examine how hospitals
respond to changes in revenues, ceteris paribus. This limits our data to the pre- or post-
reform period separately, so as to minimize the change in the cost of coding. Here, we only
use base DRGs with two severity subclasses for a clear definition of spread. We also perform
separate regressions for the pre- and post-reform period. No shown in Figure 2 for clarity,
spread changes in the fourth quarter of every year.


                                                 29
       Specification 2, which considers the impact of the payment reform on EMR hospitals
relative to non-EMR hospitals, uses four years of data (2006-2009) and all matched base
DRGs from before and after the reform with multiple severity subclasses.33 For base DRGs
with three severity subclasses, we define CodeF rac to be the fraction of patients with the
top of the three severity subclasses.
       For Specification 3, which considers never events, although mandatory POA reporting for
the HAC list started in Q4:2007, we observe almost no POA reporting until Q1:2008. Hence,
we use Q1:2008 as the start of the sample for Specification 3. Our data do not include the
POA field for 2010 and hence this sample ends in Q4:2009.
       Specification 4 replicates the analysis in Specification 2, separately for MED and SURG
DRGs. Hence, the timeline for this specification is the same as for Specification 2.


4.3       Summary statistics on data

Table 1 provides summary statistics on overall patient samples and the samples used in the
different specifications. Panel 1 of Table 1 shows our overall data separated by year. There
were more than 12 million Medicare discharges in each of the years in our data.34 The mean
age of a Medicare patient discharged from a hospital was 73 years during our sample and the
mean DRG weight was rising over time, from 1.46 in 2005 to 1.57 in 2009.
       Panel 2 shows the sample by fiscal year for Specification 1, since this specification sepa-
rately examines the pre- and post-reform periods and the reform is implemented on a fiscal
year basis. For our samples, which contain base DRGs with two severity subclasses, the per-
cent top bill codes drops substantially following the reform, from over 73% before the reform
to 30%35 immediately after the reform. Note that the number of discharges is relatively small
in FY2005, as the data in Q4:2004 are not available.
       Panel 3 shows the sample by year for Specification 2. Our sample here contains patients
  33
     In this specification, we skip the year 2005 due to a large number of missing observations on EMR
adoption status for that year.
  34
     This excludes admissions to CAH hospitals.
  35
     The 40.3% in the Introduction is cited from the Federal Registry, specifying that the number is calculated
using the 2006 MedPAR data based on the revised CC list, whereas the 30% here is based on the sample for
Specification 2--the MedPAR data for a subset of base DRGs with two subclasses in FY2008.


                                                      30
                 Table 1: Summary statistics on patient sample
                  Panel 1: universe of Medicare patients in sample
                          2005        2006        2007         2008                                  2009
 Mean age                 73.0        72.9        72.8         73.0                                  72.8
 Mean DRG weight          1.46        1.47        1.48         1.52                                  1.57
 # discharges             13,095,851 12,821,616 12,535,313 13,793,662                                14,186,766

                           Panel 2: samples for Specification 1
  (FY 2005-7: base DRGs with 2 subclasses pre-reform; FY2008-9:                     2 subclasses    post-reform)
                            FY2005      FY2006       FY2007                          FY2008          FY2009
 % top codes                77.5        73.3         73.9                            30.4            32.9
 # discharges               2,703,129 4,072,710 3,887,605                            4,834,427       5,171,755

                             Panel 3: samples for Specifications 2 and 4
                        (matched base DRGs with multiple severity subclasses)
                                  2005       2006          2007         2008                         2009
 % top codes                      ­          72.3          62.0         27.9                         30.0
 # discharges                     ­          3,135,339 2,983,042 3,352,411                           3,365,488
 MED
 % top codes                          ­              81.4            68.6            29.8            32.4
 # discharges                         ­              1,785,891       1,735,792       1,988,372       2,011,390
 SURG
 % top codes                          ­              60.3            52.9            25.1            26.4
 # discharges                         ­              1,349,448       1,247,250       1,364,039       1,354,098

                          Panel 4: sample for Specification 3
                                   (all base DRGs)
                          2005          2006       2007                              2008            2009
 % discharges w/ HACs     4.12          4.07       4.46                              5.18            4.52
 % never events given HAC ­             ­          ­                                 4.46            8.38
 % missing POA given HAC ­              ­          ­                                 59.4            8.18

 Note: Panel 2 reports statistics in the fiscal year, which is the accounting period for the federal government, from
 Q4 of the previous year to Q3 of the current year. Data in 2005 not included in the analysis for Specification
 2. "POA" indicates present on admission and "HAC" indicates hospital-acquired conditions.


in base DRGs with multiple severity subclasses pre- and post-reform for which the definition
of the base DRG before and after the reform was identical. Note that the percent top bill
codes in 2007 is a bit lower than that in 2006, as it is a mix of the percent top bill codes




                                                       31
before and after the reform.36 Specification 4 also decomposes this sample by whether the
base DRG is medical or surgical. The percent top bill codes is higher among medical than
surgical DRGs, both before and after the reform.
      Panel 4 shows the sample by year for Specification 3. The percent of reported never
events was much higher in 2009 than that in 2008, whereas the number of missing values in
the POA field dropped substantially from 2008 to 2009.
      Our analysis uses hospitals that adopted EMRs during or before 2006 and that had
not adopted EMRs by 2009. Table 2 provides summary statistics for the main hospital
characteristics separated by adoption status. Hospitals that adopted EMRs in 2006 or earlier
are on average larger and more likely to be teaching and not-for-profit hospitals. For instance,
the bed size for early adopters is more than twice that of hospitals without adoption through
2009. Early adopters also had a slightly lower debt-to-asset ratio than hospitals without
adoption through 2009.

               Table 2: Summary statistics on hospital characteristics by EMR use
                                              EMR adopters EMR non-adopters
                                              2006             through 2009
                Bed size                            253                 113
                Total outpatient visits          199,292              71,498
                Total admissions                  11,860               4,368
                FTE physicians and dentists          28                  7
                Total number of births             1,335                405
                % teaching hospital                 12.9                2.46
                % Medicare discharge                44.1                48.3
                % Medicaid discharge                18.9                17.8
                % for-profit                       21.2                 40.0
                % not-for-profit                    68.5                38.5
                % public hospitals                 10.3                 21.5
                Debt-asset ratio                   0.651               0.772
                Number of hospitals                1,696                325
                Note: For each set of hospitals in our final data, table reports the mean value
                of statistics over years in our data.


      Table 3 provides summary statistics on DRG weights with the mean DRG weights in the
 36
      The 2007 payment reform was not implemented until Q4:2007.


                                                     32
                       Table 3: Summary statistics on        DRG weights
                  Variable                      Obs           Mean Std. Dev.
                  DRG weight, FY 2005           518            1.53     1.90
                  DRG weight, FY 2006           559            1.47     1.86
                  DRG weight, FY 2007           579            1.48     1.84
                  DRG weight, FY 2008           743            1.99     1.93
                  DRG weight, FY 2009           744            2.02     2.00
                  Spread, FY2005 to FY2006 101               -0.0173   0.182
                  Spread, FY2006 to FY2007 106               -0.0053  0.0726
                  Spread, FY2008 to FY2009 110                 0.42    0.486
                  Spread, FY2009 to FY2010 110               0.0053    0.242
                  Note: Spread measures the difference between the weight in the top
                  and bottom codes.


top panel. The 2007 reform resulted in many more DRGs and in a higher and increasing mean
DRG weight, when taken as a simple average across DRGs. The bottom panel of Table 3
shows the change in spread for the base DRGs considered in Specification 1. The fiscal
years used by CMS start one quarter before the calendar year. There were large changes in
spread across fiscal years, with standard deviations in the change in spread of 0.0726 to 0.486
depending on the year. Thus, there is substantial variation to identify this specification.



5     Results

5.1    Specification 1: impact of spread

We present the results for the specifications we developed in Section 3.2. We start with
Specification 1, which evaluates the impact of the spread between bottom and top bill codes
on the probability of top coding within a base DRG. We estimate this specification sep-
arately before and after the reform, with the percent of the top bill code within a base
DRG/hospital/quarter cell as the dependent variable. We focus on all base DRGs with two
severity subclasses so that the spread unambiguously defines the incentives to document a
top bill code.
    Table 4 presents the coefficient for the key variable of interest: Spread, for both the pre-


                                                 33
                     Table 4: extra top bill codes with spread (Specification 1)
                                                 Dependent variable: Percent top
                                                   bill codes within a base DRG
                                   (1)             (2)              (3)          (4)
  Pre-reform                       -2.59           .637***          .613***      .614***
                                   (4.77)          (.102)           (.102)       (.102)

  Post-reform                          -13.7               -2.31               -2.35               -2.36
                                       (8.47)              (1.58)              (1.58)              (1.58)

  Quarter dummies                      yes                 yes                 yes                 yes
  Base DRG FEs                         no                  yes                 no                  no
  Hospital/base DRG FEs                no                  no                  yes                 yes
  Other controls                       yes                 no                  no                  yes
  Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Coefficients are reported in percentage point form.
  Pre-reform sample is base DRGs with two severity subclasses from Q1:2005-Q3:2007, and post-reform sample
  is base DRGs with two severity subclasses from Q4:2007-Q4:2009. Columns (1)-(4) in the upper panel report
  the coefficient for Spread from four specifications, separately for the pre- and post-reform sample. The four
  specifications progressively add more controls, as specified in the lower panel. Other controls, in the last row,
  include bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists,
  percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, and total number of births. Standard errors are
  clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


and post-reform samples. Thus, the eight coefficients in this table derive from eight separate
specifications. For each time period, we estimate four specifications, progressively adding
more controls. Our preferred specifications are in column (4). These specifications include
spread, quarter dummies, hospital/base DRG fixed effects, and other controls noted in the
table note.
   Focusing first on the pre-reform period, column (4) shows that before Q4:2007, top coding
occurs with high frequency when the financial incentive to report a high code increases. A
unit increase in spread corresponds to an increase of 0.614 percentage points in the reporting
of a top bill code. This is consistent, though not dispositive, with the finding in prior studies
that provided evidence of bill inflation (Silverman and Skinner, 2004; Dafny, 2005). While
documentation of top bill codes increasing with spread may imply that changes in revenues
could be an important driver of coding, it cannot distinguish between the two models we
proposed. Hospitals will report more top bill codes when the financial returns are greater,
under both the bill inflation and costly coding model.


                                                         34
   Turning now to the post-reform period, from Q4:2007 onwards, a larger spread no longer
predicts a higher fraction of top bill codes. For this time period, the column (4) point estimate
on spread is negative and not statistically significant. This difference in results may be due
to a more complex reimbursement system making the cost of coding more important in the
billing decision than the revenue gained. Regardless of the cause of the change in coefficient
from the pre- to the post-reform period, the post-reform evidence is inconsistent with a bill
inflation story where higher revenues lead to more unjustified top codes. While reducing bill
inflation is not one of the stated policy goals of the 2007 payment reform, our findings show
that it is an important side effect.
   Following prior studies (Silverman and Skinner, 2004; Dafny, 2005; Li, 2014), we also
examine the variation in responsiveness to revenues by hospital ownership and financial
health status. The upper panel in Table 5 reports the results where Spread is interacted with
hospital ownership status, separately for the pre- and post-reform sample. The coefficient for
Spread remains significantly positive for the pre-reform sample, but there is no significant
difference between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals. After the reform, the interaction
term for not-for-profit and spread is significantly negative, while the other coefficients are
not statistically significant. The lower panel presents the results when we add the hospital's
financial health status as a regressor. The interaction terms between spread and financial
health are not statistically significant.
   To summarize, we find that hospitals responded to financial incentives in coding before
the reform. This could be due to bill inflation or costly coding. Prior to the reform, there
is little evidence that the impact varied by hospital type. The significant impact of top-
coding based on financial incentives does not extend to the post-reform period, and indeed
the point estimate is negative. This suggests that the cost of complete coding might play a
more important role in the coding decision post-reform, due to the increased complexity in
the new payment system. We investigate this hypothesis in the remaining specifications.




                                               35
                 Table 5: extra top bill codes with spread, by hospital types
                                                     Dependent variable: Percent top
                                                       bill codes within a base DRG
                                               Pre-reform                      Post-reform
                                       Coefficient    S.E.           Coefficient   S.E.
By profit status
Spread                                 .696***           (.156)           -1.17             (1.6)

ForProfit×Spread                       -.11              (.15)            -.408             (.942)

NotForProfit×Spread                    -.0896            (.131)           -1.58**           (.665)
By financial health status
Spread                                 .654***           (.105)           -2.57*            (1.51)

FinanciallyDistressed×Spread -.0367                      (.101)           -.186             (.511)

FinanciallyHealthy×Spread              -.066             (.0907)          1.04              (.84)
Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Coefficients are reported in percentage point form.
Pre-reform sample is base DRGs with two severity subclasses from Q1:2005-Q3:2007, and post-reform sample
is from Q4:2007-Q4:2009. For the analysis by profit status, the omitted category is public hospitals. For the
analysis by financial health status, the omitted category is hospitals whose debt-asset ratio is above 25 and
below 75 percentiles. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of
births, EMRs interacting with quarter dummies, financial health status interacting with quarter dummies,
quarter dummies, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and
base DRG levels. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       36
5.2           Specification 2: impact of EMRs

Specification 2 evaluates the impact of EMRs on reported high bill codes. This specification
uses variation in costs generated by the 2007 payment reform and in EMR adoption status
prior to the start of our sample. Our analysis uses all matched base DRGs from before and
after the reform with multiple severity subclasses. Our regressors include quarter dummies,
indicators for quarter interacted with early EMR adoption, hospital/base DRG fixed effects,
and the same other controls as in Specification 1.
   Figure 3 presents the coefficients on interactions between quarter and EMR adoption, as
well as their 95% confidence intervals. Table A1 in Appendix A provides more details on the
same regression. All reported coefficients are relative to Q1:2006 (which has a zero coefficient
in the graph); we need to omit one quarter because (by construction) early EMR adoption
does not vary during our sample for a given hospital/base DRG. We include a vertical line
right before Q4:2007 to indicate that the reform was enacted starting in Q4:2007.

                                                     Figure 3: extra top bill codes with early EMRs
                        4
      Percent top bill codes
                        2
                        0
                        -2




                               Q1:2006                            Q1:2007                             Q1:2008                            Q1:2009
                                                                                                 Quarter
                               Note: The line reports the coefficients for early EMR adoption interacting with quarter dummies and each dot is a regression coefficient
                               expressed as a percent of the dependent variable. The red line represents the 2007 payment reform. The vertical lines show 95% confidence
                               intervals, based on standard errors clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Sample
                               is base DRGs with multiple severity subclasses, from Q1:2006-Q4:2009. Other regressors are bed size,total outpatient visits, teaching hospital,
                               total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of births, quarter
                               dummies and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




   Following the reform, we observe more top bill codes for EMR adopters relative to non-


                                                                                                37
adopters, Visually, there is no trend in either the pre-reform or post-reform periods, but
rather a sharp change in the post-reform period relative to the pre-reform period. The
distinct change at the point where the reform was enacted suggests that the result is due to
the reform rather than other secular trends.37
       The coefficients for the post-reform interaction terms show a mean increase in top coding
of 1.64 percentage points. A joint significance test reveals that these coefficients are together
significantly non-zero (P=0.0353). Thus, the results show that early EMR adopters had a
significant comparative advantage in reporting top billing codes post-reform to pre-reform.

                                                              Figure 4: Patient characteristics with early EMRs
                                   40
          Measures for patient selection
                                   20
                                   0
                                   -20
                                   -40




                                           Q1:2006                            Q1:2007                            Q1:2008                             Q1:2009
                                                                                                             Quarter

                                                                                Distance                    # diagnoses                     Mean DRG weight

                                           Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter for travel distance and the number of diagnoses but hospital/quarter for mean DRG
                                           weight. The mean DRG weight is calculated using the lowest weight for any base DRG. Coefficients are reported in percent point form,
                                           rescaled by 100 times for number of diagnoses and by 1000 times for mean DRG weight. Sample is all matched base DRGs from before and
                                           after the reform with multiple severity subclasses, from Q1:2006-Q4:2009. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels
                                           for travel distance and the number of diagnoses but at the hospital level for mean DRG weight. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient
                                           visits, teaching hospital, total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total
                                           number of births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




       Our model specifies that the relative increase in reported top codes for EMR hospitals
post-reform is due to coding differences. However, we further test whether this result could
  37
     This result contrasts with Geruso and Layton (2018), who find no significant impact of EMR adoption
on increased coding for Medicare Advantage. The two settings incorporate a number potential explanatory
differences: Geruso and Layton use 2011 EMR adoption (which was at the end of their 5-year sample period,
while many entities adopted EMRs during their sample period); they consider Medicare Advantage insurance
coding (while we consider Medicare inpatient coding for a single hospital admission); their "meaningful use"
definition of EMR adoption is narrower than our definition; and they consider physician office EMR adoption
while we consider hospital EMR option.



                                                                                                            38
be instead due to increases in the severity of illness of patients at those hospitals post-reform
rather than from coding differences.
       Figure 4 considers three patient characteristics: distance traveled to the hospital, the
number of reported diagnoses, and the mean DRG weight based on the base DRG.38 In
none of the three cases is there a sharp change post-reform relative to pre-reform. Moreover,
we find that the post-reform indicators are not jointly statistically significant for distance
(P=0.47) and for number of diagnoses (P=0.425). For mean DRG weight of the base DRG,
the coefficients are statistically significant (P=0.0216) but this reflects both positive and
negative values in different quarters.39 Hence, it does not appear that the increase in reported
top codes post-reform is due to changes in the patient mix at these hospitals relative to others.
       As a further test, Figure 5 considers two measures of patient services: length of stay
and number of procedures performed. Again, neither measures shows a sharp change post-
reform relative to pre-reform. The post-reform indicators for number of procedures are not
jointly statistically significant (P=0.584. The post-reform indicators for length-of-stay are
significantly negative (P=0.0187), which could not be caused by sicker patients at EMR
hospitals post-reform but may reflect better treatments and hence shorter care at these
hospitals over time.40
  38
      We use the mean DRG weight for the lowest severity subclass rather than the actual reported DRG
weight because we would like this effect to be robust to misreporting of severity subclasses.
   39
      To test for the presence of monotonic effects, we estimate each of these models with a single post-reform
/ early EMR interaction coefficient. We find test statistics of P=0.040, P=0.558, and P=0.743, respectively.
   40
      Here again, we estimate each of these models with a single post-reform / early EMR interaction coefficient,
finding test statistics of P=0.491 and P=0.238, respectively.




                                                       39
                                                                Figure 5: Services provided with early EMRs
                                  .1
       Measures for services provided
                                  0
                                  -.1
                                  -.2




                                        Q1:2006                            Q1:2007                            Q1:2008                             Q1:2009
                                                                                                         Quarter

                                                                                            Length of stay                    # procedures

                                        Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Coefficients are reported in percent point form. Sample is all matched base DRGs
                                        from before and after the reform with multiple severity subclasses, from Q1:2006-Q4:2009. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital
                                        and base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions, full-time physicians and
                                        dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




5.3               Specification 3: impact of never events

Our findings in Specification 2 show that the cost of coding plays a role in reported top
codes post-reform relative to pre-reform. It suggests that the costly coding model has more
support in the data than the bill inflation model. However, Specification 2 does not allow us
to rule out the bill inflation model since it is possible that bill inflation is driven by the costs
of complete coding rather than the revenues gained.
   Specification 3 seeks to further test the two models against each other by examining
never events. We base our analysis on the 2008 penalization of never events, which creates
variation in costs. In particular, it increases the specificity of coding by requiring the present
on admission field. For this specification, the dependent variable is the percent of discharges
which have at least one listed HAC within a hospital/base DRG/quarter cell for which the
HAC is coded as not present on admission. Thus, a higher value of the dependent variable
indicates a never event and lower reimbursements in the post-penalization period. We use
the same regressors as in Specification 2.


                                                                                                        40
                                                      Figure 6: extra reported never events with early EMRs
                                  60
      Percent relative to sample mean
                                  40
                                  20
                                  0
                                  -20




                                            Q1:2008                                                                Q1:2009
                                                                                                          Quarter
                                        Note: Each line reports the coefficients for early EMR adoption interacting with quarter dummies and each dot is a regression coefficient
                                        expressed as a percent relative to the sample mean. The red line represents the 2008 penalization of never events. The vertical lines show
                                        95% confidence intervals, based on standard errors clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Unit of observation is hospital/base
                                        DRG/quarter. Sample is all base DRGs from Q1:2008-Q4:2009. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital,
                                        total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of births,
                                        quarter dummies and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




   Similar to Figure 3, Figure 6 shows the interaction coefficients and their 95% confidence
intervals, with more details in Table A2 in Appendix A. In Figure 6, we normalize the
coefficients by the 2008-09 sample mean of the never event probability, which is 6.45%, and
include a vertical line right before Q4:2008 to indicate the start of penalization for never
events. All reported coefficients are relative to Q1:2008.
   All coefficients for the post-penalization periods are positive, implying that early EMR
adopters had more never events--2.1 percentage points on average--in every quarter of the
post-penalization period, in the difference-in-difference from their Q1:2008 values and non-
EMR adopters. The relative magnitudes, compared to the sample mean, are large: the
post-penalization coefficients show that early EMR adoption predicts between 25 and 37
percent more reported never events than the comparison group. The coefficients during the
penalty phase are jointly significantly positive (P=0.000345).
   Unlike with Specification 2, the pre-trends are positive (though not significant): EMR
hospitals started improved documentation of never events one quarter before the penalization
started, in Q3:2008. This is likely because EMR hospitals updated their systems to better


                                                                                                         41
capture the never event reporting requirements, and did this before the start of Q4:2008 in
response to the new rules.
   As a robustness check, Figure A1 in the Appendix A provides a similar specification to
Figure 6, but where the dependent variable is the percent of discharges for which there is
an HAC coded as not present on admission (with the difference being that the denominator
now includes discharges without any listed HAC). Our findings are similar to Figure 6: early
EMR adopters report relatively more never events overall in the post-penalization period, in
addition to reporting that more of the conditions on the HAC list were acquired in-hospital.
   Finally, we further decompose why EMR hospitals report more never events in the post-
penalization period. Figure 7 presents the interaction coefficients from a specification where
the dependent variable is the frequency of missing values in the POA field, with more details
in Table A3. We again normalize the reported coefficients by the mean probability of missing
POA values for the 2008-09 sample, which is 34.7%. The post-penalization coefficients here
are negative and the relative magnitudes are large: early EMR adopters report between 46
and 50 percent fewer missing values than non-EMR adopters. The post-penalization period
coefficients are jointly significantly negative (P=0.0476). Thus, early EMR adopters report
more never events because they decrease their missing POA codes in the post-penalization
period more than the comparison group.




                                             42
                                                 Figure 7: extra missing values in POA field with early EMRs
                                  50
      Percent relative to sample mean
                                  0
                                  -50
                                  -100
                                  -150




                                             Q1:2008                                                                Q1:2009
                                                                                                           Quarter
                                         Note: Each line reports the coefficients for early EMR adoption interacting with quarter dummies and each dot is a regression coefficient
                                         expressed as a percent relative to the sample mean. The red line represents the 2008 penalization of never events. The vertical lines show
                                         95% confidence intervals, based on standard errors clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Unit of observation is hospital/base
                                         DRG/quarter. Sample is all base DRGs from Q1:2008-Q4:2009. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital,
                                         total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of births,
                                         quarter dummies and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




   To summarize, we find that EMR hospitals increased their reporting of never events
relative to the comparison group when these were penalized (and one quarter below). This
occurred because they were relatively better at reporting the POA field. These results are
not consistent with EMRs leading to bill inflation for never events. EMR hospitals would
not increase reporting never events in the post-penalization period relative to the comparison
group if bill inflation were the predominant incentive for reporting these events and EMRs
helped with the specificity of coding. However, under the costly coding model, EMR hospitals
may report relatively more never events since EMRs lower the costs of complete coding. In
combination with Specification 2, these results lend support to EMRs lowering the cost of
complete coding but not leading to bill inflation in the post-reform period.


5.4              Specification 4: variation between medical and surgical DRGs

Specification 4 evaluates how EMRs may have differentially affected hospital coding across
different types of base DRGs, in order to corroborate our finding that costly coding is the
current dominant incentive. Similarly to Specification 2, we use the variation induced by the

                                                                                                          43
2007 payment reform. As we discussed in Section 3, EMRs help lower documentation costs
more for medical physicians than surgeons. If hospitals respond to the increased complexity
of billing as predicted by our costly coding model, we expect an increase in reporting top
bill codes where EMRs are more helpful in lowering the cost of coding. Thus, the effect will
be larger among medical than surgical DRGs. We test this with a specification identical to
Specification 2, except that we perform separate regressions for medical (MED) and surgical
(SURG) base DRGs, thus effectively interacting every coefficient with MED and SURG.
   We present coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for the early EMR adoption in Fig-
ure 8, with details in Table A4 in the Appendix A. Starting immediately after the payment
reform, EMR hospitals report relatively more top bill codes for MED. The effect is very con-
sistent across time. The magnitudes are large and jointly statistically significant (P=0.0075),
with roughly 2.21 percentage points more top bill codes for early EMR adopters relative to
non-EMR hospitals throughout the post-reform period, compared to the mean top coding
probability of 31% for the post-reform MED sample. In contrast, the post-reform interaction
coefficients for surgical DRGs are negative and jointly statistically significant (P=0.000487 ),
with roughly 2.03 percentage points fewer top bill codes for early adopting hospitals in the
SURG sample post reform.
   The difference between the MED and SURG coefficients in the post-reform period sug-
gests relatively lower coding costs post-reform at EMR hospitals for MED DRGs compared
to SURG DRGs. A plausible cause is that the complete documentation of secondary condi-
tions, which generates the top bill codes, is more integral to care for medical patients than
for surgical patients. Typically, medical admissions consist of a whole series of sequential
interventions including medications, imaging procedures, and laboratory testing. Secondary
conditions--especially those justifying a CC or MCC--play a central role in determining
which of these interventions to perform. Documenting the secondary conditions is thus an
essential byproduct of appropriate medical management. Moreover, in some cases, docu-
mentation of a specific condition is required to prescribe particular medications or order
particular imaging procedures with an EMR.



                                              44
                                 Figure 8: extra top bill codes with early EMRs, by MED and SURG
                        5
      Percent top bill codes
                        0
                        -5




                               Q1:2006                            Q1:2007                             Q1:2008                            Q1:2009
                                                                                                 Quarter

                                                                                             MED                    SURG

                               Note: Each line reports the coefficients for early EMR adoption interacting with quarter dummies and each dot is a regression coefficient
                               expressed as one percent of the dependent variable. The red line represents the 2007 payment reform. The vertical lines show 95% confidence
                               intervals, based on standard errors clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Sample is
                               base DRGs with multiple severity subclasses from Q1:2006-Q4:2009. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital,
                               total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of births, quarter
                               dummies and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




   In contrast, the primary intervention with a surgical admission is the surgery itself. Sur-
geons therefore place relatively more emphasis on the procedure and post-operative manage-
ment, including side effects from the surgery (such as pain and/or inflammation at the incision
site, lack of mobility, constipation, etc.), than on CCs or MCCs. While secondary conditions
can complicate the surgery and post-operative management, they are not as central to the
typical surgical admission.
   The negative SURG coefficients in the post-reform period further imply that surgeons face
a relatively higher cost of documenting diagnoses completely post-reform at EMR hospitals
than at the comparison hospitals. This is likely caused by EMRs having a higher fixed cost
but lower marginal cost for optimal use. Surgeons, who have less intensive interactions with
EMRs and in particular, with documenting secondary diagnoses in EMRs, may not bear
the fixed cost of optimal use. They would then face a higher average cost from reporting
diagnoses completely at EMR hospitals post-reform while medical physicians face a lower
average cost. This would then result in EMR hospitals reporting relatively fewer top codes
post-reform for SURG compared to MED DRGs.


                                                                                                45
5.5       Economic magnitudes of complete coding

Having found that current hospital reimbursement incentives are driven more by variation
in the costs of complete coding than by bill inflation, we seek to quantify the economic
magnitude of this effect. From column 1 of Table A4, early adopters experienced a 2.21
percentage point increase in top coding medical patients in the post-reform period. On
average, there are 3.34 million patients per year with the DRGs considered in our paper,
about 1.97 million of whom are medical patients, and about 1.28 million of whom are medical
patients admitted to early EMR hospitals. The average spread of the DRGs on which we
focus is 0.82 and the average DRG price is $6,349 for an admission with weight 1. Therefore,
the in-sample extra revenue paid by CMS due to complete coding from the 2007 reform by
early EMR adopters is 1.28 million × $6,349 × 0.82 × 2.21% = $147 million per year for the
U.S.
       Our sample accounts for about one fifth of the Medicare inpatient population. Consid-
ering the fact that almost 89% of patients are in DRGs with multiple subclasses, we expect
that the costs for the early EMR adopters would amount to $676 million41 when extrapo-
lating to all DRGs. Moreover, given that almost all hospitals have adopted EMRs by 2018,
when considering the full Medicare sample, the costs for all hospitals would amount to $1.04
billion42 per year, which is 0.85 percent of total Medicare hospital claims costs.
       Finally, Medicare accounts for about 30% of total spending on hospital care. Many private
insurers have DRG-based contracts with hospitals (Gowrisankaran et al., 2014) and generally
follow Medicare billing practices. If all hospitals were reimbursed on a DRG basis, the impact
of a change to MS-DRGs on extra charges due to EMRs facilitating complete coding would
translate into approximately $3.47 billion in annual billed costs.
       The $3.47 billion number is likely conservative for three reasons. First, the number
assumes that there were no costs of complete coding in the pre-reform period. Second,
because we consider only the difference in coding between non-EMR and EMR hospitals
  41
    [$147 million / 19.4% (percent of Medicare population in sample)] × 89%.
  42
    Assuming that all hospitals behave like early adopters in 2018, we extrapolate from the medical patients
admitted to early adopters in our sample to medical patients admitted to all hospitals: ($676 million / 1.28
million) × $1.97 million.


                                                    46
for MED patients, it does not incorporate the revenues from complete coding for non-EMR
hospitals or for SURG patients. Finally, given the move to complex DRG-based payment
systems across many countries, the worldwide impact of complete coding costs is likely much
larger still.
    Overall, our takeaway is that the extra revenues from complete coding are a small but
significant fraction of one of the largest sectors of the economy and hence, substantial in
magnitude. This further suggests that the distortions in incentives caused by the costs of
complete coding may also be substantial.



6     Conclusion
Over the past decades, U.S. Medicare and healthcare systems in many countries have substan-
tially increased coding complexity. While prior studies have found that providers document
more conditions with financial incentives to do so, the causes of this are less understood.
    We develop a simple model of bill inflation and costly coding. Our model specifies that
hospitals maximize revenues from coding, net of coding costs. We first estimate how financial
incentives to report secondary diagnoses affect the fraction of patients reported as having
these diagnoses. Prior to the 2007 Medicare payment reform, hospitals report more top bill
codes when the additional revenues from reporting them increase. This finding is consistent
with both bill inflation and costly coding. Post-reform, this effect is no longer present. The
change may be due to the payment reform making the cost of coding more important relative
to the revenues from reporting secondary diagnoses.
    We test the costly coding model using variation generated by the 2007 payment reform
across hospitals. We find that EMR hospitals report more top bill codes following the reform,
relative to non-EMR adopters. This finding is suggestive that coding is costly post-reform
and that EMRs lower coding costs. However, this result is consistent with EMRs also leading
to more bill inflation by lowering coding costs.
    Using the 2008 penalization of never events, we further examine whether our results are
consistent with bill inflation. With never events, greater specificity of coding the present on


                                              47
admission field leads to lower reimbursements. We find that EMR hospitals report relatively
more never events following the penalization. This is inconsistent with EMRs leading to bill
inflation but is consistent with EMRs reducing the costs of documentation.
   Last, we examine whether EMRs affect hospital coding differently for medical and surgical
admissions. Medical physicians have more extensive interactions with EMRs and the coding
of diagnoses--that justify a top bill code--is more central to medical than surgical admissions.
We find that EMR hospitals reported more top bill codes following the 2007 payment reform
for medical DRGs, while the effect on surgical DRGs is negative. This is consistent with
EMRs lowering the costs of coding for medical discharges but raising the costs for surgical
discharges, due to the fixed costs of optimal use.
   Our calculations suggest that EMR hospitals billed $1.04 billion more to CMS and $3.47
billion to all payors annually, from lower coding costs. The worldwide distortions from the
costs of complete coding may be much higher as complex DRG-based payment systems for
hospitals have become increasingly popular in many countries.
   More generally, our paper provides general evidence on incentives in the health sector.
On the one hand, our lack of evidence in favor of bill inflation after 2007 suggests that
there is a limited ability to reduce Medicare hospital expenditures through increased enforce-
ment. It also suggests that other countries with ongoing widespread bill inflation (J¨
                                                                                     urges
and K¨
     oberlein, 2015) may be able to reduce bill inflation with greater enforcement. On the
other hand, our finding that coding is costly suggests that compliance with Medicare billing
requirements may be creating distorting incentives in this market. As reimbursements sys-
tems move to increase payments for high-quality care, a hidden cost of this move may be
increased costs of coding. Policy makers may consider incorporating the costs of coding in
their reimbursement formulae to encourage proper documentation among providers.




                                              48
References
Abraham, S. and Sun, L. (2018). Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies with
  heterogeneous treatment effects. Available at SSRN 3158747.

Agha, L. (2014). The effects of health information technology on the costs and quality of
  medical care. Journal of Health Economics, 34:19­30.

American Diabetes Association (2015). Classification and diagnosis of diabetes, Diabetes
  care, 38(Supplement 1):S8­S16.

Borusyak, K. and Jaravel, X. (2017). Revisiting event study designs. Available at SSRN
  2826228.

Brown, J., Duggan, M., Kuziemko, I., and Woolston, W. (2014). How does risk selection re-
  spond to risk adjustment? New evidence from the Medicare Advantage program. American
  Economic Review, 104(10):3335­64.

Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., and Miller, D. L. (2012). Robust inference with multiway
  clustering. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics.

Clemens, J. and Gottlieb, J. D. (2017). In the shadow of a giant: Medicare's influence on
  private physician payments. Journal of Political Economy, 125(1):1­39.

Cram, P., Bozic, K. J., Callaghan, J. J., Lu, X., and Li, Y. (2014). Use of present-on-admission
  indicators for complications after total knee arthroplasty: an analysis of Medicare admin-
  istrative data. The Journal of Arthroplasty, 29(5):923­928.

Dafny, L. S. (2005). How do hospitals respond to price changes? American Economic Review,
  pages 1525­1547.

de Chaisemartin, C. and D'Haultfoeuille, X. (2019). Two-way fixed effects estimators with
  heterogeneous treatment effects.




                                              49
Donaldson, M. S., Corrigan, J. M., Kohn, L. T., et al. (2000). To err is human: building a
  safer health system, volume 6. National Academies Press.

Dranove, D., Forman, C., Goldfarb, A., and Greenstein, S. (2014). The trillion dollar co-
  nundrum: Complementarities and health information technology. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4):239­270.

Dunn, A., Gottlieb, J. D., Shapiro, A. H., and Tebaldi, P. (2019). The costs of payment
  uncertainty in health care markets. Working paper.

Edwardson, N., Kash, B. A., and Janakiraman, R. (2017). Measuring the impact of electronic
  health record adoption on charge capture. Medical Care Research and Review, 74(5):582­
  594.

F¨
 assler, M., Wild, V., Clarinval, C., Tschopp, A., Faehnrich, J. A., and Biller-Andorno, N.
  (2015). Impact of the DRG-based reimbursement system on patient care and professional
  practise: perspectives of Swiss hospital physicians. Swiss medical weekly, 145(0708).

Freedman, S., Lin, H., and Prince, J. (2018). Information technology and patient health: An-
  alyzing outcomes, populations, and mechanisms. American Journal of Health Economics,
  4(1):51­79.

Ganju, K., Atasoy, H., and Pavlou, P. (2018). Does the adoption of electronic medical record
  systems inflate Medicare reimbursements? Working paper.

Gawande, A. (2018). Why doctors hate their computers. New Yorker.

Geruso, M. and Layton, T. J. (2018). Upcoding or selection: Evidence from Medicare on
  squishy risk adjustment. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Gowrisankaran, G., Lucarelli, C., Schmidt-Dengler, P., and Town, R. (2018). Can amputation
  save the hospital? the impact of the Medicare Rural Flexibility Program on demand and
  welfare. Journal of health economics, 58:110­122.



                                             50
Gowrisankaran, G., Nevo, A., and Town, R. (2014). Mergers when prices are negotiated:
  Evidence from the hospital industry. The American Economic Review, 105(1):172­203.

Healthcare Australia (2017). Myth buster! clinical coding and health information manage-
  ment in high demand and pay is on the rise in 2017. Available at http://web.archive.
  org/web/20080207010024/http://www.808multimedia.com/winnt/kernel.htm.

Hopfe, M., Stucki, G., Bickenbach, J. E., and Prodinger, B. (2018). Accounting for what
  matters to patients in the G-DRG System: A stakeholder's perspective on integrating
  functioning information. Health services insights, 11:1­10.

Ibrahim, A. M., Dimick, J. B., Sinha, S. S., Hollingsworth, J. M., Nuliyalu, U., and Ryan,
  A. M. (2018). Association of coded severity with readmission reduction after the hospital
  readmissions reduction program. JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(2):290­292.

Jha, A., DesRoches, C., Campbell, E., Donelan, K., Rao, S., Ferris, T., Shields, A., Rosen-
  baum, S., and Blumenthal, D. (2009). Use of electronic health records in us hospitals. New
  England Journal of Medicine, 360(16):1628­1638.

J¨
 urges, H. and K¨
                oberlein, J. (2015). What explains DRG upcoding in neonatology? the roles
  of financial incentives and infant health. Journal of Health Economics, 43:13­26.

Kahn, C. N., Ault, T., Potetz, L., Walke, T., Chambers, J. H., and Burch, S. (2015). Assessing
  Medicare's hospital pay-for-performance programs and whether they are achieving their
  goals. Health Affairs, 34(8):1281­1288.

Lee, J., McCullough, J. S., and Town, R. J. (2013). The impact of health information
  technology on hospital productivity. The RAND Journal of Economics, 44(3):545­568.

Levinson, D. R. (2010). Adverse events in hospitals: national incidence among Medicare
  beneficiaries. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General.

Li, B. (2014). Cracking the codes: do electronic medical records facilitate hospital revenue
  enhancement. Working paper.

                                             51
Makary, M. A. and Daniel, M. (2016). Medical error­the third leading cause of death in the
  US. BMJ, 353:i2139.

Mathauer, I. and Wittenbecher, F. (2013). Hospital payment systems based on diagnosis-
  related groups: experiences in low-and middle-income countries. Bulletin of the World
  Health Organization, 91:746­756A.

McCullough, J., Casey, M., and Moscovice, I. (2010). Critical Access Hospitals and mean-
  ingful use of health information technology. University of Minnesota, Team FM.

McCullough, J. S., Parente, S. T., and Town, R. (2016). Health information technology and
  patient outcomes: the role of information and labor coordination. The RAND Journal of
  Economics, 47(1):207­236.

Miller, A. and Tucker, C. (2009). Privacy protection and technology diffusion: The case of
  electronic medical records. Management Science, 55(7):1077­1093.

Miller, A. R. and Tucker, C. (2011). Can health care information technology save babies?
  Journal of Political Economy, 119(2):289­324.

Ody, C., Msall, L., Dafny, L. S., Grabowski, D. C., and Cutler, D. M. (2019). Decreases
  in readmissions credited to Medicare's program to reduce hospital readmissions have been
  overstated. Health Affairs, 38(1):36­43.

Office of the Federal Register and National Archives and Records Service (2007). Medicare
  program; changes to the hospital inpatient prospective payment systems and fiscal year
  2008 rates. Federal Register (Wednesday, August 22, 2007), 72(162):47129­48175.

Office of the Federal Register and National Archives and Records Service (2008). Medicare
  program; changes to the hospital inpatient prospective payment systems and fiscal year
  2009 rates. Federal Register, (Tuesday, August 19, 2008), 73(161):48433­49083.

Or, Z. (2014). Implementation of DRG payment in France: Issues and recent developments.
  Health policy, 117(2):146­150.

                                             52
Parente, S. T. and McCullough, J. S. (2009). Health information technology and patient
  safety: evidence from panel data. Health Affairs, 28(2):357­360.

Sacarny, A. (2018). Adoption and learning across hospitals: The case of a revenue-generating
  practice. Journal of Health Economics, 60:142­164.

Saint, S., Meddings, J. A., Calfee, D., Kowalski, C. P., and Krein, S. L. (2009). Catheter­
  associated urinary tract infection and the Medicare rule changes. Annals of Internal
  Medicine, 150(12):877­884.

Silverman, E. and Skinner, J. (2004). Medicare upcoding and hospital ownership. Journal
  of Health Economics, 23(2):369­389.

Thompson, S. B. (2011). Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and
  time. Journal of Financial Economics, 99(1):1­10.




                                            53
Appendix A

      Table A1: extra top bill codes with early EMRs (Specification 2)
                                                 Dependent variable: Percent top
                                                  bill codes within a base DRG
                                                 Coefficient          S.E.
         EMR×Quarter 1                              .176             (.465)
         EMR×Quarter 2                             -.407             (.393)
         EMR×Quarter 3                             -.231             (.465)
         EMR×Quarter 4 (Q1:2007)                   -.553             (.503)
         EMR×Quarter 5                             -.365              (.63)
         EMR×Quarter 6                             -.619             (.551)
         EMR×Quarter 7                              1.58              (1.2)
         EMR×Quarter 8 (Q1:2008)                    1.41             (1.21)
         EMR×Quarter 9                              1.58             (1.18)
         EMR×Quarter 10                             .942             (1.16)
         EMR×Quarter 11                             2.24**           (1.12)
         EMR×Quarter 12 (Q1:2009)                   1.66             (1.24)
         EMR×Quarter 13                             1.31             (1.18)
         EMR×Quarter 14                             1.92*            (1.13)
         EMR×Quarter 15                             2.12*            (1.13)
         Quarter 1                                 -.531             (.405)
         Quarter 2                                  .152             (.403)
         Quarter 3                                -.0356              (.45)
         Quarter 4 (Q1:2007)                        .553             (.377)
         Quarter 5                                  .353             (.539)
         Quarter 6                                  .283              (.51)
         Quarter 7                                 -48.7***          (3.48)
         Quarter 8 (Q1:2008)                       -46.9***          (3.49)
         Quarter 9                                 -47.4***          (3.49)
         Quarter 10                                -46.9***          (3.52)
         Quarter 11                                -46.7***           (3.5)
         Quarter 12 (Q1:2009)                      -45.2***          (3.57)
         Quarter 13                                -44.8***          (3.57)
         Quarter 14                                -45.5***          (3.44)
         Quarter 15                                -44.6***          (3.47)
         N                                                   1,311,245
         p-value for joint significance of                     .0353
         post-reform EMR coefficients
         Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Coefficients are
         reported in percent form. Sample is base DRGs with multiple severity sub-
         classes, from Q1:2006-Q4:2009. Standard errors are clustered at both hos-
         pital and base DRG levels. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient
         visits, teaching hospital, total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists,
         percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of
         births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
         p < 0.01.




                                               54
Table A2: extra reported never events with early EMRs (Specification 3)
                                   Dependent variable: Percent reported
                                     never events within a base DRG
                                   Coefficient           S.E.
 EMR×Quarter 1                       -.408              (.483)
 EMR×Quarter 2                        1.28              (.959)
 EMR×Quarter 3                        2.25***           (.794)
 EMR×Quarter 4 (Q1:2009)              1.67*             (.926)
 EMR×Quarter 5                        2.42**            (.945)
 EMR×Quarter 6                        2.15**            (.904)
 EMR×Quarter 7                        2.02*             (1.12)
 Quarter 1                            .817              (.538)
 Quarter 2                            4.53***           (1.59)
 Quarter 3                            4.65**            (2.28)
 Quarter 4 (Q1:2009)                 5.37**             (2.14)
 Quarter 5                            4.56**            (1.81)
 Quarter 6                            4.64***           (1.69)
 Quarter 7                             5.8***           (2.13)
 N                                               373,910
 p-value for joint significance of               .000345
 post-reform EMR coefficients
Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Coefficients are expressed
as a percent relative to the sample mean. Sample is all base DRGs, from Q1:2008-
Q4:2009. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Other
regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit
status, total number of births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                         55
Table A3: extra missing POA values with early EMRs (Specification 3)
                                   Dependent variable: Percent missing
                                     POA values within a base DRG
                                  Coefficient            S.E.
EMR×Quarter 1                       .0664               (1.67)
EMR×Quarter 2                       -8.18               (6.51)
EMR×Quarter 3                       -17.2               (11.3)
EMR×Quarter 4 (Q1:2009)             -16.5               (10.9)
EMR×Quarter 5                       -17.4                (11)
EMR×Quarter 6                       -16.4               (10.3)
EMR×Quarter 7                       -16.3               (10.8)
Quarter 1                           -5.18***            (1.65)
Quarter 2                           -39.1***             (7.4)
Quarter 3                           -67.3***            (13.1)
Quarter 4 (Q1:2009)                 -67.3***            (12.7)
Quarter 5                           -66.2***             (13)
Quarter 6                           -63.7***            (13.3)
Quarter 7                           -66.2***            (12.5)
N                                               373,910
p-value for joint significance of                .0476
post-reform EMR coefficients
Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Coefficients are expressed
as a percent relative to the sample mean.. Sample is all base DRGs, from Q1:2008-
Q4:2009. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Other
regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions,
full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit
status, total number of births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                         56
Table A4: extra top bill codes with early EMRs, by MED and SURG (Specification 4)
                                                          Dependent variable: Percent
                                                          top code within a base DRG
                                                           MED                  SURG
                                                    Coefficient S.E. Coefficient       S.E.
           EMR×Quarter 1                                .68       (.418)   -.781      (.871)
           EMR×Quarter 2                              -.14         (.41)   -1.04      (.646)
           EMR×Quarter 3                              .0203       (.439)   -.762      (.916)
           EMR×Quarter 4 (Q1:2007)                     .206       (.365)   -1.79*     (.953)
           EMR×Quarter 5                              -.324       (.472)   -.425      (1.39)
           EMR×Quarter 6                              -.423       (.463)   -1.03      (1.13)
           EMR×Quarter 7                               2.01*      (1.04)   -2.07      (1.42)
           EMR×Quarter 8 (Q1:2008)                     2.14** (1.05)       -2.57*     (1.53)
           EMR×Quarter 9                               2.35*** (.799)      -2.59*     (1.45)
           EMR×Quarter 10                              1.66*      (.909)   -3.16** (1.22)
           EMR×Quarter 11                              2.98*** (.955)      -1.74      (1.29)
           EMR×Quarter 12 (Q1:2009)                    2.19*      (1.09)   -1.76      (1.46)
           EMR×Quarter 13                               1.6       (1.03)   -1.73      (1.36)
           EMR×Quarter 14                              2.33** (1.01)       -1.32       (1.2)
           EMR×Quarter 15                              2.66** (1.05)       -1.32      (1.14)
           Quarter 1                                  -.943** (.403)        .303      (.718)
           Quarter 2                                  -.15         (.48)    .827      (.578)
           Quarter 3                                  -.264       (.423)    .475      (.932)
           Quarter 4 (Q1:2007)                         .104       (.328)    1.43*     (.748)
           Quarter 5                                   .442       (.457)    .302      (1.16)
           Quarter 6                                   .215       (.467)    .572      (1.04)
           Quarter 7                                  -55.4*** (3.84)      -36.4*** (3.54)
           Quarter 8 (Q1:2008)                        -53.6*** (3.91)      -34.7*** (3.75)
           Quarter 9                                  -54.3*** (3.72)      -34.7*** (3.79)
           Quarter 10                                 -53.9*** (3.74)      -34.1*** (3.77)
           Quarter 11                                 -53.3*** (3.84)      -34.6*** (3.89)
           Quarter 12 (Q1:2009)                       -51.3*** (4.18)      -34.1*** (3.7)
           Quarter 13                                 -50.8*** (4.14)      -33.9*** (3.89)
           Quarter 14                                 -51.5*** (3.96)      -34.4*** (3.72)
           Quarter 15                                 -50.6*** (3.97)      -33.6*** (3.8)
           N                                              670,687              640,558
           p-value for joint significance of                .0075              .000487
           post-reform EMR coefficients
           Note: Unit of observation is hospital/base DRG/quarter. Coefficients are reported in
           percent form. Sample is base DRGs with multiple severity subclasses from Q1:2006-
           Q4:2009. Standard errors are clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Other
           regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital, total admissions, full-
           time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status,
           total number of births, and hospital/base DRG fixed effects. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
           *** p < 0.01.




                                                       57
Figure A1: extra reported never events with early EMRs (with different denominator in the
dependent variable)               60
      Percent relative to sample mean
                                  40
                                  20
                                  0
                                  -20




                                            Q1:2008                                                                Q1:2009
                                                                                                          Quarter
                                        Note: Each line reports the coefficients for early EMR adoption interacting with quarter dummies and each dot is a regression coefficient
                                        expressed as a percent relative to the sample mean. The red line represents the 2008 penalization of never events. The vertical lines show
                                        95% confidence intervals, based on standard errors clustered at both hospital and base DRG levels. Unit of observation is hospital/base
                                        DRG/quarter. Sample is all base DRGs from Q1:2008-Q4:2009. Other regressors are bed size, total outpatient visits, teaching hospital,
                                        total admissions, full-time physicians and dentists, percentage Medicare, percentage Medicaid, profit status, total number of births,
                                        quarter dummies and hospital/base DRG fixed effects.




                                                                                                         58
