                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             RULES WITHOUT COMMITMENT:
                              REPUTATION AND INCENTIVES

                                       Alessandro Dovis
                                       Rishabh Kirpalani

                                      Working Paper 26451
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26451


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We thank Mark Aguiar, Gadi Barlevy, John Geanakoplos, Ben Hébert, Juanpa Nicolini, Erik
Madsen, Ramon Marimon, Giuseppe Moscarini, Guillermo Ordonez, Chris Phelan, Facundo
Piguillem, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Fabrizio Zilibotti for valuable comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alessandro Dovis and Rishabh Kirpalani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rules without Commitment: Reputation and Incentives
Alessandro Dovis and Rishabh Kirpalani
NBER Working Paper No. 26451
November 2019
JEL No. E6

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies the optimal design of rules in a dynamic model when there is a time
inconsistency problem and uncertainty about whether the policy maker can commit to follow the
rule ex post. The policy maker can either be a commitment type, which can always commit to
follow rules, or an optimizing type, which sequentially decides whether to follow rules or not.
This type is unobservable to private agents, who learn about it through the actions of the policy
maker. Higher beliefs that the policy maker is the commitment type (the policy maker's
reputation) help promote good behavior by private agents. We show that in a large class of
economies, preserving uncertainty about the policy maker's type is preferable from an ex-ante
perspective. If the initial reputation is not too high, the optimal rule is the strictest one that is
incentive compatible for the optimizing type. We show that reputational considerations imply that
the optimal rule is more lenient than the one that would arise in a static environment. Moreover,
opaque rules are preferable to transparent ones if reputation is high enough.


Alessandro Dovis
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
The Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
adovis@upenn.edu

Rishabh Kirpalani
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
rishabh.kirpalani@wisc.edu
1    Introduction
Since Kydland and Prescott (1977), a large literature in macroeconomics has grappled
with the problem of designing policies when there are time inconsistency problems. Rules
are often proposed as a solution to the time inconsistency problem. The implicit assump-
tion is that society can credibly impose rules on policy makers and that policy makers
can commit to follow these rules. However, at the time when rules and regulations are
formulated, there is often substantial uncertainty about whether policy makers can resist
the temptation to deviate ex-post from the stated rules if it is optimal for them to do so.
This uncertainty is only resolved over time as the actions of policy makers are observed.
The combination of uncertainty and learning generates reputational incentives for policy
makers.
     The key question motivating this paper is how should rules be designed taking into
account both the uncertainty about the policy makers' ability to follow the rules ex-post
and their reputational building incentives. To do this we study the optimal design of
policy rules in a dynamic game between policy makers and private agents in which the
policy maker's ability to commit is private information. We define the public beliefs about
the ability of the policy maker to commit as the policy maker's reputation. The main re-
sult of our paper is that if the initial reputation is low enough, the optimal rule should be
designed to preserve uncertainty in future periods. This is implemented by introducing
leniency in policy. In contrast, if the initial reputation is high, the optimal rule should
promote learning about this type. We also show that designing opaque rules can be ben-
eficial when reputation is high since they help preserve uncertainty without the need to
introduce leniency in rules.
     The insights from our theory can be applied to many relevant policy design questions
including the design of central bank mandates, fiscal rules in federal governments, and
financial regulation. Consider, for instance, the optimal design of financial regulation. As
is well understood, in a large class of economies, if regulators can commit, a no-bailout
policy is optimal in order to prevent excessive risk taking by financial institutions ex-ante.
In particular, creditors should be forced to take losses in the event of default (bail-in). If
the reputation of regulators is not sufficiently high, our analysis suggests that allowing
for partial bailouts in equilibrium is optimal. We show that, contrary to conventional
wisdom, bailouts along the equilibrium path are necessary to discipline future risk-taking
of financial firms as they preserve uncertainty about the type of the policy maker.
     We consider a dynamic model with three types of agents: a rule designer, policy mak-
ers, and private agents. The rule designer chooses a rule, which consists of a policy recom-
mendation to policy makers, in order to maximize the expected social welfare. After the
rule is chosen, the private agents take their actions and, finally, the policy maker chooses


                                              2
a policy. As in Barro (1986), the policy maker can be one of two types: a commitment
type, which always follows the recommendation, or an optimizing type, which follows
the recommendation only if it is sequentially optimal to do so. This type is unobservable
to both the rule designer and private agents. We define the beliefs that the policy maker
is the commitment type as its reputation.
    We present two leading examples of our framework. The first is a model similar to
Barro and Gordon (1983b) in which the rule designer must choose the optimal inflation
target. The second is a banking model in the spirit of Kareken and Wallace (1978) where
there is a trade-off between providing incentives to bankers for taking appropriate levels
of risk ex-ante and bailing them out ex-post to avoid a costly default. In this case the rule
designer chooses an optimal bailout policy.
    We first study a static problem. Since there is no way to incentivize the optimizing type
to choose any policy other than the ex-post optimal one, the best the rule designer can do
is get the commitment type to follow the Ramsey policy. We show that under certain
conditions, uncertainty is beneficial in that the expected social welfare is higher when the
private agents and the rule designer are uncertain about the type of the policy maker
relative to the case in which this type is revealed right before the rule designer chooses the
rule. That is, the rule designer's static value is concave in the policy maker's reputation.1
This is because under our assumptions there are decreasing returns to reputation. In the
context of the bailout example, an increase in reputation incentivizes banks to take on less
risk, and the disciplining effect of reputation is greater when reputation is low and banks
are taking on a lot of risk.
    We then consider a repeated version of this policy game. Unlike in the static model,
the optimizing type now cares about its reputation in the following period as it affects
the actions of the private agents. Thus, it can be incentivized to choose policies other
than its static best response. We show that when reputation is low, the rule designer
wants to preserve uncertainty about the type of the policy maker. The optimal rule in
this case is the most stringent policy that is incentive compatible for the optimizing type.
This recommended policy is more lenient than the statically optimal one. Leniency in
the rule makes it easier for the optimizing type to follow the recommendation ex-post.
This has dynamic benefits because it prevents the private agents from learning the type
of the policy maker, and uncertainty is beneficial. When reputation is low, inducing the
optimizing type to follow the rule also has static benefits. This is because it promotes
better behavior by the private agents who anticipate that the optimizing type will follow
   1 Nosal and Ordoñez (2016) also consider an environment in which uncertainty can mitigate the time
inconsistency problem. The mechanism is very different: here there is uncertainty about the policy maker's
type, while in their paper there is uncertainty about the state of the economy, which restrains the policy
maker ex-post.



                                                    3
the rule ­ albeit more lenient ­ instead of the statically optimal policy.
    This result has sharp implications for policy. In the context of optimal inflation target-
ing, having looser inflation targets is beneficial when reputation is low. Another appli-
cation of our framework is the design of exchange rate regimes. Our result suggests that
when reputation is low, crawling pegs might be superior to fixed exchange rate policies.
Similarly, in the context of financial regulation, if reputation is low, the optimal rule is not
a strict no-bailout policy that imposes losses on lenders. By explicitly allowing for partial
bailouts along the equilibrium path, the rule designer makes it easier for the optimizing
type to adhere to the rule and maintain its reputation. The optimal rule prescribed by the
model is in contrast with the observed design of financial regulation after the 2008 finan-
cial crisis. After the bailouts of financial institutions during this crisis, the reputation of
regulators was arguably low. While our model prescribes a more lenient bailout policy in
this situation, the Dodd-Frank Act imposed very strict no-bailout policies.
    In contrast, if reputation is sufficiently high, the rule designer finds it optimal to set
stringent rules that result in the type of the policy maker being revealed. This is because
when reputation is sufficiently high, there are static costs associated with choosing a le-
nient rule. In this case, the private agents anticipate that the rule will be followed with
sufficiently high probability and so by choosing the Ramsey policy, the rule designer can
obtain a value close to the Ramsey outcome. There are, however, dynamic losses asso-
ciated with choosing the Ramsey policy: if the rule is to follow the Ramsey policy, for a
low enough discount factor, the optimizing type will not follow the rule and there will be
revelation about the type of the policy maker in the first period. Because uncertainty is
beneficial, the expected continuation value is lower than in the case in which the type of
the policy maker is not revealed. When reputation is high enough, the static benefits of
choosing a stringent rule outweigh the dynamic losses.
    We then show that the rule designer itself suffers from a time-inconsistency problem.
In particular, we study the problem for a rule designer who can choose rules for each
subsequent period in period 0 and commit to them. We show that the solution to this
problem is different than the baseline in which the rule designer chooses the rule each
period. This is because the rules in period t + 1 can provide incentives to the policy maker
in period t which are not internalized by the rule designer in period t + 1. In particular, we
show that the prospect of stringent rules in period t + 1 provides more incentives to the
optimizing type in period t. Thus, for a range of prior reputation levels, the rule designer
in period t would like to choose a stringent rule in period t + 1 that induces separation,
while the rule designer in period t + 1 would like to choose a lenient rule that induces
pooling.
    Next, we study the optimal degree of transparency of the rule. We say that a rule
is transparent if the policy maker's deviations are easily detectable. In repeated policy

                                               4
games with no reputational considerations, perfect monitoring is always desirable. See
Atkeson and Kehoe (2001), Atkeson et al. (2007), and Piguillem and Schneider (2013).
In contrast, we show that with reputational considerations, transparent rules are desir-
able only for low levels of reputation, while opaque rules are desirable for high levels of
reputation.2 This is because they can help maintain reputation without the static costs
associated with pooling when reputation is high.
    We consider two ways in which the rule designer can affect the transparency of the
rules. First, we assume that future private agents and rule designers observe only a signal
of the chosen policy and the rule designer can choose the precision of the signal. High
precision (transparency) is beneficial because it incentivizes the optimizing type to follow
the rule, as a deviation results in the revelation of its type with large reputation losses.
Low precision (opaqueness) is beneficial because it allows the rule designer to maintain
uncertainty about the policy maker's type. For instance, if the signals are imprecise, the
private agents attribute the observed deviations from the stated policy to noise rather
than to the policy maker being the optimizing type that deviated from the policy. This
is helpful for high levels of reputation since the rule designer would like to choose the
Ramsey policy from a static perspective. As discussed earlier, there is a trade-off between
the static value of having the commitment type follow a stringent rule and the dynamic
losses associated with learning the policy maker's type. Allowing for opaque rules helps
break this trade-off: the rule designer can achieve both the high static pay-off of choosing
a rule equal to the Ramsey policy without the costs associated with separation for sure
because the policy observations are very noisy. A similar argument implies that it is
optimal to have short tenure for the policy maker when reputation is high.
    An alternative way of introducing opacity in rules is to allow the rule designer to
choose stochastic rules even though fundamentals are deterministic. When reputation is
low, the optimal rule has no randomization in order to maximize the incentives of the
optimizing type to follow more stringent policies. When reputation is high instead, it is
optimal to have randomization in order to reduce the dispersion in the posteriors.
    In our baseline setup, we model the commitment type as a policy maker that cannot
deviate from the rules. One interpretation of this is that the commitment type suffers a
cost from deviating from the stated rule over and above the reputational cost in the model.
For example, a deviation may affect the commitment's type ability to be elected to higher
offices, while the optimizing type may not have such ambitions. Alternatively, one could
assume that policy makers are identical, but there is uncertainty about whether these
policy deviations can be enacted, due to legislative holdups, for example. In particular,
policy makers always have an incentive to choose policies which are sequentially rational,
  2 In the principal-agent literature there are examples of environments where imperfect monitoring is
beneficial to provide incentives. See for instance Crémer (1995) and Prat (2005).


                                                  5
but might face roadblocks in implementation if the legislature is controlled by opponents
who might block these policies for purely political purposes. As in Piguillem and Riboni
(2018), the rule can be the default option in case of such disagreements. In this case, we
can interpret the commitment type as a policy maker which faces such roadblocks, and
the optimizing type as one which does not. The latter might want to pretend as if its
hands are tied (like the commitment type) for exactly the same reasons as in the baseline
model.
    An alternative approach is to assume that the two types of policy makers differ in their
preferences (payoff types). For example, policy makers can differ in their temptation to
deviate ex-post because certain policy makers can better resist the pressure from interest
groups ex-post or simply have different preferences over outcomes than the social welfare
function, as in the seminal Rogoff (1985) paper. The outcomes in this case differ from
the ones in the baseline model: we show that with preference types and a reasonable
belief refinement, the equilibrium with payoff types has separation for all levels of initial
reputation.


Related literature This paper is related to the literature that studies the trade-off be-
tween rules and flexibility. See for example Athey et al. (2005), Halac and Yared (2014),
Halac and Yared (2017), and Azzimonti et al. (2016), among others. The focus of this liter-
ature is on how much flexibility to leave the policy maker when it is not possible to make
the rule contingent on the state of the economy (say because it is private information to
the policy maker). We abstract from this issue by considering a deterministic environ-
ment, but we focus instead on the uncertainty about the ability of the policy maker to
commit. Our paper is also related to the literature that studies optimal policies with-
out commitment when it is known that the policy maker cannot commit. This is the
approach followed by a large literature on time consistent policies, including Barro and
Gordon (1983b), Chari and Kehoe (1990), Phelan and Stacchetti (2001), and Halac and
Yared (2018). Our paper nests simple versions of these two approaches as special cases
when reputation is either one or zero.
    This paper builds on the reputation literature that originates with Milgrom and Roberts
(1982) and Kreps and Wilson (1982). See Barro (1986), Backus and Driffill (1985), Phelan
(2006), Amador and Phelan (2018), and Dovis and Kirpalani (2019b) for recent applica-
tions to policy games. Most of this literature takes as given the policy chosen by the
commitment type and analyses the incentives of the optimizing type and the outcomes
that can be achieved. The goal of this paper is to study the optimal policy that the com-
mitment type should follow.
    A key driver of our results is the idea that uncertainty about the policy maker type
is beneficial. This feature is also present in Dovis and Kirpalani (2019a). Our contribu-

                                             6
tion is to show how this property affects the design of the optimal rule. Marinovic and
Szydlowski (2019), Bond and Zeng (2018), and Asriyan et al. (2019) also consider envi-
ronments in which uncertainty is beneficial and it is not optimal to resolve uncertainty. In
these models, the focus is on whether the agent having the information should disclose
it to the other agent(s) in the economy. In contrast, the rule designer in our model does
not know the policy maker's type and we focus on the design of policies that can induce
­ or not ­ revelation. In Section 5.1, we consider an environment in which the rules are
chosen by the policy makers (who know their type) instead of the rule designer and show
that the results are very different. In particular, for intermediate levels of discount factors,
there will be separation for all priors.
    Our paper is also related to a literature that studies signaling games when policy mak-
ers have different types. See for instance Vickers (1986), Cole et al. (1995), Angeletos et al.
(2006), King et al. (2008), Lu (2013), and Lu et al. (2016) with payoff types, or Dovis and
Kirpalani (2019a), where one type has the ability to commit to the announced policy. See
also Sanktjohanser (2018) for a similar analysis in the context of a bargaining game. Our
approach differs from these papers since we study the best policy chosen by the rule de-
signer when there is uncertainty about the type of the policy maker, while these papers
study the optimal policy that the commitment type would choose knowing its type. We
show that if the rules are chosen by the policy maker, the commitment type (if sufficiently
patient) chooses a stringent rule to separate from the optimizing type for all levels of rep-
utation, while the rule designer under the veil of uncertainty chooses to avoid separation
when the reputation of the policy maker is sufficiently low.
    Debortoli and Nunes (2010) consider a policy game in which the policy maker has the
ability to change its policies infrequently and randomly. They abstract from reputation-
building incentives.


2    Policy game
We consider a policy game that captures a variety of relevant economic environments
as special cases. We present two leading examples of our framework: a version of the
Barro and Gordon (1983a) model of monetary policy and a banking model in the spirit
of Kareken and Wallace (1978). Our framework also nests other models, including the
Fisher model of capital income taxation considered in Chari and Kehoe (1990).
   There are three types of agents: the rule designer, policy makers (or bureaucrats), and
a continuum of private agents. We consider a repeated environment where there are
no endogenous state variables across periods. At the beginning of each period, the rule
designer recommends a policy r from a set [, ]. We refer to this recommendation as


                                               7
a rule. The private agents then choose an individual action. After observing the private
action, the policy maker chooses a policy . The policy maker can be one of two types: a
commitment type, which always follows the recommendation made by the rule designer,
or an optimizing type, which can choose any policy  in the set [, ]. We assume that
the policy maker's type is permanent.3 The policy maker's type is unobservable to the
private agents and the rule designer, who learn about it through the observed policies.
We assume that the private agents and the rule designer share a common prior  that
they are facing the commitment type. We define the probability that the private agents
and the rule designer ascribe to the policy maker being the commitment type as the policy
maker's reputation.
    We let x denote the representative (average) action taken by the private agents. We as-
sume that the private action is a function  of the expected policy, E = c + (1 - ) o ,
where c = r is the policy chosen by the commitment type and o is the policy imple-
mented by the optimizing type,
                                        x =  (E) .                                      (1)

We will refer to (1) as the implementability constraint. We think of the function  as sum-
marizing the set of implementability conditions describing the set of outcomes that can
be implemented given a set of policies or an incentive compatibility constraint.
    The rule designer and the policy makers maximize a social welfare function w (x, ).
We assume that the problem is time inconsistent. Specifically, we define the Ramsey out-
come as
             (xramsey , ramsey ) = arg max w (x, ) subject to x =  (1, ) .
                                             x,

We assume that there is a time-inconsistency problem in that the Ramsey policy is not
optimal ex-post, i.e., ramsey =  (xramsey ), where  (x) denotes the best response of the
government to x,  (x) = arg max w (x, ). We assume without loss of generality that
 (xramsey ) > ramsey .
   We also make the following assumptions about w and :

Assumption 1. Assume that

   1. If wx > 0 then         0,        0, and wx < 0

   2. If wx < 0 then         0,        0, and wx > 0.

   As is standard in the time-inconsistency literature, we consider environments in which
the inability of the policy maker to commit ex-post incentivizes the private agents to take
   3 This assumption is made for convenience. Our main results extend to the case in which the policy
maker's type can change exogenously, provided that this type process is persistent. When types are i.i.d.,
there is no role for reputation.


                                                    8
worse actions ex-ante. Thus, if social welfare is increasing in the private action x, we
assume that if the agents expect higher , they choose lower values of x (       0). We also
assume that the private action x is concave in expected policy. Finally, we assume a form
of supermodularity in (x, ) which implies that the government's incentive to deviate
from its ex-ante promises is higher the worse the private action (low x) is.
   We next present two economies and show how they map into our general framework.


Example 1: Barro-Gordon One special case of the general environment is the classic
Barro and Gordon (1983a) model used to analyze the time inconsistency problem in mon-
etary policy. In this context, we interpret x as the average wage inflation, and  is the
money growth rate (or price inflation).
   We assume that the private agents set wage inflation according to

                               x =  (E) = c + (1 - ) o .

The social welfare function takes the quadratic form

                                           1
                             w (x, ) = -     ( + x - )2 + 2 ,
                                           2

with  > 0. The first term in this functional form represents the welfare losses associated
with low employment due, for example, to monopolistic competition in labor markets.
The parameter  measures the extent of this distortion, and it can be mapped into the
wage markup set by unions. The second term captures the costs of ex-post inflation (due,
for example, to the transactional value of real money balances).


Example 2: Bailout and effort We now consider another economy inspired by the clas-
sic analysis in Kareken and Wallace (1978), which studies the trade-off between the ex-
post benefits and the ex-ante costs of bailouts.
    There are two types of private agents: depositors and bankers. At the beginning of
each period, the banker must borrow k = 1 from the depositors to finance an investment
opportunity that pays off at the end of the period. The return of the investment opportu-
nity is RH with probability p (e), where e is the effort exerted by the banker, and 0 with
probability 1 - p (e). The function p is increasing and concave, and it satisfies the Inada
conditions. Exerting effort e results in a utility cost v (e), where v is increasing and convex.
We interpret the effort as the costs associated with monitoring the investment project. The
bankers and the depositors are risk-neutral and do not discount consumption between the
beginning and the end of the period.
    The banker offers the depositors a contract that promises to repay R units of the con-


                                               9
sumption good in the second sub-period subject to limited liability. We assume that so-
ciety faces bankruptcy costs  whenever the lenders recover less than their initial invest-
ment.4 The policy maker can avoid these bankruptcy costs by making a transfer to the
banker to enable him to repay the depositors. In particular, the government can choose
the recovery  in case the banker is unable to repay. There is a taxation cost associated
with these transfers, denoted by c () , where c is increasing and convex. To simplify cal-
culations we assume that p (e) = e , v (e) = e2 /2, and c () = 2 /2. We assume that if
the recovery is , the bankruptcy costs are  (1 - ).
    We assume that the depositors can observe the effort e. They are then willing to lend
to the banker if the interest rate is at least

                                      1 - (1 - p (e)) [c + (1 - ) o ]
                            R (e) =                                   .                           (2)
                                                    p (e)

The banker chooses the effort to maximize -v (e) + p (e) [RH - R (e)] subject to (2). Using
(2) to substitute for R (e), we can rewrite the banker's problem as

                             max -v (e) + p (e) RH + (1 - p (e)) E,
                               e

where the term (1 - p (e)) E represents the distortion induced by the expected bailout.
Thus the optimal effort e is a function  (E) that is implicitly defined by the first order
condition
                                 v (e) = p (e) [RH - E] .

The social welfare function is the equally weighted sum of the utility of the bankers and
depositors net of taxation and bankruptcy costs:

                  w (e, ) = -v (e) + p (e) RH - 1 - (1 - p (e)) (1 - )  - c () .


3      Optimal rules
We now consider the problem of how to design the optimal rule. We begin by character-
izing the rule designer's problem in a static setting and next study how the optimal rule
changes once we introduce dynamics. We first establish a set of sufficient conditions un-
der which uncertainty about the policy maker's type is beneficial in the static economy.
Our main result is that when reputation is low, the rule designer designs a rule which
preserves uncertainty about the type of the policy maker. The optimal rule is the most
stringent policy that is incentive compatible for the optimizing type. This recommended
    4 Alternatively,
                 we could have assumed that these costs are incurred whenever the lenders recover less
than the promised return.


                                                 10
policy is more lenient than the statically optimal one. Leniency in the rule makes it easier
for the optimizing type to follow the recommendation ex-post. In contrast, if reputation
is sufficiently high, the rule designer finds it optimal to set stringent rules that result in
the type of the policy maker being revealed. This is because when reputation is suffi-
ciently high, the static costs associated with choosing a lenient rule outweigh the benefits
associated with preserving uncertainty about the policy maker's type.
    We next relax the assumption that the rule designer chooses a rule in each period.
First, we show that the rule designer itself suffers from a time inconsistency problem and
contrast the optimal path of rules chosen in period zero with the ones chosen sequentially.
Second, we consider a set-up in which the rule designer lacks commitment but is only
stochastically able to change the rule each period.


3.1    Statically optimal rules
We begin by studying the optimal rule in a static setting. The rule designer anticipates
that if the policy maker is the commitment type, it will follow the rule r . Instead, if
the policy maker is the optimizing type, it will always choose the static best response to
the private action x. This is because in a static model the rule designer has no tools to
incentivize the optimizing type to take any other action. Of course, this will change in the
dynamic setting.
    We can then write the problem for the rule designer as choosing the recommendation
for the commitment type, c , to solve

                           W0 () = max w (x, c ) + (1 - ) w (x, o ) ,                                 (3)
                                        c


where given c and the prior , x and o are given by

                                       x =  (c + (1 - ) o )                                           (4)
                                      o =  (x) .

For later reference, we denote the solution to this problem as c0 (), o0 (), and x0 ().5
We can also define the value for the optimizing type:

                                  V0 () = w (x0 () ,  (x0 ())) .
   5 Note that here we are allowing the rule designer to choose the best equilibrium given a rule r . Thus
there is no need to have the rule depend on the representative private action x.




                                                   11
    We next discuss the conditions under which uncertainty is beneficial in that

                                 W0 ()       W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0) .                                     (5)

When uncertainty is beneficial, the expected social welfare is higher when the policy
maker's type is uncertain relative to the case in which types are revealed right before
the rule designer chooses the rule. This property of the static problem turns out to be
critical for the form of the optimal rule in a dynamic model.6
    We now provide a set of sufficient conditions on primitives that ensure that uncer-
tainty is beneficial. In the appendix we show that the Barro-Gordon and bailout examples
satisfy these assumptions.

Assumption 2. Assume that

   1. w (x, ) is concave in (x, ).

   2. w (x, ) is convex in (x, ).
                                        wx (x, (x))
   3. 1 >  x (x)  ()               1-    wx (x,) ,    where x =  (), x =  (), and  x (x) =
           wx x, x
               (   (   ))
          -w    
             (x, (x))
                      .

                                                        ·               ()
   4. w (x, ) + [wx (x, ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))] [1- (·)( 1-) (x)]                    0 for all .
                                                                             x


    We have the following lemma:

Lemma 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, c0 () =  and uncertainty is beneficial in that (5)
holds.

    The optimal static rule takes a simple form: for all , the rule is set to c () = , which
is also the Ramsey policy.7 This result follows from Condition 4 in Assumption 2. The
expression in Condition 4 is the first-order condition for the problem in (3). The condition
implies that reducing  has a positive marginal effect and thus it is optimal to be at the
corner . Therefore, it is optimal for the rule designer to recommend the most stringent
possible policy. In the context of the Barro-Gordon example, this means that the optimal
inflation target is zero, while in the bailout example, a strict no-bailout policy is optimal.
    We now argue that under our assumptions, condition (5) holds. To establish that un-
certainty is beneficial it is sufficient to show that W0 () is concave or equivalently that
there are decreasing returns to reputation. To understand why, consider an increase in
   6 InAppendix B we provide an example of an environment that does not satisfy this property.
   7 Thisis true even though the private action is not at the Ramsey level since the private agents anticipate
that with probability 1 -  the policy maker is the optimizing type who will deviate from the recommenda-
tion and choose the static best response.


                                                      12
reputation . We illustrate the logic for the case in which wx > 0 , as in the bailout
model. A specular logic holds for the case in which wx < 0. First, notice that an in-
crease in  increases x0 () =  ( + (1 - )  (x0 ())) through a direct channel (since
 <  and  is decreasing) and an indirect channel since  is decreasing in x, which
in turn increases x further. Since  is concave (Assumption 1) and  is convex (which
follows from Condition 2 of Assumption 2), the increase in x0 will be larger for low 
than for high . Consequently, x0 is concave in . Next, the concavity of w and the
concavity of x0 imply that w (x0 () , ) and w (x0 () , o ()) are concave in . Estab-
lishing the concavity of w (x0 () , ) and w (x0 () , o ()) is not enough to show that
W0 () = w (x0 () , ) + (1 - ) w (x0 () , o ()) is concave since the product of two
concave functions is not necessarily concave. However, the technical assumption in Con-
dition 3 guarantees that W0 () is concave.
    Intuitively, the marginal value of reputation is larger when reputation is low. In the
context of the bailout example, this implies that an increase in reputation will incentivize
banks to increase their effort by more when reputation is low than when reputation is
high, i.e., x0 is concave in , as shown in Figure 1. In other words, the disciplining effect
of reputation is greater when reputation is low and banks are exerting little effort.


                  Figure 1: Static value and private action when wx > 0

W0()                                               x0()
                                                              xramsey




                                                                                               
       0                                  1               0                              1



3.2    Dynamic problem
We now study the optimal rule design problem in a dynamic setting. We start by repeat-
ing the stage game, studied in the previous section, twice and then analyze what happens
as the number of periods goes to infinity.


                                              13
    When there is more than one period, the optimizing type can be incentivized to take
a different action from its static best response. We can set up the rule designer's prob-
lem as choosing the rule that will be followed by the commitment type, r = c , and
a recommendation to the optimizing type, o . This recommendation must be incentive
compatible in that the optimizing type must prefer to follow the recommendation than to
choose its best possible deviation (playing the static best response  (x)) and attaining a
continuation value V0 (0) as the prior jumps to zero:

                       w (x, o ) + o V0  (o )           w (x,  (x)) + o V0 (0) ,                      (6)

where o is the discount factor for the optimizing type and  (o ) is the private belief
about the policy maker's type after observing o (given recommendation c ).8 The law
of motion for beliefs on path follows Bayes' rule
                                            
                                                  
                                                           if  = c
                                               +(1-)
                                   ( ) =                              ,                               (7)
                                            0              o/w

where  is an indicator variable that takes value 1 if the private agents expect the op-
timizing type to choose the same policy as the commitment type, o = c , and  = 0
otherwise.
    For all subsequent analyses we assume that the policy makers are sufficiently impa-
tient so that the Ramsey outcome is not incentive compatible:

Assumption 3. The discount factor o is small enough so that

                                                                      o
          w (xramsey ,  (xramsey )) - w (xramsey , ramsey ) >             [V0 (1) - V0 (0)] .
                                                                    1 - o

    We can then write the rule designer's problem as

     W () = max  w (x, c ) + W0  (c )                   + (1 - ) w (x, o ) + W0  (o )                 (8)
               x,c ,


subject to the implementability condition,

                           x =  (c + (1 - ) [c + (1 - )  (x)]) ,

the incentive compatibility constraint for the optimizing type (6), and the law of motion
   8 If
      the rule designer chooses o = c , then a deviation only happens off-path and thus Bayes' rule does
not pin down the posterior. On the right side of (6), we assume that after a deviation, the posterior goes
to zero. This is reasonable because the commitment type cannot deviate. Moreover, it also constitutes the
worst punishment in the event that the optimizing type deviates.


                                                   14
for beliefs (7). Note that we allow in principle for the rule designer's discount factor  to
differ from o , although this is not critical.
    For simplicity we abstract from mixed strategies for the optimizing type. In Appendix
A.2, we show that this is without loss of generality. Under our assumptions, the outcome
in which the optimizing type follows the rule with probability   (0, 1) and the ex-
post optimal policy with probability 1 -  is dominated in terms of welfare by the best
equilibrium in which the optimizing type follows the rule with probability one. This
is because of two reasons. First, since uncertainty is beneficial and the posterior is a
martingale, mixing introduces volatility in the posterior without affecting its mean, which
lowers the continuation value. Second, we show in the appendix that mixing tightens the
optimizing type's incentive constraint because w is concave in  and V0 is concave in 
and thus reduces static payoffs.
    We can then reduce the problem above to a discrete choice between two options: sep-
arating or pooling. If the rule designer chooses to separate, it chooses the best static rule.
Because of Assumption 3, the Ramsey outcome is not incentive compatible and the opti-
mizing type will choose the static best response and not follow the rule so the type of the
policy maker is revealed at the end of the period. Thus the continuation value is either
W0 (1) with probability  or W0 (0) with probability 1 - . The value of separating is then

                     Wsep () = W0 () +  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)] .

    If the rule designer chooses to pool, it sets the rule to 1,ico (), which is the most
stringent policy  consistent with the incentive compatibility constraint for the optimizing
type:

  w ( (1,ico ()) , 1,ico ()) + V0 () = w ( (1,ico ()) ,  ( (1,ico ()))) + V0 (0) .

In this case, both types of policy makers follow the rule in equilibrium and thus uncer-
tainty about the type is preserved and the continuation value is W0 (). The value of
pooling is then

                    Wpool () = w ( (1,ico ()) , 1,ico ()) + W0 () .

   The next proposition shows that designing a rule that preserves uncertainty about the
policy maker's type is valuable when reputation is low:
Proposition 1. Under Assumptions 1­3,
  1. For  close to one there is separation with probability one and  = 0c () = ;

  2. For  close to zero there is pooling ( = 1) and c () > 0c () = .

                                             15
In particular, for the Barro-Gordon economy, the optimal regulation has a cutoff property in that
there exists a  1  (0, 1) such that:

  1. For  > 1 it is optimal to separate and  = 0c () = .

  2. For      1 it is optimal to pool and c () = 1,ico () > 0c () = .

   The key implication of this proposition is that in contrast to the static case, when rep-
utation is low, the rule designer recommends more lenient rules in order to preserve un-
certainty about the policy maker's type in the future. To see why this is indeed the case,
consider
                         Wpool () - Wsep () =  () +  () ,

where  ()  W0 () - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)] are the dynamic benefits of pooling and
 () are the static benefits of pooling given by

                        ()  w ( (1,ico ()) , 1,ico ()) - W0 () .

The dynamic and static benefits of pooling are plotted in Figure 2. Since uncertainty is
beneficial, we know that  () > 0 for all   (0, 1) and equal to zero when there is
no uncertainty and   {0, 1}. Also by construction, the static benefits of pooling are
zero for  = 0, since 1,ico (0) = o0 (0) =  (x0 (0)), and negative for  = 1, since W0 (1)
attains the Ramsey value and w ( (1,ico ()) , 1,ico ()) < Wramsey because the incentive
constraint is assumed to be binding for all  (Assumption 3).
    Combining these observations, it is immediate that for  close to one Wsep () >
Wpool () since the dynamic benefits are approximately zero and  () < 0. In the proof,
we show that the static benefits of pooling  () are increasing in  for low levels of rep-
utation. Intuitively, in the pooling regime the rule designer is inducing the optimizing
type to follow a more stringent policy than the static best response, 1,ico () <  (x0 ())
at the cost of forcing the commitment type to follow a more lenient policy, 1,ico () > .
When reputation is low enough, this makes the expected policy more stringent in the
pooling regime than in the separating regime, because in the latter, the private agents ex-
pect the recommended policy to be followed with a low probability. Thus, pooling has
both static and dynamic benefits and is therefore preferable.
    For the Barro-Gordon example we can provide a tighter characterization of the optimal
policy and show that it has a cutoff property. The proof for this is in the appendix. (For
the bailout example we verify that this is the case numerically.) The optimal dynamic rule
in this case is plotted in Figure 3.
    Let's now consider what Proposition 1 implies for our two examples. In the bailout
example, the optimal static rule is a strict no-bailout policy. However, in the dynamic

                                               16
                    Figure 2: Dynamic and static benefits of pooling


                       +   > 0                                 +   < 0




                                                                    ()
                               ()



                                                                                       
      0                                                                           1
                                                            1




model, on-path bailouts are necessary to achieve good outcomes when reputation is low.
In particular, counter to conventional wisdom, bailouts along the equilibrium path are
necessary in order to impose future discipline on financial institutions. This is precisely
because allowing for bailouts makes it easier for the optimizing type to follow the de-
signer's recommendation and thus helps to preserve uncertainty going forward. This is
beneficial because uncertainty about the policy maker's type prevents bankers from tak-
ing on excessive risk by exerting little effort. Similarly, in the Barro-Gordon model, having
looser inflation targets is beneficial when reputation is low.


3.3   Limit of finite horizon
We now show that the insights from the two-period model extend to any horizon. In
particular, we analyze the limit of the finite horizon economy and show that an analog of
Proposition 1 holds.
                                                                  K
    Let K be the horizon of the economy. For a fixed K, let Kk () k=0 be the optimal rules
set by the rules designer at each horizon. In the previous section, we characterized the
case for K = 1. We will use the following property:




                                             17
                                Figure 3: Optimal dynamic rule


                                                                          ¯

                                         Optimal rule
                                         (dynamic)
                          ico ()




                                                                          

                                                                              
                    0                                    1                1


Assumption 4. The gains of best responding are decreasing in x, in that

                               G (x)  w (x,  (x)) - w x, -1 (x)

is monotone decreasing in x.

    This property is satisfied in our two examples. In the appendix we provide an addi-
tional sufficient condition on the general environment which implies this property.
    To set up our next proposition, we define the following objects. First, let (xCK , CK ) be
the private action and the policy that emerge in the best sustainable equilibrium for the
infinite horizon version of the model where  = 0. That is, xCK solves

                  w xCK , -1 (xCK )                         o
                                    = w (xCK ,  (xCK )) +       W0 (0) ,                   (9)
                      1 - o                               1 - o

where W0 (0) = V0 (0) is the value of the worst equilibrium (the repetition of the static
Nash for  = 0) and CK = -1 (xCK ). Note that because of Assumption 3, xCK is higher
(lower) than the Ramsey outcome when wx < 0 (wx > 0 ).
   Second, define the cutoff  as the (unique) solution to

            w xCK , -1 (xCK )             
                              = W0 ( ) +    [ W0 (1) + (1 -  ) W0 (0)] .                  (10)
                 1-                      1-

Recall that 1 is the cutoff that separates the region where it is optimal to pool from the



                                              18
region where it is optimal to separate in the twice repeated Barro-Gordon economy. For
the next result we restrict ourselves to environments in which such a cutoff exists.
   The next proposition shows that the limit of the finite horizon economy has the fol-
lowing property: there are two cutoffs and it is optimal to pool for priors below one cutoff
and separate for priors above the other cutoff.

Proposition 2. Under Assumptions 1­4, as the horizon k   we have that:

  1. For  = 0, Wk (0) = W0 (0) / (1 - ) and Vk (0) = V0 (0) / (1 - o ).

  2. For   (0,  ], there is pooling for all k and k  CK .

  3. For   (1 , 1], there is separation for all k and k =  for all k.

  4. For   ( ,      1 ) there is no convergence. In particular, the optimal rules display a cyclical
     pattern: it is optimal to pool for M () consecutive periods and then to separate for one
     period and so on.

    Qualitatively, the optimal rule is the same as in the two-period model. For high values
of , above the cutoff     1 , it is optimal to separate because pooling is associated with static
losses that are not compensated by the dynamic gains. For low levels of reputation, it
is optimal to choose rules that do not reveal the type of the policy maker. Note that the
optimal policy in the pooling regime does not depend on the prior  in the limit. This is
because if it is optimal to pool today it is also optimal to pool in all subsequent periods.
In this case, the type of the policy maker will never be revealed and so  does not affect
the value on the equilibrium path. The initial prior also does not affect the value of the
deviation on the right side of (10). This is because upon deviation the prior jumps to zero
independently of the initial value. Thus the value of pooling in (0,  ] is independent of ,
as shown in Figure 4. Moreover, the policy converges to its value in the best sustainable
equilibrium when it is known that the policy maker is the optimizing type.
    Notice that there is a discontinuity at  = 0. This is because when  = 0 and the
horizon is finite it is not possible to incentivize the optimizing type to choose any policy
other than its static best response.
    For intermediate values,    ,             1 , the equilibrium strategies do not converge as
the horizon goes to infinity. This is because there is strategic substitutability between rule
designers in different periods. Pooling by the rule designer in period t + 1 reduces the
incentives of the period t rule designer to pool. In fact, the prospect of pooling in t + 1
tightens the incentive compatibility for the optimizing type in period t. The best way to
provide incentive to the optimizing type is to promise separation next period. We will
explain the intuition behind this observation in Section 3.4 when discussing optimal rule
design when the rule designer can commit.

                                                19
Comparison with best sustainable equilibrium We now compare the limit of the finite
horizon to the best sustainable equilibrium (in the infinite horizon economy).

Proposition 3. Under Assumption 3, the best sustainable equilibrium from the rule designer's
perspective is such that it is always optimal to separate for all  > 0. The value to the rule designer
is larger than the limit of the finite horizon for   (0, 1).

    The value of the best equilibrium is plotted in Figure 4 and denoted by W   ¯ (). In
the best sustainable equilibrium, it is always optimal to separate even when uncertainty
is beneficial in the finite horizon economy. This is because trigger strategies can sub-
stitute for reputation and it is statically beneficial to use the commitment power of the
commitment type. In fact, the value of the pooling regime equals the value of the best
equilibrium when the rule designer knows that it is facing the optimizing type for sure,
Wpool = W   ¯ (0). This is because when  = 0, it is possible to support CK with trigger
strategies to the worst equilibrium, W (0), which equals W0 (0) / (1 - ). Instead, in the
limit of the finite horizon economy, once the private agents learn that the policy maker
is the commitment type, the only outcome that can be supported is the repetition of the
static economy with  = 0 with value W0 / (1 - ) = W (0).

                                  Figure 4: Equilibrium values



                                                                                           Wramsey

              Best sustainable


                                                                                                   ¯ (0)
                                                                                           Wpool = W




                                                          Limit of finite horizon


                         [W0 (1)+(1-)W0 (0)]
              W0() +            1-

                                                                                           W (0)

                                                                                           
     0                                                    1                            1


                                                 20
3.4   Optimal rules when the rule designer can commit
In our baseline model, we assumed that the rule designer chooses the optimal rule in
each period. We now study the problem for the rule designer that can choose rules for
all subsequent periods in period zero and commit to them. For an intermediate range
of priors, the solution to this problem differs from the case in which rules are chosen
sequentially: the rule designer itself suffers from a time-inconsistency problem. This is
because future rules can be used to incentivize the policy maker in the current period,
thereby relaxing the incentive compatibility constraint. We illustrate this point in the
simplest possible way by considering a thrice repeated economy.9
    The key insight is that the optimizing type's incentive constraint in period t is tighter
if there is pooling in period t + 1 as compared with the case in which there is separation
in t + 1 for sufficiently high levels of reputation. Thus the period t rule designer wants
to have more stringent rules in period t + 1 to induce separation. To understand this
point, consider the value of the optimizing type along the equilibrium path in the first
two periods, when rules are chosen sequentially. These values are illustrated in Figure 5.
Consider the value in period 1,V1 (). This value is discontinuous at the cutoff     1 . This is
              
because at 1 , the period-one rule designer is indifferent between pooling and separating.
Since separation has dynamic losses, it must have static gains. A necessary condition for
separation to be statically beneficial over pooling is that the private action under pooling,
xico,1 (), is worse than the one under separation, i.e., xico,1 () > x0 () when wx < 0.
This in turn implies that

                 lim V1 () = w xico,1 (1) , 
                                             -1
                                                (xico,1 (1 )) + V0 ()                           (11)
                1

                            = w (xico,1 (                
                                         1 ) ,  (xico,1 (1 ))) + V0 (0)
                            < w (x0 (            
                                     1 ) ,  (x0 (1 ))) + V0 (0) = lim V ( ) ,
                                                                      11


where the second equality follows from (6) and the strict inequality follows from xico,1 () >
x0 (). The idea is that the optimizing type's value is high when the private action is low
and it is allowed to best respond.
    Consider now the incentive compatibility constraint in the first period. This can be
written as
                       w (x, ) - w (x,  (x)) o [V1 () - V1 (0)] .

For  slightly smaller than    1 , from (11) we have that V0 () - V0 (0) > V1 () - V1 (0),
as illustrated in Figure 5. Thus the incentive constraint is tighter in period zero than in
  9 Note that in the two-period economy there is no difference between the date zero and sequentially
optimal rule since the only outcome that is feasible in last period is separation.


                                                 21
      Figure 5: Dynamic incentives for the optimizing type, Vk () - Vk (0) for k = 0, 1




                                                             V1() - V1 (0)


                   V0() - V0 (0)




                                                                                           
         0                                                 1                           1

period one. Therefore, the static value of pooling is lower and the region in which it is
optimal to pool shrinks. Then, there are priors  such that it is optimal to pool in period
one but optimal to separate in period zero, when rules are chosen sequentially. For those
levels of reputation, the rule designer in period zero would like to force the rule designer
in period one to adopt a stringent rule that induces separation next period and relax its
incentive compatibility constraint. We have the following proposition:

Proposition 4. There exists an interval              
                                           commit , 1 where the optimal rules with and without
commitment do not coincide. In particular, without commitment, it is optimal to separate in period
zero. With commitment, it is optimal to pool in period zero and commit to separation in period
one. This is achieved by committing to the most stringent rule, , in period one.


3.5     Sticky rules
So far we have allowed the rule designer to choose a new rule in each period as a func-
tion of the current reputation of the policy maker. In practice, opportunities for revising
and introducing new rules arise infrequently. We now modify our framework to allow
for this feature and show that our main conclusions are unchanged. In particular, the
characterization in Proposition 2 continues to hold.
    We consider the case in which rules are "sticky" in that they can only be changed in a

                                               22
given period with probability . The analyses in the baseline modelconsidered the case
in which  = 1. We now assume that  < 1. Let W     ~ t+1 ( , c ) be the rule designer's value
next period if it cannot set a new rule and must use c and V  ~ t+1 (o , c ) be the analogous
value for the optimizing type. Fixing the horizon K, the problem for a rule designer that
has the opportunity to set new rules in period t < K can be written as

                                                ~ t+1 c , c
      Wt () = max  w (x, c ) + Wt+1 c +  (1 - ) W
                x,c ,o
                                                               ~ t+1 o , c
                         + (1 - ) w (x, o ) + Wt+1 o +  (1 - ) W

subject to the implementability condition (4), the evolution of the prior (7), and the incen-
tive compatibility constraint

                                     ~ t+1 o , c
        w (x, o ) + Vt+1 o +  (1 - ) V                       w (x, o ) + Vt+1 (0) .      (12)

    Under our assumptions, if the rule designer wants to separate, its value is the same as
the one in the previous section since the optimal rule under separation is  for all  and
t. However, the introduction of sticky policies affects the rule designer's value when it
chooses to pool. In particular, choosing c equal to the lowest value consistent with the
optimizing type's incentive compatibility constraint induces the optimizing type to pool
in the current period, but it may induce separation in future periods if the rules cannot be
adjusted. Thus the rule designer may want to choose an even more lenient policy, which
implies that (12) is slack, to ensure pooling next period in the event that the rule cannot
be adjusted. However, this trade-off vanishes in the limit for   [0,  ] as the horizon
goes to infinity since

                           lim K              K
                               ico,t () = lim ico,t+1 () = CK ,
                           K               K

where CK is defined in (10). Thus the minimal rule that ensures pooling is constant over
time. This observation implies that Proposition 2 holds with sticky policies ( < 1).
   Note that the ability to change the rule only with some probability does not help the
rule designer to solve the underlying time inconsistency problem. This is because the
optimal sequence of rules from a time zero perspective are time and state varying. In fact,
as we showed in the previous section, the date zero rule designer would choose different
rules for period zero and one. The stickiness here limits only the ability to change rules
over time.




                                             23
4     Transparency of rules
We now study the implications of our theory for the optimal degree of transparency of
the rule. Should the rule be designed so that a deviation by the policy maker is easily de-
tectable? In other words, we ask if perfect monitoring is always desirable. Conventional
wisdom suggests that for a typical repeated policy game with no reputational considera-
tions, perfect monitoring is always desirable. In contrast, we show that with reputational
considerations, perfect monitoring is desirable only for low levels of reputation, while
imperfect monitoring is desirable for high levels of reputation.


4.1   Optimal degree of monitoring
We first consider the case in which the rule designer can control the degree to which the
private agents and future rule designers can monitor the policies chosen by the policy
maker. In particular, suppose the private agents cannot directly observe the policy , but
they can only observe a signal    ~ =  + , where   N 0, 2        . The rule designer can
choose the standard deviation of the noise,  , as part of the optimal design of the rule.
We interpret a choice of large noise as standing in for complicated rules whose deviations
are hard to detect for the private agents. We say that a rule is transparent if  = 0 and
opaque if  > 0.
   For a given  , the law of motion for beliefs is

                              Pr (  ~ |c )                    g (   ~ - c )
       (~ , ) =                                     =                                ,   (13)
                     Pr (~ |c ) + (1 - ) Pr (~ |o )   g (~ - c ) + (1 - ) g (~ - o )

where g is the PDF of a Normal distribution with mean zero and variance 2
                                                                         . We can then
write the rule designer's problem for the twice repeated economy as
                                         ^
                    max  w (x, c ) +       W0  (c + , ) g () d                           (14)
                x,c ,o ,
                                                ^
                           + (1 - ) w (x, o ) +  W0  (o + , ) g () d


subject to the implementability condition, x = c + (1 - ) o , the incentive compatibil-
ity constraint for the optimizing type,
                ^                                              ^
w (x, o ) + o       V0  (o + , ) g () d          w (x, ) + o       V0  ( + , ) g () d ,
                                                                                        (15)
and the law of motion for beliefs (13). Note that the values in the final period, W0 and V0 ,
are the static values and are not affected by  .


                                                24
   The next proposition establishes that for low levels of reputation it is optimal to have
perfectly transparent rules ( = 0), while for higher values of reputation it is optimal to
have opaque rules:

Proposition 5. Under Assumptions 1­4:

  1. For  close to zero there is pooling and signals are perfectly informative,  = 0.

  2. For  close to one there is separation and signals are not perfectly informative,  > 0.

    Consider first low levels of reputation. From Proposition 1, we know that if signals
are perfectly informative, it is optimal to be in the pooling regime so o = c . Conditional
on pooling, it is preferable to choose  = 0 to relax the incentive constraint (15). In fact,
without noise, (15) reduces to

                      w (x, o ) + o V0 ()      w (x, ) + o V0 (0)                             (16)

and so the spread in continuation values [V0 () - V0 (0)] provides the maximal incentives
to the optimizing type. To see this, first note that for any  > 0
                            ^
                                V0  ( + , ) g () d > V0 (0)

so the right side of (15) is the lowest at  = 0. Second, by concavity of V0 we have that
                                     ^
                           V0 () >       V0  (o + , ) g () d

           ´
since  =  (o + , ) g () d, so the left side of (15) is the highest at  = 0. Thus,
since we know that for low levels of reputation pooling is preferable to separating we
have that the optimal rule has pooling and it is perfectly transparent.
    Consider now high levels of reputation. Suppose by way of contradiction that it is
optimal to be in the separating regime (o = c ) with perfectly informative signals,  =
0. Since types are perfectly revealed at the end of the first period we have that   {0, 1}
and the only incentive-compatible policy for the optimizing type is o =  (x). Note
that we can support the same policies by choosing  = . This alternative rule has the
same static payoff but prevents learning about the regulator's type and therefore  = 
because the signal  ~ is totally uninformative. This increases the expected continuation
value because uncertainty is beneficial, W () > W (1) + (1 - ) W (0). Thus, the rule
designer's payoff is strictly higher and therefore it cannot be that  = 0. In principle, it
may be optimal to choose an intermediate value for the noise  to induce the optimizing
type to do something better than the static best response.

                                              25
4.2   Optimal tenure
The results in Proposition 5 are also informative about the optimal tenure of the policy
maker. In fact, an alternative instrument for the rule designer to separate the static policy
choice from the evolution of the reputation of the policy maker in subsequent periods
is to terminate the current policy maker's tenure after one period. This is equivalent
to choosing a perfectly opaque rule with  = . Thus early termination (one-period
tenure) is optimal when the reputation of a new policy maker is sufficiently high.
    Consider the twice repeated environment. To obtain a tighter characterization we
prove our result for the Barro-Gordon model. Suppose that in the first period the rule
designer can choose a regulation c and whether to terminate the policy maker's tenure
after one period. The prior that a new policy maker is the commitment type is  and is
constant in both periods. We assume that the termination choice cannot be made contin-
gent on the outcome at the end of the period. It is clear that the rule designer's problem
is the same as the one in (14) with the additional restriction that   {0, }.

Proposition 6. In the Barro-Gordon model, there exists  < 1 such that:

  1. For       it is optimal to pool and not terminate the policy maker's tenure after one period.

  2. For       it is optimal to separate and terminate the policy maker's tenure after one period.

    Consider first the case in which pooling has static benefits,  () 0. As shown in
Figure 2, this is true for   [0,  ], where  is defined as  ( ) = 0. In this case, the
rule designer does not want to terminate the policy maker's tenure, as it would tighten
the incentive compatibility constraint without changing the continuation value. Thus in
this region it is optimal to not terminate the policy maker's tenure.
    Consider next the case in which there are static losses of pooling in that  () < 0.
This is true for levels of reputation above the cutoff  . For these levels of reputation,
if the rule designer keeps the same policy maker in office, the rule designer must trade
off the static losses of pooling against their dynamic benefits. However, when the rule
designer terminates the policy maker's tenure after one period, it can achieve both the
static benefits associated with separation and the dynamic benefits associated with pool-
ing. This is because replacing the policy maker after one period prevents learning and
does not require the commitment type to implement a lenient policy in order to do so.


4.3   Stochastic rules
An alternative way of introducing opacity in rules is to allow the rule designer to choose
stochastic rules even though fundamentals are deterministic. The rule designer can now
choose a rule that consists of a set of policies, c , and a probability distribution over

                                               26
these policies, c . We can interpret this as introducing clauses that allow policies to be
conditioned on irrelevant details. The commitment type will then draw a policy from this
distribution. The optimizing type can also randomize across policies. We will denote its
strategy as o .
    The rule designer's problem is then
                      ^
              max         w (x, ) + W0  (, )          [c () + (1 - ) o ()] d             (17)
             x,o ,c


subject to c , o   ([, ¯ ]), the implementability condition,
                                  ^
                          x=           [c () + (1 - ) o ()] d ,                          (18)

the incentive compatibility constraint for the optimizing type,   Suppo , ~  Suppo 
Suppc  { (x)}



                    w (x, ) + V0  (, )            w (x, ~ ) + V0  (~ , ) ,               (19)

and the evolution of beliefs,

                                               c ()
                              (, ) =                         .                           (20)
                                          c () + (1 - ) o ()

   We say that a rule is stochastic if the support of c contains more than one element,
while a rule is deterministic if the support of c is a singleton. Similar to Proposition 5, we
show that if the policy maker's reputation is high enough then recommending stochastic
rules is optimal, while if its reputation is sufficiently close to zero then it is optimal to
have deterministic rules that provide strong incentives for the optimizing type.

Proposition 7. Suppose Assumptions 1­4 hold:

  1. For  close to one it is optimal to have stochastic rules.

  2. For  close to zero a deterministic rule is optimal and, in particular, c = ico () with
     probability one.

   Consider first the case in which the reputation is close to one. The optimality of
stochastic rules follows from the properties of Bayes' rule and continuation values be-
ing increasing in the prior and does not rely on uncertainty being beneficial. To establish
the result, suppose by way of contradiction that it is optimal to choose a rule that rec-
ommends policy  with probability one. This is the best deterministic rule, as shown in
Proposition 1. Consider a perturbation in which the rule puts a small but positive prob-
ability, , on the static best response. When  is close to one, on observing the static best

                                                27
response, the agents attribute this to the perturbation of the commitment type rather than
the optimizing type. Consequently, the posterior that the policy maker is the commitment
type rises sharply, which increases the expected continuation value of the perturbation
and more than compensates the static losses.10
    The case with reputation close to zero instead relies on uncertainty being beneficial.
The argument here mirrors the one provided to show that randomization by the opti-
mizing type is not optimal. The idea here is that randomization tightens the optimizing
type's incentive constraint, which results in a more lenient expected policy. This in turn
lowers the static payoff in addition to the dynamic losses that arise because uncertainty
is beneficial.
    The message of this section is that when reputation is low, rules should be transparent
and easily interpretable so that deviations are easily detectable. This is because provid-
ing incentives to the optimizing type is critical, as in Atkeson et al. (2007). In contrast,
when reputation is high, rules should be opaque and hard to interpret. This is because
the benefits of maintaining uncertainty about the policy maker's type outweigh the costs
associated with looser incentives to the optimizing type. This can account for why coun-
tries with low credibility adopt policies like fixed exchange rates or crawling pegs, while
countries with high credibility are more likely to have discretionary exchange rate poli-
cies.


5    Signaling game and payoff types
In this section, we contrast our characterization of the optimal rule in Section 3 with two
alternatives. First, we consider a signaling game in which the rule is chosen by the policy
maker (which knows its type) instead of the rule designer, which is uncertain about the
type of the policy maker. Second, we consider a model where the two types of policy mak-
ers differ in their preferences. In particular, policy makers can differ in their temptation
to deviate ex-post because certain policy makers can better resist pressure from interest
groups ex-post or have different preferences over outcomes than the social welfare func-
tion, as in the seminal Rogoff (1985) paper. We show that in both cases the equilibrium
outcome has separation for all levels of reputation (under a reasonable refinement), in
contrast with our main result that it is optimal to pool for low levels of reputation.
  10 Note that forcing the commitment type to randomize reduces the variance of the posterior. In fact, un-

der the deterministic rule with separation, the posterior is one with probability  and zero with probability
1 - . Under our perturbation, the posterior is one with probability  (1 - ) and / [ + (1 - )] with
probability  + (1 - ).




                                                    28
5.1   Comparison to a signaling game
We now consider a signaling game in which the rule is chosen by the policy maker (which
knows its type) instead of the rule designer, which is uncertain about the type of the policy
maker. If the rules are chosen by the policy makers, the commitment type (if sufficiently
patient) will choose a rule that induces separation for all levels of reputation. In particular,
it will prefer to separate for low levels of reputation even though the rule designer strictly
prefers to pool. This result mirrors the one in Dovis and Kirpalani (2019a).

Proposition 8. Under Assumptions 1 and 3, the outcome of the signaling game is such that the
commitment and optimizing types follow different policies if either i)  is sufficiently high or ii)
 is sufficiently small and o = c  ,      ¯ . Thus, in both cases there is separation after one
period.

    The main idea here is that there are no dynamic gains for the commitment type of pre-
serving uncertainty. The continuation value for the commitment type is always larger in a
separating equilibrium as compared with pooling, as it can achieve the Ramsey outcome
since the private agents know that they are facing the commitment type. However, there
may still be static benefits of pooling when reputation is sufficiently low, as we saw in
Section 3.2. But if the discount factor is sufficiently high ( > ), the dynamic benefits
outweigh the static losses. Note that for this to be an equilibrium we also need the op-
timizing type to strictly prefer to separate, which requires the discount factor to be low
enough ( < ). We show that  < , since the optimizing type has additional static ben-
efits of separating owing to the fact that it can choose its policy after the private agents
have chosen their action.


5.2   Payoff types
So far, we have modeled the commitment type as a policy maker that cannot deviate from
the rule. An alternative to modeling the uncertainty about the policy maker's ability to
follow the rule is to assume that the two types of policy makers differ in their preferences.
In particular, the policy makers can differ in their temptation to deviate ex-post because
certain policy makers can better resist pressure from interest groups ex-post or have dif-
ferent preferences over outcomes than the social welfare function, as in the seminal Rogoff
(1985) paper.
    We next show that with preference types and a reasonable equilibrium refinement,
we have different outcomes than in our benchmark case. In particular, the equilibrium
coincides with the outcome of the signaling game and there is separation for all levels of
initial reputation.


                                                29
   We make our point in the context of the bailout example. Recall that the social welfare
function is

               w (x, ; ) = -v (x) + p (x) RH -  (1 - p (x)) (1 - ) - c () ,

where x is the banker's effort given by  (E) for some  with  < 0,  > 0, p (x)
is the probability that the investment succeeds, and  (1 - p (x)) (1 - ) is the default
cost that can be mitigated by transfers . The parameter  controls the degree of time
inconsistency: if  = 0 then the Ramsey outcome is sustainable because there are no
benefits of deviating from the optimal plan ex-post. In contrast, if  is large then there is
a much larger temptation to deviate ex-post.
    Suppose now that there are two types of policy makers, each associated with a differ-
ent value of . The high cost type has  = H > 0, and the low cost type has  = L = 0.
The low cost type then has no incentive to deviate ex-post and thus represents the com-
mitment type in our baseline model. It also corresponds to the "conservative central
banker" in Rogoff (1985) since if the private agents know they are facing the low cost
type with probability one then the Ramsey outcome can be implemented. To keep the
symmetry with the previous analyses, we assume that the social welfare function used
by the rule designer to evaluate outcomes is w (x, ; H ).
    Consider the twice-repeated problem. The characterization in the terminal period
does not change relative to the case analyzed previously. Thus, the value for the rule
designer is W0 (), where  is the prior of facing the low cost type, the value for the
high cost type is V0 (; H ) = V0 (), and the value for the low cost type is V0 (; 0) =
w (x0 () ,  = 0).
    Consider now the rule designer's problem in the first period. The difference with
problem (8) is that we have to add an incentive compatibility constraint for the low cost
type,
              w (x, r ; 0) + o V0 c ; 0   w (x, ; 0) + o V0  () ; 0       ,

where  () is the posterior after observing policy  and the low cost type's discount
factor is o . Since w (x, ; 0) = 0 for all (x, ) then we can rewrite the constraint above as
o V0 (c ; 0) o V0 ( () ; 0) or, since V0 (; 0) is strictly increasing in , as

                                  c =  (r )          ( )   .                                (21)

    The incentive compatibility constraint for the low type, (21), is satisfied in the sepa-
ration regime as c = 1 so the rule designer can attain the same value. We now turn to
analyze whether the pooling regime is feasible. The answer to this question depends on
the specification of off-path beliefs. Clearly, it is possible to specify the off-path beliefs as

                                               30
follows                                    
                                                  if  = r
                                   ( ) =                    .                            (22)
                                           0      if  = r

This choice is consistent with Bayes' rule on-path, trivially satisfies (21), and so supports
the pooling outcome described above. An unappealing feature of (22) is that implement-
ing more stringent policies ex-post reduces the policy maker's reputation. If we restrict
to specifying beliefs such that  () is strictly decreasing in  then pooling is not feasible
and the separating regime is the only solution for all levels of reputation. The restriction
is intuitive as it imposes that if the deviation is relatively more advantageous for the low
cost type then the posterior rises after enforcement.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we study the optimal design of rules in a dynamic model when there is a
time inconsistency problem and uncertainty about whether the policy maker can commit
to follow the rule ex-post. We show that in a large class of economies preserving uncer-
tainty about the policy maker's type is preferable from an ex-ante perspective. Therefore,
learning the type of the policy maker can be costly. When reputation is low, we show that
reputational considerations imply that the optimal rule is more lenient than the one that
would arise in a static environment. For example, in the context of financial regulation,
on-path bailouts are necessary to discipline future risk taking by financial institutions.
Moreover, opaque rules are preferable to transparent ones when reputation is high.
    In our analysis we abstract from the question on the optimal degree flexibility when
the policy maker has private information about the state of the economy considered by
the delegation literature. See for instance Athey et al. (2005), Amador et al. (2006), and
Halac and Yared (2014). In our economy with no fundamental uncertainty, if the policy
maker follows the rule for sure, it is trivially optimal to leave no flexibility and by doing
so implement the Ramsey outcome. An interesting avenue for future work is to study
how the incentives to build reputation considered in this paper interact with the choice
of how much flexibility to leave to the policy maker.


References
A MADOR , M. AND C. P HELAN (2018): "Reputation and Sovereign Default," Tech. rep.,
  National Bureau of Economic Research. 6




                                             31
A MADOR , M., I. W ERNING , AND G.-M. A NGELETOS (2006): "Commitment vs. flexibil-
  ity," Econometrica, 74, 365­396. 31

A NGELETOS , G.-M., C. H ELLWIG , AND A. PAVAN (2006): "Signaling in a global game:
  Coordination and policy traps," Journal of Political economy, 114, 452­484. 7

A SRIYAN , V., D. F OARTA , V. VANASCO , ET AL . (2019): "The good, the bad and the com-
  plex: Product design with imperfect information," Tech. rep. 7

ATHEY, S., A. ATKESON , AND P. J. K EHOE (2005): "The optimal degree of discretion in
 monetary policy," Econometrica, 73, 1431­1475. 6, 31

ATKESON , A., V. V. C HARI , AND P. J. K EHOE (2007): "On the optimal choice of a mone-
 tary policy instrument," . 5, 28

ATKESON , A. AND P. J. K EHOE (2001): "The advantage of transparent instruments of
 monetary policy," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 5

A ZZIMONTI , M., M. B ATTAGLINI , AND S. C OATE (2016): "The costs and benefits of bal-
  anced budget rules: Lessons from a political economy model of fiscal policy," Journal of
  Public Economics, 136, 45­61. 6

B ACKUS , D. AND J. D RIFFILL (1985): "Inflation and reputation," American economic review,
  75, 530­538. 6

B ARRO , R. J. (1986): "Reputation in a model of monetary policy with incomplete infor-
  mation," Journal of Monetary Economics, 17, 3­20. 3, 6

B ARRO , R. J. AND D. B. G ORDON (1983a): "A positive theory of monetary policy in a
  natural rate model," Journal of political economy, 91, 589­610. 7, 9

------ (1983b): "Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary policy," Journal
  of monetary economics, 12, 101­121. 3, 6

B OND , P. AND Y. Z ENG (2018): "Silence is Safest: Non-Disclosure When the Audience's
  Preferences are Uncertain," Available at SSRN 3124106. 7

C HARI , V. V. AND P. J. K EHOE (1990): "Sustainable plans," Journal of political economy, 98,
  783­802. 6, 7

C OLE , H. L., J. D OW, AND W. B. E NGLISH (1995): "Default, settlement, and signalling:
  Lending resumption in a reputational model of sovereign debt," International Economic
  Review, 365­385. 7


                                             32
C RÉMER , J. (1995): "Arm's length relationships," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110,
  275­295. 5

D EBORTOLI , D. AND R. N UNES (2010): "Fiscal policy under loose commitment," Journal
  of Economic Theory, 145, 1005­1032. 7

D OVIS , A. AND R. K IRPALANI (2019a): "Fiscal rules, bailouts, and reputation in federal
  governments," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 6, 7, 29

------ (2019b): "Reputation, Bailouts, and Interest Rate Spread Dynamics," . 6

H ALAC , M. AND P. YARED (2014): "Fiscal rules and discretion under persistent shocks,"
  Econometrica, 82, 1557­1614. 6, 31

------ (2017): "Fiscal Rules and Discretion in a World Economy," . 6

------ (2018): "Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Self-Enforcement," . 6

K AREKEN , J. H. AND N. WALLACE (1978): "Deposit insurance and bank regulation: A
  partial-equilibrium exposition," Journal of Business, 413­438. 3, 7, 9

K ING , R. G., Y. K. L U , AND E. S. PASTEN (2008): "Managing expectations," Journal of
   Money, Credit and banking, 40, 1625­1666. 7

K REPS , D. M. AND R. W ILSON (1982): "Reputation and imperfect information," Journal
  of economic theory, 27, 253­279. 6

K YDLAND , F. E. AND E. C. P RESCOTT (1977): "Rules rather than discretion: The incon-
  sistency of optimal plans," Journal of political economy, 85, 473­491. 2

L U , Y. K. (2013): "Optimal policy with credibility concerns," Journal of Economic Theory,
  148, 2007­2032. 7

L U , Y. K., R. G. K ING , AND E. PASTEN (2016): "Optimal reputation building in the New
  Keynesian model," Journal of Monetary Economics, 84, 233­249. 7

M ARINOVIC , I.   AND   M. S ZYDLOWSKI (2019): "Monitor Reputation and Transparency," .
 7

M ILGROM , P. AND J. R OBERTS (1982): "Predation, reputation, and entry deterrence," Jour-
 nal of economic theory, 27, 280­312. 6

N OSAL , J. B. AND G. O RDOÑEZ (2016): "Uncertainty as commitment," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 80, 124­140. 3


                                            33
P HELAN , C. (2006): "Public trust and government betrayal," Journal of Economic Theory,
  130, 27­43. 6

P HELAN , C. AND E. S TACCHETTI (2001): "Sequential equilibria in a Ramsey tax model,"
  Econometrica, 69, 1491­1518. 6

P IGUILLEM , F. AND A. R IBONI (2018): "Fiscal Rules as Bargaining Chips," Tech. rep. 6

P IGUILLEM , F. AND A. S CHNEIDER (2013): "Coordination, Efficiency and Policy Discre-
   tion," Tech. rep., Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance (EIEF). 5

P RAT, A. (2005): "The Wrong Kind of Transparency," The American Economic Review, 95,
   862­877. 5

R OGOFF , K. (1985): "The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary
  target," The quarterly journal of economics, 100, 1169­1189. 6, 28, 29, 30

S ANKTJOHANSER , A. (2018): "Optimally Stubborn," Tech. rep., working paper. 7

V ICKERS , J. (1986): "Signalling in a model of monetary policy with incomplete informa-
   tion," Oxford Economic Papers, 38, 443­455. 7




                                           34
Appendix (Not for publication)

A     Omitted proofs

A.1    Proof of Lemma 1
Here we provide the proof for the case in which wx < 0. The case with wx > 0 follows
from a symmetric argument.
   Suppose first that c () =  for all . We first prove a preliminary result.
Claim. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, if wx < 0 then  (x) is increasing and convex and
x () is decreasing and convex.

Proof. The optimizing type's static best response,  (x), is implicitly defined by the first
order condition:
                                    w (x,  (x)) = 0                                   (23)

so by the implicit function theorem we have

                                          wx (x,  (x))
                              x (x) = -                >0                              (24)
                                          w (x,  (x))

where the inequality follows from wx > 0 and w < 0.
  Implicitly differentiating (23) twice we have

                                        2
                       w (x,  (x))                             
                                   x (x) + 2wx x (x) + wxx (x,  (x))
            xx (x) =
                                     (-w (x,  (x)))

Thus, in order for  (x) to be convex we need

                                2
               w (x,  (x))                             
                           x (x) + 2wx x (x) + wxx (x,  (x))             0.

Notice that the expression above can be equivalently written as

                                                     x (x)
                              [           2
                               x (x) , 1]  w (x, )
                                                      1

which is positive since w (x, ) is convex by Assumption 2. Hence  (x) is increasing
and convex.
   Consider now
                            x () =  (c + (1 - ) o ())                          (25)




                                            35
where o () =  (x ()). So

                                         [ c - o ]
                          x () =                          <0                          (26)
                                   [1 -  (1 - ) x (x ())]

which is negative since o  and 1 -  (1 - )       x (x)  0, where the latter follows from
condition 3 of Assumption 2. Twice differentiating the implementability condition (25)
we obtain

                                         2
      x ( ) =    c - o + (1 - ) o ()         +  -o () + (1 - ) o () - o ()            (27)
                                         2
          =      c - o + (1 - ) o ()         +  (1 - ) o () - 2x (x) x ()


and since o () =  (x ()) then

                                            2
                          o () =               
                                 xx (x) x () + x (x) x ()                             (28)

Therefore, using (28) to substitute for o () in (27), we obtain

             [c - o + (1 - ) o ()]2 +  (1 - )            2    
                                              xx (x) x () - 2 x (x) x ()
  x ( ) =
                                       [1 -  (1 - ) x (x)]
                                                                                      (29)

Thus x      0 follows from Assumption 1,         0,        0,                
                                                              x (x) > 0, and xx (x)     0,
where the last two inequalities were proved earlier.

   We now turn the proof of the lemma. Define

                                    ¯ (x) = w (x, c )
                                    w

                                   w (x) = w (x,  (x))

and
                                    ¯ (x ()) + (1 - ) w (x ())
                       F (, x ()) = w

and so W0 () = F (, x ()). We want to show that W0 () is concave. We have,

                                                    1                  0
            W0 () = 1, x () 2 F (, x ())                + F (, x ())                  (30)
                                                  x ( )              x ()
                    = 2Fx x () + Fxx x ()2 + Fx (, x ()) x ()

Thus to prove the result it is sufficient to show that the above expression is negative.
We proceed in several steps. First we show that Fxx x ()2 < 0 and then we show that

                                             36
2Fx x () + Fx (, x ()) x () 0.
  To see that Fxx x ()2 < 0, note that

                         Fx = wx (x, c ) + (1 - ) wx (x, o ) < 0                         (31)

since wx > 0, and so

                    ¯ xx (x ()) + (1 - ) w
              Fxx = w                     xx (x ())                                      (32)
                  = wxx (x, c ) + (1 - ) [wxx (x, o (x)) + wx (x, ) x (x)]


The first term in (32) is negative since wxx < 0. For the second, note that from (24), we
have that
                                               wx (x, o )
                                     x (x) = -                                        (33)
                                               w (x, o )
Therefore, using (33) we can write the second term in (32) as

                                           wxx (x, o ) w (x, o ) - wx (x, o )2
        wxx (x, o ) + wx (x, o ) x (x)   =                                     <0
                                                        w (x, o )

where the inequality follows from w being concave in (x, ). Therefore, both terms in (32)
are negative and so Fxx x ()2 < 0.
   Now note that we can write Fx as

        ¯ x (x ()) - w
   Fx = w                                                                 
                      x (x ()) = wx (x, c ) - [wx (x,  (x)) + w (x,  (x)) x (x)]         (34)
       = wx (x, c ) - wx (x,  (x)) < 0

Then from (30) it follows that

 W0 () =2Fx x () + Fxx x ()2 + Fx (, x ()) x ()
         <2Fx x () + Fx (, x ()) x ()
         =2 [wx (x, c ) - wx (x,  (x))] x () + [wx (x, c ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))] x ()

where the first inequality follows from the fact that Fxx x ()2 < 0 and the second equality
follows from (34) and (31). A sufficient condition for the concavity of W0 is then

    2 [wx (x, c ) - wx (x,  (x))] x () + [wx (x, c ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))] x ()     0

or, rearranging terms,

                       2 [wx (x,  (x)) - wx (x, c )]             x ()
                                                             -        .                  (35)
                    - [wx (x, c ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))]         x ()

                                             37
Using the expressions for x () and x () in (26) and (29) we have



   x ( )    [c - o + (1 - ) o ()]2 +  (1 - )               2    
                                                xx (x) x () - 2 x (x) x ()
 -       =
   x ( )                              [ o - c ]
                 
           -2 x (x)
                      x ()
            [o - c ]
                 2     x (x)
         =
           [1 -  (1 - )    x (x ())]

where the first inequality follows from the fact that  > 0,  > 0,       xx > 0 and the
denominator is positive, and the last equality follows from using (26) to substitute for
x (). Hence a sufficient condition for (35) is

                 2 [wx (x,  (x)) - wx (x, c )]               2 x (x) 
              - [wx (x, c ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))]     [ 1 -  ( 1 -  ) x (x)]

or, rearranging terms,
                                        wx (x,  (x))
                             x (x)  +                     1.
                                         wx (x, c )
Notice that

                         wx (x,  (x))                     wx (x,  (x))
              x (x)  +                   x (x)  () +                       1
                          wx (x, c )                       wx (x, )

where we have used the fact that  (x) ,  () are convex, w (x, ) is concave, and the last
inequality follows from condition 3 of Assumption 2. Thus W0 () < 0.
   As a final step we will show that our assumptions imply that c is independent of 
and in particular equals . The first order condition of the static government's problem
wrt c is

                                                                 (·)
         w (x, ) + [wx (x, ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))]
                                                        [1 -  (·) (1 - ) x (x)]

Since by assumption

                                                               ( ·)
       w (x, ) + [wx (x, ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))]                                 0
                                                     [1 -  (·) (1 - ) x (x)]

it must be that c = . Q.E.D.
    We next show that the two examples satisfy Assumption 2.

Lemma 2. The Barro-Gordon economy satisfies Assumption 2.


                                          38
   Proof. Recall that
                                           1
                               w (x, ) -     ( + x - )2 + 2
                                           2
Thus,
                                        wxx = -1 < 0

                                        w = -2 < 0

and
                                   wxx w - wx = 1 > 0

Therefore the Hessian of w (x, ) is negative semi-definite and thus w (x, ) is concave.
Next, note that wa = 0, w = 0 and waa = 0 and so w is convex.
   Next, since
                                             x+
                                      (x) =
                                                2
we have
                                                   1
                                     x (x)  () =
                                                   2
Therefore
                                         1        wx (x,  (x))   1
                     1 >  x ( x)  ( )
                                      =      1 -               =
                                         2         wx (x, )      2
and so condition 3 is satisfied. Finally, using a little algebra condition 4 is

                                                2
                                        -2 +      c
                                               1+

which is strictly less than zero for any c positive. Thus, it must be c = 0. Q.E.D.

Lemma 3. If  is sufficiently small, then bailout economy satisfies Assumption 2.

   Proof. Recall that

                 w (e, ) = -v (e) + p (e) RH - (1 - p (e)) (1 - )  - c ()

and thus  (e) is the solution to

                                   (1 - p (e))  - c () = 0

Let's first show that w (e, ) is concave. We have

                           we = -v (e) + p (e) (RH + (1 - ) )

                        wee = -v (e) + p (e) (RH + (1 - ) ) < 0


                                               39
                                      we = -p (e)  > 0

                                    w = (1 - p (e))  - c ()

                                       w = -c ()        0

So

                 wee w - w2
                          e                                                        (36)
               = -v (e) + p (e) (RH + (1 - ) )           -c () - p (e)2 2

The first term is positive since v > 0, p < 0, and c > 0 but -p (e)2 2 is negative.
Clearly, the whole expression is positive if  is small enough. Thus the Hessian of w is
negative semi-definite which implies that w is concave.
   Next, we show that w (e, ) is convex. We have

                              w (e, ) = (1 - p (e))  - c ()

Therefore
                                        we = -p (e) 

                                      wee = -p (e)  > 0

                                           we = 0

                                      w = -c () = 0

since c (e) is quadratic and so c    = 0. Therefore

                      wee w - w2
                               e = -p (e)                   -c (e) = 0

Thus the Hessian of w is positive semi-definite and so w is convex.
   We now check that condition 3 is satisfied. We have to show that the following two
conditions hold:

                                          1 > x (x)  ()
                                                    wx (x,  (x))
                              x (x)  ()       1-
                                                     wx (x, )

Notice that
                                                   p (e) 
                            x (x)  () =        -              ( )
                                                    c ( )




                                              40
and

             wx (x,  (x))      -v (e) + p (e) RH + p (e) (1 -  (e)) 
        1-                = 1-                                       =  ( e ) .
              wx (x, )              -v (e) + p (e) RH + p (e) 

Thus, the two conditions can be written as

                                             p (e) 
                                   1>    -             ( )                                 (37)
                                              c ( )

and
                                      p (e) 
                                  -             ( )        ( e ) .                         (38)
                                       c ( )
Under our functional form assumptions,

                                          p (e) = e

                                         c () = 2 /2

                                         v (e) = e2 /2,

we have that
                    e =  () =  (RH - ) ,              1/ (2 - )  (0, 1)

so

                 p (e)              -e-1  
             -              () =          (RH - )-1
                  c ( )               
                                                          -1
                                   - ( (RH - ) )      
                                 =                     - (RH - )-1
                                            
                                    1 +      1       
                                 =              1 - 
                                   2 -  (RH - )      

and since e =  RH we have that


                                 1 - p  R                 
                           (e) =         H
                                            = [1 - (RH ) ] .
                                                          

By inspection, the first inequality, (37), is satisfied if  is sufficiently small while the sec-
ond inequality, (38), is satisfied if RH is sufficiently large. In fact, as RH  1/, p (e)  1
                           (e)
so  (e)  0 while - p      c ()   > 0.
                                     ( )




                                               41
   Finally, we check that condition 4 holds. We have

                                                          ( ·)
 w (e, ) + [we (e, ) + (1 - ) we (e,  (e))]
                                                 [1 -  (·) (1 - ) e (e)]
= (1 - p (e))  - c ()
                                                                            ( ·)
  + p (e) [ + (1 - ) ] + (1 - ) [o (e) + (1 -  (e)) ]
                                                                                   (e)
                                                               1 -  (·) (1 - ) - p
                                                                                 c ()


which is negative if  is sufficiently small since c > 0, we    0,      0, and 1 -  e      0.
Q.E.D.


A.2    Optimizing type does not randomize
We now show that under our assumptions it is without loss of generality to consider the
case in which the optimizing type either follows the rule with probability one or chooses
its best response and deviates from the rule with probability one.
    To see this, let's allow the allow the optimizing type to randomize. The value the rule
designer can attain by inducing the optimizing type to follow the rule with probability 
starting with a prior  is



        Wpool (, ) = [ + (1 - ) ] w (xico (, ) , ico (, )) + W0  (, )
                     + (1 - ) (1 - ) [w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + W0 (0)]

where the evolution of the prior is given by

                                                    
                                  (, ) =
                                                + (1 - ) 

and (xico (, ) , ico (, )) solves

         xico (, ) =  ([ + (1 - ) ] ico (, ) + (1 - ) (1 - )  (xico (, )))

and

   w (xico (, ) , ico (, )) + V0  (, ) = w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + V0 (0)

That is, ico (, ) is the most stringent policy that is incentive compatible for the optimiz-
ing type given  and .
   We next show that it is optimal to choose  = 1. We will use the following intermediate


                                            42
result:

Lemma 4. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, V0 () is concave.

   Proof. We prove this for the case with wx < 0. The proof for the other case is identical.
Recall that
                               V0 () = w (x () ,  (x ()))

Then

                            V0 () = wx x () + w x (x) x ()

                                   = wx x ()

where we used that w (x,  (x)) = 0. Then

                                        2
               V () = (wxx + wx x ) x () + wx x ()

                           wxx w (x,  ) - wx (x,  )2
                      =                                   x ()2 + wx x ()
                                  w (x, o )
                      <0

where the second line follows from using (24) to substitute for x and the last inequality
follows from Assumption 2 and x ()       0 where the latter property was established in
the proof of Lemma 1. Q.E.D.

Lemma 5. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for all  and , Wpool (1, )      Wpool (, ).

    Proof. Consider  < 1. Consider a deviation in which the optimizing type chooses the
following policy

              dev = [ + (1 - ) ] ico (, ) + (1 - ) (1 - )  (xico (, ))

with probability one and c = dev . Note that this policy is just the expected value of the
policies followed by the optimizing type when there is randomization. Therefore, under
this deviation, xico (, ) is unaffected. Since w is concave in  and W0 is concave in ,
this policy improves welfare:

Wpool (, ) = [ + (1 - ) ] w (xico (, ) , ico (, )) + (1 - ) (1 - ) w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, )))
            + [ + (1 - ) ] W0  (, ) + (1 - ) (1 - ) W0 (0)
               w (xico (, ) , [ + (1 - ) ] ico (, ) + (1 - ) (1 - )  (xico (, ))) + W0 ()
            = w (xico (, ) , dev ) + W0 ()


                                            43
We are left to show that this deviation is feasible for the rule designer in that it satisfies
the incentive compatibility constraint for the optimizing type:

         w (xico (, ) , dev ) + V0 ()       w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + V0 (0)

Note that at the original allocation it must be that

 w (xico (, ) , ico (, )) + V0  (, )            w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + V0 (0) (39)

and trivially

  w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + V0 (0)       w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + V0 (0) . (40)

Multiplying the left and right side of (39) by [ + (1 - ) ], the left and right side of (40)
by (1 - ) (1 - ), and summing up the two resulting equations yields

w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + V0 (0)       [ + (1 - ) ] w (xico (, ) , ico (, )) + V0  (, )
                                         + (1 - ) (1 - ) [w (xico (, ) ,  (xico (, ))) + V0 (0)]
                                            w (xico (, ) , dev ) + V0 ()

where the second inequality follows from concavity of w in  and V0 in . Thus the
proposed deviation is incentive compatible and it increases welfare. Moreover, since

                        Wpool (1, ) = max w ( (c ) , c ) + W0 ()
                                        c


subject to
                w ( (c ) , c ) + V0 ()      w ( (c ) ,  ( (c ))) + V0 (0)

and since dev is feasible for this problem we have

                Wpool (1, )    w (xico (, ) , dev ) + W0 ()      Wpool (, )

as wanted. Q.E.D.


A.3    Proof of Proposition 1
Consider first  close to 1. Since the incentive compatibility is binding, we have that for
some  > 0, for all 
                                Wramsey -  Wpool () .



                                              44
Clearly, at  = 1, Wsep (1) attains the Ramsey outcome. By continuity, there exists a 
sufficiently small such that for all   (1 -  , 1) ,

                                  Wsep ()     Wramsey - .

Combining the two expressions above we have that for all   (1 -  , 1),

                                    Wpool () < Wsep ()

as wanted.
    Consider now  close to zero and assume that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Thus by
Lemma 1 uncertainty is beneficial, W0 () > W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0), and the continua-
tion value is higher under pooling than under the separation policy. To show that it is
optimal to pool, it is sufficient to show that the static benefits of pooling are positive for
priors close to zero, i.e.  () 0 where

                         () = w ( (ico ()) , ico ()) - W0 ()

and

      W0 () = [w ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , c ) + (1 - ) w ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , o )] .

To this end, note that at  = 0 we have  (0) = 0 since ico (0) = o (0) =  ( (o (0))).
Thus it is sufficient to show that  (0) > 0. Note that

W0 () = w ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , c ) - w ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , o )
       + [wx ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , c ) + (1 - ) wx ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , c )]  (c + (1 - ) o )
       × c - o + (1 - ) o ()

where we used that w ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , o ) = 0. Therefore,

   (0) = wx ( (ico (0)) , ico (0))  (ico (0)) + w ( (ico (0)) , ico (0)) ico (0)
           - {w ( (o (0)) , c ) - w ( (o (0)) , o (0))
           +wx ( (o (0)) , o (0))  (o (0)) c - o + o (0)
              wx ( (ico (0)) , ico (0))  (ico (0)) + w ( (ico (0)) , ico (0)) ico (0)
           - wx ( (o (0)) , o (0))  (o (0)) c - o + o (0)
           = wx ( (ico (0)) , ico (0))  (ico (0)) ico (0) - (c - o ) - o (0)




                                             45
where the first inequality follows from w ( (o (0)) , c ) - w ( (o (0)) , o (0)) < 0 and
the last equality follows from ico (0) = o (0) which implies that w ( (ico (0)) , ico (0)) =
0 . Since wx < 0 and  > 0 then it is sufficient to show that the term in square brack-
ets is negative. To this end, we next show that ico (0) = - and - (c - o ) - o (0) is
bounded.
    Let's start with proving that lim0 ico () = -. Recall that ico () is implicitly
defined by the incentive compatibility constraint

     w ( (ico ()) , ico ()) + V0 () = w ( (ico ()) ,  ( (ico ()))) + V0 (0) .

Totally differentiating and evaluating at  = 0 we have that

                       w ( (ico (0)) , ico (0)) ico (0) = -V0 (0)

where we used that ico (0) =  ( (o (0))). Since

                  w ( (ico (0)) , ico (0)) = w ( (ico (0)) , o (0)) = 0

and -W0 (0) < 0, it must be that lim0 ico () = - since w              0 in the relevant
range.
    Since - (c - o ) ¯ - , we are left to show that o (0) is bounded. Recall that o ()
is the solution to
                         w ( (c + (1 - ) o ) , o ) = 0

and so applying the implicit function theorem we have

                              wx ( (o (0)) , o (0)) x (0)
                    o ( 0) = -
                               w ( (o (0)) , o (0))
                              wx ( (o (0)) , o (0))     [c - o ]
                           =-                       ×
                              w ( (o (0)) , o (0)) [1 -     x (x)]

Using (24) and (26) we can rewrite the expression above as

                                                              [c - o ]
                     o (0) =                   
                             x (x (0)) x (0) = x (x (0))
                                                           [ 1 -  x (x)]

so
                                                   | (M ) | [¯ - ]
                    |o (0) |   |x (x (0)) |                 
                                                                    <
                                              [1 -  (M ) x ( (M ))]
since  is assumed to be bounded and 1 -         x (x) is generically not equal to zero. In par-
ticular, if the economy satisfies Assumption 2 then [1 -  (M )      x ( (M ))] > 0. Suppose
                                         
not. Then it must be that [1 -  (M ) x ( (M ))] 0 which contradicts Assumption 2

                                                46
part 3. Thus o (0) is bounded.
   The above claims imply that ico (0) - (c - o ) - o (0) < 0 so  (0) > 0 as
wanted. Q.E.D.


A.4    Proof of Proposition 1 for the Barro-Gordon example
Consider the Barro-Gordon example with

                             (c + (1 - ) o ) = c + (1 - ) o

and
                                           1
                             w (x, ) = -     ( + x - )2 + 2 .
                                           2
Therefore,
                                   w = - [- ( + x) + 2]

                                      wx = - ( + x - )

Moreover, the static best response is

                                                 ( + x)
                                         (x) =
                                                   2

Consider first the static problem:

                             1                           1
        W0 () = max -          ( + x - c )2 + 2
                                              c - (1 - )   ( + x - o )2 + 2
                                                                          o
                  c ,o ,x    2                           2

subject to
                                      x = c + (1 - ) o
                                         ( + x)
                                         o =
                                            2
Combining the two constraints we can express o and x in terms of c as

                                      + c               
                             o =            =    c +
                                     (1 + )   1+     (1 + )

and
                                         2     (1 - )
                                   x=      c +        
                                        1+     (1 + )




                                               47
Therefore, substituting into the objective function we obtain

                                                                   2
                   1             2     (1 - )
W0 () = max -               +      c +         - c                     + 2
                                                                         c
                   2            1+     (1 + )
                                                                             2                        2
                            2     (1 - )                                                       
       + ( 1 - )       +      c +        -    c -                                +      c +
                           1+     (1 + )   1+     (1 + )                             1+     (1 + )
                                                         2                                            2
                   1           2          1-                                                   
       = max -                     -              c          + 2
                                                               c + (1 - ) 2                 +     c
            c      2        (1 + )        1+                                         ( 1 + ) 1 + 

the first order condition for the above problem is

                        1-      4       1-                             1-
                0= -                 -                         2             c + 2c
                        1 +  ( 1 + )    1+                             1+
                     (1 - )           
                + 4                +    c
                     1+     (1 + ) 1 + 

which implies that
                                            c = 0

Therefore
                                                      
                                        o () =            ,
                                                  ( 1 + )
                                                 ( 1 - )
                                        x () =           
                                                 ( 1 + )
and
                                                         2
                                       W0 () = -              .
                                                      ( 1 + )
Also it is worth noting that
                                                     2
                                      W0 () = -2          <0
                                                   (1 + )
and so W0 is concave.
   Consider now the two-period problem. Let the value for the optimizing type in the
terminal period be

                                  1
                          V ( ) = -  ( + x () -  )2 + ( (x ()))2
                                  2
                                            2
                                        
                               =-
                                    ( 1 + )




                                                 48
Lets consider the pooling case first. The optimal rule solves

                                        1
                    W pool () = max -     ( + x - )2 + 2 + W0 ()
                                 ,x     2

subject to
                                             x=
         1                                    1
     -     (  + x - ) 2 + 2 +  o V (  )      - ( + x -  (x))2 +  (x)2 + o V (0)
         2                                    2
or
                                              1 2
                          W pool () = max -      + 2 + W0 ()
                                              2
subject to
                                                    2
                       1 2                                   (  + ) 2
                   -      + 2 - o                       =-            - o 2
                       2                   (1 + )               4
Thus the solution is pinned down by the last constraint. Solving for  we have
                                                                              
                                                                          2
                                                                1
                        ico () =  1 -         4o 1 -                          
                                                             (1 + )

                                                         
(Note that ico (0) =  = o (0) and ico (1) =  1 -         3o so it must be that o < 1/3.)
So the payoff from pooling is
                                                                              2          
                                                                      2
                        1                                    1                         1 
         W pool () = -2  1 + 1 -             4o 1 -                             +
                        2                                ( 1 + )                    (1 + )
                                                                                           


The value of separation is

                       W sep () = W0 () +  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                                            1        
                               = -2             + 1-
                                        ( 1 + )      2




                                              49
Let's consider

         () W pool () - W sep ()
                                                                                 2                    
                                                                             2
                      1                                               1                             1 
                 = 2 -  1 + 1 -                      4o 1 -                        +
                       2                                          ( 1 + )                       ( 1 + )
                                                                                                        

                       1           
                 +           + 1-
                   ( 1 + )         2
                             1   1                    1
                 = 2            - [1 + z ()] +  1 - -
                         ( 1 + ) 2                 2 1+

where
                                                     2
                                                 2                                                   2
                                       1                              2                     2
      z (  )  1 -     4o 1 -                          =         1-                   ( 1 + ) - 1         <1
                                    (1 + )                         ( 1 + )

and
                                                          o .

At  = 0,  (0) = 0, while at  = 1,
                                                                            2 
                                                                        2
                               1                                    1
                      (1) = 2 - 1 -                   4o 1 -                   < 0.
                                                                              
                               2                                    2


Next, let's look at the slope

                                         1     1             1    1
                  () =2         -            -   z (  ) +  -   +
                                    ( 1 + ) 2 2              2 (1 + )2

                                                                                        1       
                                                                                 2     -2
                                     1                                1
              z () = - 8o                    3
                                                  4o 1 -                                    - 1               (41)
                                (1 + )                             (1 + )

Notice that as   0, z () goes to -. Therefore the slope of  () at  = 0 is

                                             1       
                                2        -1 - z () +                
                                             2       2

so that near 0 there exists a region of pooling.




                                                     50
      In general to get pooling we need

                                               1     1
                                                 ) + 2 1 + z 
                                           - (1+       [    ( )]
                                   >
                                               1-      1
                                                  2 - 1+


Let
                                                1     1
                                                  ) + 2 1 + z 
                                            - (1+       [    ( )]
                                 F ()                                                      (42)
                                                 1-      1
                                                    2 - 1+

We know that lim0 F () = - and lim1 F () = . In fact, we have

                                                         0
                                              F ( 0) =
                                                         0

So by the L'Hôpital's rule we have

                                                  1+ 1
                                                     2 z ( 0)
                               lim F (0) = lim            1
                                                                   = -
                               0            0
                                                          2

and
                                           -1   1
                                            2 + 2 [1 + z (1)]
                                F ( 1) =         1
                                                                   =
                                                 2   -1
                                                      2

We next show that F () is monotone increasing in  so that there exists a cutoff  such
that it is optimal to pool for  <  and it is optimal to separate for  >  . To this end,
note that we can rearrange (42) as

                                           -2 + (1 + ) [1 + z ()]
                                 F () =
                                                  (1 - )

So

                  (1 - ) [(1 + ) z () + 1 + z ()] - [-2 + (1 + ) [1 + z ()]] [1 - 2]
       F ( ) =                                                                         .   (43)
                                               2 (1 - )2

The denominator is positive and so we just need to sign the numerator in order to sign
F ().
      Lets do some preliminary calculations. We have that


                                                         ( 1 + ) 2 - 1
                                   z () = 1 - 2
                                                              (1 + )




                                                  51
and so
                                     2             1-       z ()
                                          =                                                   (44)
                                  ( 1 + )                     2
                                                       ( 1 + ) - 1

Therefore, after some algebraic manipulations, we can rewrite (41) as
                                                                                    1    
                                                                               2   -2
                                     1                                1
               z () = - 8o                3
                                               4o 1 -                                   - 1   (45)
                               (1 + )                              (1 + )
                                                                                   
                                                   2
                               2            2                      1              
                    =-                                                         - 1
                            (1 + )       ( 1 + )        
                                                                  [(1+)2 -1]
                                                                                  
                                                          2        (1+)
                                                        2
                                                          
                               2   1 - z ()        z ( )
                    = -
                       
                            (1 + ) (1 + )2 - 1
                                               
                                                1 - z ()

                            2            z () - z ()
                    =-
                         (1 + )           (2 + )

where in the third line we used (44).
  Next let's consider the numerator of F () in (43):

         h ()   (1 - ) (1 + ) z () + 1 + z () - [-2 + (1 + ) [1 + z ()]] [1 - 2]
                         -2 z () + (2 +  (2 + )) z () +  (2 + )
              = (1 - )
                                        (2 + )
             - {-2 [1 - 2] + (1 + ) [1 - 2] + (1 + ) [1 - 2] z ()}
                  -2 (1 - )   z () +  + 42 + 3 z () + (2 + ) (1 - )2
              =
                                        (2 + )
                  -2 (1 - ) z () +  + 42 z () + (2 + ) (1 - )2
              >
                                     (2 + )
                                                              
                 (1 - ) (2 + ) (1 - ) - 2 z () +  + 42 z ()
              =                                               
                                     (2 + )

where to obtain the second equality we used (45), the third equality follows from algebra,
the inequality follows from 3 z () > 0, and the last equality also follows from algebra.
Notice that if (2 + ) (1 - ) - 2 z ()       0 then h () > 0 and the result is proved.




                                                   52
Suppose not, i.e.
                                                   2 z ( )
                                       ( 1 - ) <                                       (46)
                                                   (2 + )
We can then write
                                                                              
                           (1 - ) (2 + ) (1 - ) - 2 z () +  + 42 z ()
              h () >                                                          
                                                   ( 2 + )
                                                                             
                        2 z()
                         (2+)     (2 + ) (1 - ) - 2 z () +         + 42   z () 
                    >
                                                   ( 2 + )
                                                                               

                                                                       
                                                       4
                           2 (1 - )   z () - z ()    (2+)    -  - 42
                    =                                                  
                                           (2 + )
                         z ()                 4
                    >          2 ( 1 - ) -        -  - 42
                        (2 + )             (2 + )

where the second line follows from (46), the third is algebra, and the fourth line follows
                                                                        4            2
from z () > z () since z () < 1. We next show that 2 (1 - ) > (2+         ) -  - 4 . To
see this, suppose it is not true. Then

                                               4
                              2 (1 - ) -           -  - 42 < 0
                                           ( 2 + )

or
                                      42 (2 + ) - 2 < 0

which is a contradiction. Therefore h () > 0 and so F () > 0. Q.E.D.


A.5    Assumption 4 satisfied in our examples
Lemma 6. In our two examples, the gains from going to best response are decreasing in x. In
                           ((), (()))
general, this is true if wx wx ((),)
                                      is close enough to one.




                                              53
     Proof. In the Barro-Gordon model:

                                                  2            2
                           1                +x            +x           1 2
               G (x) = -       +x-                    +            +      + x2
                           2                2             2            2
                                    2
                               +x 1 2
                     =-              + x2
                                        +
                               2  2
                         1             1 2
                     = - 2 + x2 + 2x +     + x2
                         4             2
                       1 2       1
                     =     + x2 - x
                       4         2

so
                                       1           1
                               G (x) =   (x - ) = - ( - x)
                                       2           2
which is negative for all x  [0, ] i.e. between the Ramsey and the Markov outcome
(which is the relevant range).
   For the the bailout example, it is more convenient to consider

                                        ~ ()  G ( ()) .
                                        G

                                            ~ () = G ( ())  () or G (x) = G
Since  is strictly decreasing, we have that G                             ~ -1 (x) / ()
so G         ~
        0 if G    0. Note that

~ () = - (1 - p ( ())) (1 -  ( ()))  - c ( ( ())) + (1 - p ( ())) (1 - )  + c ()
G

Since (1 - p ( ()))  = c ( ( ())) we can write

~ () = p ( ())  () (1 -  ( ()))  - p ( ())  () (1 - )  - (1 - p ( ()))  + c ()
G
        = p ( ())  () ( -  ( ()))  - (1 - p ( ()))  - c ()

Recall that
                                               (1 - p (e)) 
                                     ( e ) =
                                                     
Thus,

        ~ () = p ( ())  ()  - (1 - p ( ()))   - [(1 - p ( ()))  - ]
        G
                                      
                (1 - p ( ()))                    
             =                 -  -p ( ())  () -    
                                                 

We are now going to show that the first term in square brackets is positive while the
second is negative. Let's start with the first. Since we considering   [0, M ] it must be


                                                 54
that for any , , and interior , the first term is positive since  <  ( ()). Consider
next the second term, [-p ( ())  () - /]. Note that -p ( ())  () > 0 and it
is increasing in . Moreover, M () is increasing in . These two observations imply
that we can find a  sufficiently small such that the second term is negative for all  
[0, M ()]. Thus, for  small enough, we have that G   ~ () 0.
    In general, we have that

          ~ () = [wx ( () ,  ( ())) - wx ( () , )]  () - w ( () , )
          G

which is negative if

                            wx ( () ,  ( ()))
           wx ( () , )                        - 1  () - w ( () , )            0
                                wx ( () , )

                   wx ((), (()))
which is true if       wx ((),)    is close enough to one. Q.E.D.


A.6     Proof of Proposition 2
The problem for the rule designer for a generic horizon k can be written as

  Wk () = max  w (x, c ) + Wk-1  (c )               + (1 - ) w (x, o ) + Wk-1  (o )
            x,c ,
                                                                                      (47)
subject to the implementability condition,

                          x =  (c + (1 - ) [c + (1 - )  (x)]) ,

the incentive compatibility constraint for the optimizing type,

                   w (x, o ) + Vk-1  (c )       w (x,  (x)) + Vk-1  (c )

and the law of motion for beliefs (7). The value for the optimizing type for a generic
horizon k is
                Vk () = w (xk () , o,k ()) + o Vk-1  (o,k ()) .

As for the twice repeated case, we can just compare two values:

                                         pool       sep
                            Wk () = max Wk    () , Wk   ()                            (48)

where
                      sep
                     Wk   () = W0 () +  [Wk-1 (1) + (1 - ) Wk-1 (0)]                  (49)



                                               55
                   pool
                  Wk    () = w xico,k () , -1 (xico,k ()) + Wk-1 ()                      (50)

and xico,k () solves
                                G (xico,k ()) = Vk-1 ()                                  (51)

where we define
                                 Vk ()  Vk () - Vk (0) .

and recall that G (x) = w (x,  (x)) - w x, -1 (x) .
    With this setup, we can now turn to the proof of the proposition (as usual we consider
the case with wx < 0):
    Part 1. For  = 0 it is clear that the equilibrium is the repetition of the static outcome
i.e. all k, Wk (0) = W0 / (1 - ) and Vk (0) = V0 (0) / (1 - o ), since no incentives can be
provided to the optimizing type.
    Part 2. Consider now the region   (0,  ]. We will show that i) in this region it
is always optimal to pool and ii) the optimal rule converges monotonically to CK . We
will do so by an induction argument. Before doing so, we prove an intermediate result:
 <      1.
    To prove this we need to show that at  , with residual horizon of 1 (twice repeated)
the rule designer strictly prefers to pool, i.e.,

      w (xico,1 ( ) , ico,1 ( )) + W0 ( )     W0 ( ) +  [ W0 (1) + (1 -  ) W0 (0)]

while

                                                  
   w (xCK , CK ) +      w (xCK , CK ) = W0 ( ) +    [ W0 (1) + (1 -  ) W0 (0)]           (52)
                     1-                          1-

To show this, it is sufficient to show that at  , both the static payoff and the continuation
value of pooling are larger with horizon 1 than for the infinitely repeated economy, i.e.

                          w (xico,1 ( ) , ico,1 ( )) > w (xCK , CK )                     (53)

and

                                            
 [W0 ( ) - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]] >          [w (xCK , CK ) - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]]
                                          1-
                                                                                         (54)
   Let's first compare the static values. To prove condition (53), it is sufficient to show
that ico,1 ( ) < CK or equivalently xico,1 ( ) < xCK since wx < 0. To this end, we first




                                             56
show that x0 ( ) < xCK . Suppose not, i.e. xCK     x0 ( ). Then

                W0 ( ) = w (x0 ( ) , ) + (1 -  ) w (x0 ( ) ,  (x0 ( )))
                          < w (x0 ( ) ,   + (1 -  )  (x0 ( )))
                          = w x0 ( ) , -1 (x0 ( ))

                            w (xCK , CK )

where the first line is the definition of W0 (), the second line follows from the concavity of
w, the third line is algebra, and the fourth line follows from the contradiction hypothesis
xCK     x0 ( ). We next show that this is a contradiction because the definition of  im-
plies that there must be static losses associated with pooling, i.e. W0 ( ) > w (xCK , CK ).
Suppose not, i.e. W0 ( ) w (xCK , CK ) then

          w (xCK , CK )    W0 ( )             
                                  > W0 ( ) +    [ W0 (1) + (1 -  ) W0 (0)]
             1-             1-               1-

which contradicts (52). Thus it must be that xCK x0 ( ).
   We now turn to show that xico,1 ( ) < xCK . Let's consider the incentive constraint for
the optimizing type in the twice repeated economy:

   w xico,1 ( ) , -1 (ico,1 ( )) + V0 ( ) = w (xico,1 ( ) ,  (xico,1 ( ))) + V0 (0)

and in the infinite horizon economy, (9), reported here for convenience,

                     w xCK , -1 (xCK )                         o
              VCK                      = w (xCK ,  (xCK )) +       V0 (0)                (55)
                          1-                                 1 - o

Recall that
                            G (x) = w (x,  (x)) - w x, -1 (x)

is decreasing in x. Also note that by the definition of  ,

                                    G (xCK ) = VCK ( )

where
                                                     V0 (0)
                                 VCK ()  VCK -              .
                                                     1 - o
Therefore, if V0 ( ) > VCK , then xico,1 ( ) < xCK . We now show that V0 ( ) > VCK .




                                             57
Define

                     sep                                        o
                    VCK  ( )  w (x0 ( ) ,  (x0 ( ))) +              V0 (0)               (56)
                                                              1 - o
                                                           o
                                 > w (xCK ,  (xCK )) +         V0 (0)
                                                         1 - o
                                 = w xCK , -1 (xCK ) + o VCK

                                 = VCK

where the second line follows from xCK > x0 ( ) and wx < 0, the third line from the
incentive compatibility constraint (55), and the last line from the definition of VCK . Thus,

                                           V0 (0)
                           VCK = VCK -
                                          1 - o
                                     sep        V0 (0)
                                  < VCK  ( ) -
                                                1 - o
                                                o             V0 (0)
                                  = V0 ( ) +         V0 (0) -
                                             1 - o            1 - o
                                  = V0 ( ) - V0 (0) = V0 ( )

                                                                           sep
where the second line follows from (56), the third from the definition of VCK  (), and the
last line follows from algebra. Thus VCK < V0 ( ) and consequently ico,1 ( ) < CK .
                                                    

Thus condition (53) holds.
    We now compare the continuation values and show that (54) holds. Note from the
definition of  , (52), it follows that

            w (xCK , CK )    
     W0 ( ) =             -    [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
               1-           1-
                                       1
= W0 ( ) - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)] =     [w (xCK , CK ) - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]] .
                                      1-

Therefore, the dynamic benefits are identical and condition (54) holds as an equality.
Thus,  1 > .
            


   We are now ready to consider the main induction argument. Define

                            k
              pool
             Wk +1 ()            j w xk+1-j () , -1 xk+1-j ()       + k+1 W0 ()
                           j=0
                                      k+1
              sep
             Wk +1 ()    W0 () +            j [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                                      j=1




                                                 58
where xk is short-hand notation for xico,k .
  We will show that for   (0,  ], if i) Wjpool ()               Wjsep () for all j     k and ii)
        k                              pool       sep                     k+1
 xj ()  j=1
            is monotone then i)       Wk +1 ()   Wk  and ii) xj ()
                                                    +1 ()                 j=1
                                                                                is monotone.
    We will use the following observations: From (51), xk is such that

                                       G (xk ()) = o Vk-1 ()                                   (57)

Moreover, for any k       1

                               k
               pool                                  -1                  +1
              Vk    ( )   =         j
                                    o w xk+1-j () ,     xk+1-j ()    + k
                                                                       o V0 ()
                              j=0
                                                      pool
                          = w xk () , -1 (xk ()) + o Vk -1 ()


Thus if it is optimal to pool for all k, k - 1, ..., 1, the dynamic incentives are given by

                          pool
                 Vk () = Vk    () - Vk (0)                                                     (58)
                                                          pool
                              = w xk () , -1 (xk ()) + o Vk -1 () - Vk (0)

                              = w (xk () ,  (xk ())) + o Vk-1 (0) - Vk (0)
                              = w (xk () ,  (xk ())) - V0 (0)

where the third line follows from (51) and the last from Vk (0) = 1 + o + 2         k
                                                                          o + ... + o V0 (0).
Let's define
                                F (x)  w (x,  (x)) - V0 (0) .

Clearly F (x) is a strictly decreasing function.Combining (57) and (58) using the definition
of F, we have that for all k 1

                                                      1
                              F (xk ()) = Vk () =       G (xk+1 ()) .                          (59)
                                                      o

   We can now proceed with the induction argument.
                                                                pool          sep
   For k = 1: Since  <     1 , it is optimal to pool and so W1       () > W1      () for all
  (0,  ].
                                                                  k
   Consider now a generic horizon k + 1. Suppose that xj () j=1 is monotone decreas-
ing. Then xk xk-1 so using (59) and the fact that G and F are strictly decreasing functions
we have
                      1                                   1
                        G (xk+1 ) = F (xk ) F (xk-1 ) =     G (xk )
                     o                                   o




                                                 59
Since G is strictly decreasing, the above implies that

                                      xk+1    xk     xk-1

           k+1                                                                             k
so xj () j=1 is monotone decreasing. A symmetric argument can be made if xj ()             j=1
is monotone increasing.
    Next we show that it is optimal to pool in k + 1. Note that

 pool       sep                -1            pool
Wk +1 () - Wk+1 () = w xk+1 ,     (xk+1 ) + Wk    ( )

                                      1 - k
                      -    W0 () +          [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                                      1-
                                                                  1 - k-1
                          w xk+1 , -1 (xk+1 ) +  W0 () +                  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                                                                   1-
                                      1 - k
                      -    W0 () +          [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                                      1-

                      = w xk+1 , -1 (xk+1 ) - (1 - )W0 () +  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

                      = w xk+1 , -1 (xk+1 ) - W0 () +  [W0 () - W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

                                                       pool      sep
where the first equality just uses the definitions of Wk +1 and Wk+1 , the second inequality
                 pool      sep
follows from Wk         Wk     which follows from the induction hypothesis, and the final
equality follows from algebra. The last term is positive if and only if

             w xk+1 , -1 (xk+1 )                  
                                       W0 () +      [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]            (60)
                   1-                            1-

                              k
   Suppose first that xj ()   j=1
                                    is monotone decreasing. Then xk+1     xk and so

   w xk+1 , -1 (xk+1 )      w xk , -1 (xk )                   
                                                   W0 () +      [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
         1-                     1-                           1-

                            pool       sep
because wx < 0. Therefore, Wk +1 () - Wk+1 () > 0.
                    k
   If instead xj () j=1 is monotone increasing then xk+1    xk so we cannot use the
above argument. However, (60) holds if xk+1      xCK . Thus we need to show that if
xk xCK then xk+1 xCK . Notice that since

                 w xCK , -1 (xCK ) = (1 - o ) w (xCK ,  (xCK )) + o V0 (0)




                                              60
we have that
                                           w xCK , -1 (xCK ) - V0 (0)
                              F (xCK ) =
                                                   (1 - o )
and

                                                                   w xCK , -1 (xCK ) - V0 (0)
     G (xCK ) = w (xCK ,  (xCK )) - w xCK , -1 (xCK ) = o
                                                                           (1 -  o )

so
                                                    1
                                       F (xCK ) =     G (xCK )
                                                    o
Since for all k,
                                                    1
                                        F (xk ) =     G (xk+1 )
                                                    
if xk   xCK and F and G are strictly decreasing we have that

                    F (xk )    F (xCK )  G (xk+1 )       G (xCK )  xk+1    xCK

Therefore condition (60) holds and it is optimal to pool when the horizon is k + 1. This
concludes the proof of the induction step.
    Summarizing, we have proved that for   (0,  ], for all k 1 it is optimal to pool and
{xk ()}k 1 is a monotone and bounded sequence. The fact that the sequence if bounded
follows from x  [ () , 0 (0)]. Then {xk ()}k 1 must converge pointwise to some limit
x (). To see that x () = xCK , note that for all k

                pool
 G (xk ()) = o Vk    () - Vk (0)
                                                                                                 
                     k                                                                  +1
                                                                                  1 - k
            = o           j w xk+1-j () , -1 xk+1-j ()            + k+1 V0 () -       o
                                                                                             V0 (0)
                                                                                   1 - o
                    j=0


Taking limits as k   we have that the limit x () is implicitly defined by

                                           w x () , -1 (x ())   V0 (0)
                         G (x ()) = o                         -
                                                1 - o           1 - o

or
                   w x () , -1 (x ())                          V0 (0)
                                      = w (x () ,  (x ())) + o
                        1 - o                                  1 - o
which is the implicit definition of xCK (and there is a unique solution).
    Part 3. Consider now   (       1 , 1]. Here we know that in the twice repeated problem it
is optimal to separate in the first period. We now show it is also optimal to separate for all
horizons k 2. Consider any horizon k + 1 with k 1. Suppose it is optimal to separate


                                                    61
for horizons 0, 1, ..., k at prior . We next show it is optimal to separate in k + 1 Note that
regardless of the horizon, if there is separation next period we have that

      Vk () = V0 () +  + 2 + ... + k V0 (0) - 1 +  + 2 + ... + k V0 (0)

               = V0 () - V0 (0)

Thus xk+1 () = xk (). Therefore

 pool                 -1
Wk +1 () = w xk () ,     (xk ()) + W0 () + 2 + 3 + ... + k+1 [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
 sep                  2  3         k+1
Wk +1 () = W0 () +  +  +  + ... +      [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

and

               sep        pool                        -1
              Wk +1 () - Wk+1 () = W0 () - w xk () ,     (xk ())

                                     -  {W0 () - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]}
                                        sep       pool
                                     = W1   () - W1    ( ) > 0

Thus for  >     1 it is always optimal to separate for any horizon.
    Part 4. We now show that for    ,            1 the equilibrium rules do not converge as
the horizon goes to infinity and they display a cyclical pattern.This is because there is a
form a strategic substitutability across time. In particular, if it is optimal to separate with
horizon k then it is optimal to pool with residual horizon k + 1 if    ,            1 . To see
this, note that since it is optimal to separate with horizon k then the values of pooling and
separating with horizon k + 1 are given by

        pool                          2         k
       Wk +1 () = w (xk+1 ) + W0 () +  + ... +    [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
         sep                  2         k
        Wk +1 () = W0 () +  +  + ... +    [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

so

  pool       sep
 Wk +1 () - Wk+1 () = w (xk+1 ) + W0 () - W0 () -  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)] (61)


The dynamic incentives provided to the optimizing type are

          Vk () = V0 () +  + ... + k-1 V0 () - 1 +  + ... + k-1 V0 (0)

                   = V0 () - V0 () = V0 ()




                                              62
so xk+1 = x1 . Thus, from (61) it follows that

                      pool       sep       pool       sep
                     Wk +1 () - Wk+1 () = W1    () - W1   ( ) > 0

so it is optimal to pool if the next period (horizon k) rule designer separates.
    Since in the last period, k = 0, it is optimal to separate, the above logic implies that
pooling is optimal at k = 1. We now argue that the consecutive number of periods of
pooling must be finite. Suppose to the contrary that they are not. Then the value of pool-
ing converges to w xCK , -1 (xCK ) / (1 - ) which is less than the value of separating
because  >  . Then the finite consecutive number of periods with pooling, M (), is
is the largest natural number such that the value of pooling is greater than the value of
separating implicitly defined by

    M()
                                                          
           M()-j w xj , -1 xj      + M() W0 () +            [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                                                         1-
     j=1
                  
       W0 () +      [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                 1-

                          M()
where the sequence xj     j=1
                                solves

                                                1
                                    F (x0 ()) =   G (x1 ())
                                               
                                             . .
                                             .=.
                                             . .
                                                   1
                                 F (xM-1 ()) =       G (xM ())
                                                   

given x0 () from the static problem.
   The optimal rule as a function of the residual horizon is then
           
                                 if k = 0, M () + 1, ..., n (M () + 1) , ...
           
            
           -1 (x ())             if k = 1, M () + 2, ..., n (M () + 1) + 1, ...
                1
     k () = .                    .
            .                    .
           
            .                    .
           -1 (x ())             if k = M () , 2M () + 1, ..., n (M () + 1) + M () , ...
                M


so the the optimal strategy has M + 1 period-cycles. Q.E.D.
    Note that for    ,       1 the equilibrium strategies display a cyclical pattern but not
the equilibrium outcomes. This is because the first time the strategy for the rule designer
calls for a stringent rule ­  ­ to induce separation then the posterior converges to ei-
ther 0 or 1 and these two states are absorbing. However, we could observe equilibrium

                                              63
                     Figure 6: Strategies and outcomes when    , 1

Equilibrium strategies when M () = 2
r                                                x
                                                          x2 = (2 )
2
                                                                         x1 = (1 )
1





                                                                         x0 = ( + (1 - )  (x0))

    0   1        2   3       4   ...   Horizon        0      1       2      3       4   ...   Horizon

Equilibrium outcome when M () = 2 and K = 3
r                                   x
                                                 x2
2
                                                 x1
1




                                                 x0



    0            1           2          Time          0              1              2         Time

Equilibrium outcome when M () = 2 and K = 4
r                                   xk
           w/ pr 1 - 
                                                                     w/ pr 1 -  x = (  (x))
2
1




                                                 x0
            w/ pr 
                                                                 w/ pr  x = ( )
    0        1           2         3    Time          0          1              2       3     Time



                                                     64
             Figure 7: Equilibrium values: uncertainty is beneficial for k   1
                          pool      sep
             Wk () = max{Wk    (), Wk   ()} > Wk (1) + (1)Wk (1)


Wk (1)            Wk (1) = (1 +  + ... +  k )W0(1)




               pool                    sep
              Wk    ()                Wk   ()




Wk (0)              Wk (0) = (1 +  + ... +  k )W0(0)

                                                                             
         0                                                               1

dynamics that depend on horizon K. To see this, consider the following example. For
concreteness, suppose M () = 2. The equilibrium strategies for the rule designers as a
function of k are reported in the first panel of Figure 6. If we start the economy with an
horizon of K = M () + 1 = 3, the equilibrium outcome has two periods of pooling with
progressively more stringent rules and finally there is separation in the final period when
the recommendation is  as displayed in the second panel of Figure 6. If instead we start
the economy with an horizon of K = 4 then it is optimal to separate in the very first period
and then the equilibrium outcome is either the Ramsey outcome (with probability ) or
the static Markov outcome (with probability 1 - ). This is illustrated in the third panel of
Figure 6. Thus the equilibrium outcome critically depends on the horizon of the economy
when    ,        1 .
   Moreover, note that if W0 () is concave then uncertainty is beneficial at any horizon
k 0, in that Wk () > Wk (1) + (1 - ) Wk (0) for all k as shown in Figure 7. This is true
despite the fact that for a general horizon k, Wk () is the upper envelope of two (concave)
                               pool       sep
functions, Wk () = max Wk           () , Wk   () , and therefore it is not globally concave.

Lemma 7. If Wk () > Wk (1) + (1 - ) Wk (0) then Wk+1 () > Wk+1 (1) + (1 - ) Wk+1 (0).




                                             65
   Proof. Note that

                           sep
             Wk+1 ()      Wk +1 ()
                       = W0 () + Wk (1) +  (1 - ) Wk (0)
                          [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)] + Wk (1) +  (1 - ) Wk (0)
                       = Wk+1 (1) + (1 - ) Wk+1 (0)

where the first inequality follows from the definition of Wk+1 in (48), the second line fol-
                               sep
lows from the definition of Wk  +1 () in (49), the third line follows from uncertainty being
beneficial in the static problem and the induction hypothesis, and the last line follows
from the fact that for   {0, 1}, Wk () = Wk+1 () = W0 (). Q.E.D.
   The above lemma and the fact that W0 satisfies the property implies that for all k,
Wk () satisfies the above property.


A.7    Proof of Proposition 3
                                                                          ¯ (). Consider
Let's denote the value of the best sustainable equilibrium with prior  by W
first the value when  = 0. Here trigger strategies alone can attain the value of Wpool
described above:
                            W¯ (0) = max w ( () , ) + W    ¯ ( 0)
                                        

subject to
                   w ( () , )        (1 - ) w ( () ,  ( ())) + V (0)

where the worst equilibrium for the optimizing type is V (0) = W0 (0) / (1 - ). Clearly
¯ (0) = Wpool and the optimal policy is CK .
W
   Consider now any  > 0. If it is optimal to pool in all periods, the value is

                       ¯ pool () = w ( (CK ) , CK ) = W
                       W                              ¯ (0) = Wpool .
                                        1-

If instead it is optimal to separate in period 0, the problem solves

         ¯ sep () = max  [w (x, c ) + Wramsey ] + (1 - ) w (x, o ) + W
         W                                                           ¯ (0)
                       c ,o ,x


subject to
                                     x =  (c + (1 - ) o )
                                       ¯ (0)
                           w (x, o ) + V       w (x,  (x)) + V (0)
                           ¯ (0) = w ( (CK ) , CK ) / (1 - ). Clearly, i) W
and c = o . Note that here V                                              ¯ sep () >


                                               66
Wsep () for all  < 1 where

                                            
                    Wsep () = W0 () +         [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
                                           1-
                              = W0 () +  [Wramsey + (1 - ) W (0)]

        ¯ sep (0) = W
and ii) W           ¯ (0) = Wpool and W ¯ sep () is strictly increasing in  so W
                                                                               ¯ sep () >
Wpool for all   (0, 1). Thus it is always optimal to separate and the limit of the finite
horizon converges to the best sustainable equilibrium only for the trivial case  = 1.
Q.E.D.


A.8    Proof of Proposition 4
We know that when rules are chosen sequentially by the rule designer, following the
logic in the text, there exist two cutoffs,                                       
                                                1 and 2 , such that: i) for  > 1 it is optimal to
separate in all periods, ii) for   (       
                                       2 , 1 ] it is optimal to pool in period 1 but not in period
0, iii) if    2 it is optimal to pool in periods 0 and 1.
     Consider now the problem where the rule designer in period 0 can choose the rec-
ommended rule for periods 0 and 1. In particular, consider     (                     
                                                                                 2 , 1 ]. With com-
mitment, the rule designer in period 0 can choose a stringent rule for period 1 to induce
separation in period 1 and therefore relaxing the incentive constraint in period 0. The
value associated with this plan is at least

      W~ 0 () = w x1 () , -1 (x1 ()) + W0 () + 2 [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]                     (62)

                W0 () +  + 2 [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

where the inequality follows from the fact that for               1 , the value of pooling in the
                                          - 1
twice repeated economy, w x1 () ,  (x1 ()) + W0 (), is higher than the value of
separation, W0 () +  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)] .
   The other alternative is to choose a rule for period 1 that allows for pooling as in the
case without commitment. Since  >          2 , if there is pooling in period 1 then the incentive
constraint in period 0 is tight and it is not optimal to pool in period 0 as      2 is defined as


            w x2 (2) , 
                        -1
                           (x2 (             
                                2 )) + w x1 (2 ) , 
                                                    -1
                                                       (x1 (       2
                                                            2 )) +  W0 ()

             = W0 (2) +  + 
                            2
                              [                 
                                2 W0 (1) + (1 - 2 ) W0 (0)]


Thus for all  > 2 we have that the value of separating is higher than pooling in both




                                                67
periods 0 and 1. Thus the value of this option is

                       W0 () +  + 2 [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

                             ~ 0 () from (62). Hence, it is better to pool in period 0 and
which is less than the value W
induce separation in period 1 for all   (     
                                          2 , 1 ]. Q.E.D.



A.9     Proof of Proposition 7
We start by proving that for  close to 1 it is optimal to have stochastic rules. Consider a
 close enough to 1 so that with a deterministic rule it is optimal to separate so  = 0 ()
. The value of this policy is

         W = [w (x0 , 0 ) + (1 - ) w (x0 ,  (x0 ))] +  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]
            = W0 () +  [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

We now show that if  is close to 1 then this policy is dominated by one that calls for the
commitment type to play the static best response with some positive probability. Consider
a deviation indexed by  > 0 sufficiently small so that
                                   
                                    ()           with pr 1 - 
                                     0
                               c =
                                   1             with pr 

so after observing a bailout the posterior is

                                                 
                           =              =             >0
                                 + (1 - )    + (1 - ) /

and after no-bailout  = 1. The value of this deviation is then

           W dev () = [ (1 - ) w (x0 () , 0 ) + [ + (1 - )] w (x0 () ,  (x0 ))]
                    +   (1 - ) W0 (1) + [ + (1 - )] W0 

Since W = W dev (0) we have

                      W dev () - W dev (0) =  () +  ()
                                              () +  () 

where
             () = [ (1 - ) w (x0 () , 0 ) + [ + (1 - )] w (x0 () ,  (x0 ))]


                                                68
      () =  (1 - ) W0 (1) + [ + (1 - )] W0                - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)]

Note that

                                                                          
             () = -W0 (1) + W0  () + [ + (1 - )] W0  ()
                                                                          
                                                                          
                    = - W0 (1) - W0  ()           + [ + (1 - )] W0     ()
                                                                          

As   0
                                                                      
                    ()  - [W0 (1) - W0 (0)] + [(1 - )] W0 (0)
                                                                      
                        [ + (1 - )] -    (1 - )         
                     =               2
                                                2
                                                  =
                         [ + (1 - )]    ( 1 - )     ( 1 - )
so for  close to one
                                   lim lim  () = 
                                   1 0

Thus to show that the deviation is profitable it is sufficient to show that  > -M for
some M sufficiently large. Consider

         () =  [w (x0 () ,  (x0 ())) - w (x0 () , 0 )]
                                                                               x0 ()
               + { (1 - ) wx (x0 () , 0 ) + [ + (1 - )] wx (x0 () ,  (x0 ))}
                                                                                
               +  (1 - ) w (x0 () , 0 )

where
                                  x0 ()
                                           =    (  - 0 )
                                    
Since the first term in square brackets is positive we have that

                                                                               x0 ()
         () > { (1 - ) wx (x0 () , 0 ) + [ + (1 - )] wx (x0 () ,  (x0 ))}
                                                                                
               +  (1 - ) w (x0 () , 0 )
               = {wx (x0 , 0 ) + (1 - ) wx (x0 ,  (x0 ))}   ( - 0 ) + w (x0 , 0 )

with wx and  bounded, as   1 we have that the last expression converges to

wx (x0 , 0 )  ( - 0 ) + w (x0 , 0 ) > wx (x0 , 0 )  ( - 0 ) > wx (x0 , 0 )  (¯ - ) > -M

for some M < .
    (Notice that to derive this result we are not relying on the concavity of W0 but only: i)
W0 > 0 and ii) properties of Bayes' rule.)
    We now prove that for  close to zero a deterministic rule is optimal. Since W0 is

                                             69
concave and the posterior is a martingale,
                        ^
                             (, ) [c () + (1 - ) o ()] d = ,

then                         ^
                   W0 ()         W0  (, ) [c () + (1 - ) o ()] d

Thus randomization can be optimal only if it improves that static outcome by reducing x.
Then it must be that
                                   ^
               w ( (ico ) , ico ) < w (x, ) [c () + (1 - ) o ()] d

where x is given by (18). A necessary condition is that
                                           ^
             x <  (ico )  E                     [c () + (1 - ) o ()] d < ico

Thus, it is sufficient to show that E > ico to prove our result. Note that
                                                  ^
                   E      ( ) =      min                [c () + (1 - ) o ()]
                                  c ,o ([0,1])


subject to (18), (19), and (20). It is then sufficient to show that  () > ico () for  close to
zero. Suppose by way of contradiction that it is not optimal to have ico with probability
1 so                         ^
                                [c () + (1 - ) o ()] d < ico                              (63)

and since we consider   0 then
                                           ^
                                  Eo  =         o () d       ico                         (64)

otherwise we can make  arbitrary close to 0 so that the inequality in (63) is reversed.
From the incentive constraint, it must be that   Supp0

  w (x, ) + V0  (, )             w (x,  (x)) + V0  ( (x) , )      w (x,  (x)) + V0 (0)
                                                                                    (65)
where the second inequality follows from V0 being increasing in the posterior and  ( (x) , )
0. Note now that by properties of Bayes' rule
              ^                        ^
                                                    c ()
                   (, ) o () d =                                  o () d       .         (66)
                                               c () + (1 - ) o ()



                                                  70
Thus we have:
         ^
            w (x, ) + V0  (, )             o () d < w (x, Eo ) + V0 Eo                 (67)

                                                      w (x, Eo ) + V0 ()
                                                    = w ( (Eo ) , Eo ) + V0 ()

where the first inequality follows from the strict concavity of w (in ) and V0 , the second
inequality from (66) and V0 strictly increasing. Thus combining (65) and (67) we have that

            w ( (Eo ) , Eo ) + V0 () > w ( (Eo ) ,  ( (Eo ))) + V0 (0)

Since ico is the smallest solution to

                   w ( () , ) + V0 () = w ( () ,  ()) + V0 (0)

then it follows that for  close to zero

                                          ico () < Eo 

a contradiction. Q.E.D.


A.10    Proof of Proposition 8
We consider the case with wx < 0. Note that the statically optimal rule chosen by the
commitment type is . To see why note that the first order condition for the commitment
type is

                                          ( ·)
           w (x, ) + wx (x, )
                                [1 -  (·) (1 - ) x (x)]
                                                                    ( ·)
           w (x, ) + [wx (x, ) + (1 - ) wx (x,  (x))]
                                                          [1 -  (·) (1 - ) x (x)]
           0

where the first inequality follows from the assumption that wx      0 and the last inequal-
ity from Assumption 2. Let
                                     c
                                  V0   () = w (x0 () , ) ,

be the value for the commitment type in the terminal period given the prior  where

                           x0 () =  ( + (1 - )  (x0 ())) .


                                               71
We can write the value for the commitment type if it chooses to separate as

                              c                        c
                             Vsep () = w (x0 () , ) + V0 (1) ,

while the value of pooling is

                        c                                   c
                       Vpool () = w ( (ico ()) , ico ()) + V0 ( )

where ico solves

     w ( (ico ()) , ico ()) + V0 () = w ( (ico ()) ,  ( (ico ()))) + V0 (0) .

Therefore,

        c         c                                                  c        c
       Vsep () - Vpool () = [w (x0 () , ) - w ( (ico ) , ico )] +  [V0 (1) - V0 ()]

First note that for  sufficiently large separating has both dynamic gains, V0c ( 1) - V c (  ) >
                                                                                       0
0, and static gains as [w (x0 () , ) - w ( (ico ) , ico )] > 0. In particular, for   1 we
have that the static gains of separating converge to

                          [w ( () , ) - w ( (ico (1)) , ico (1))]

which is positive since under our assumption thatthe Ramsey outcome is not sustain-
able, ico () < . Consequently, for  large enough the commitment type will choose a
stringent rule and thus there will be separation.
    Next, given some , the commitment type would like to separate if

                                 [w ( (ico ()) , ico ()) - w (x0 () , )]
                         ( )                 c (1) - V c ()
                                            V0        0

To show that it is optimal for the optimizing type to separate at  it must be that

                 w (x0 () ,  (x0 ())) + V0 (0) > w (x0 () , ) + V0 (1)

(note that if the optimizing type mimics the commitment type the posterior jumps to one
because we are constructing an equilibrium with separation) or

                                        
                     <¯ ()  [w (x0 () ,  (x0 ())) - w (x0 () , )]
                                        V0 (1) - V0 (0)




                                              72
Therefore, the equilibrium outcome of the signaling game has separation if

                                      ¯ ( ) >  >  ( )
                                      

Thus we need to show that such an interval exists. For   0 we have

                          ¯ () =w (x0 (0) ,  (x0 (0))) - w (x0 (0) , )
                      lim 
                      0                     V0 (1) - V0 (0)
                                w x0 0 ,  (x0 (0))) - w (x0 (0) , )
                                  (   ( )
                      lim  () =              c (1) - V c (0)
                      0                     V0        0

since ico ()   (x0 (0)). Thus to compare    ¯ (0) and  (0) we only need to compare the
denominators since the numerators are identical. In particular, ¯ (0) >  (0) if and only if
                   c (1) - V c (0), or
V0 (1) - V0 (0) < V0        0


        w (x0 (1) ,  (x0 (1))) - w (x0 (0) ,  (x0 (0))) < w (x0 (1) , ) - w (x0 (0) , )

or
        w (x0 (1) ,  (x0 (1))) - w (x0 (1) , ) < w (x0 (0) ,  (x0 (0))) - w (x0 (0) , )

Note that

        w (x0 (0) ,  (x0 (0))) - w (x0 (0) , )        w (x0 (0) ,  (x0 (1))) - w (x0 (0) , )

so we are left to show that

        w (x0 (0) ,  (x0 (1))) - w (x0 (0) , ) > w (x0 (1) ,  (x0 (1))) - w (x0 (1) , )

Under Assumption 1, for xH > xL
                         ^                            ^
                                 w (xH , ) d >                w (xL , ) d
                          [, ]                         [, ]


Thus, since x0 (0) > x0 (1) the inequality is satisfied. Q.E.D.


B    Example where uncertainty is not beneficial
Here we present an example of an economy where uncertainty is not beneficial. This
economy is similar to our bailout example but there is no effort choice.
   There are two types of private agents: depositors and bankers. At the beginning of
each period the banker has no capital and must borrow k = 1 from the depositors to


                                                 73
finance an investment opportunity that pays off at the end of the period. The return of the
investment opportunity is RH with probability p and 0 with probability 1 - p. The banker
offers a contract to depositors that promises to repay R units of the consumption good in
the second sub-period subject to limited liability. We assume that there are bankruptcy
costs  in case of a default. The policy maker can avoid this bankruptcy costs by making
a transfer to the banker. In particular, the policy maker can choose the recovery rate  in
case of inability of the banker to repay. With a recovery rate , the bankruptcy costs are
 ( 1 - ) .
    The rule designer and the policy makers care about the depositor's utility net of bankruptcy
costs.
    Depositors are then willing to lend to the banker at an interest rate

                                   Q (b, E) = [p + (1 - p) E]

so the banker's problem is
                                       max p max {RH - b, 0}
                                        b

subject to
                                            1 = Q (b, E) b.

In equilibrium, it must be that b = 1/Q (b, E) so we can let x = Q with

                               Q =  (E) = [p + (1 - p) E]                               (68)

and express the social welfare function as

                                              1           1
                     w (Q, ) = -1 + p           - (1 - p)  max {1 - , 0}
                                              Q           Q

   We first show that the solution to the static rule designer's value is convex in :

Lemma 8. If p > 1/2, the static rule designer's value W0 () is convex.

   Proof. Consider

                                              1           1
                 W0 () = max - 1 - p            - (1 - p)  max {1 - c , 0}
                            c ,Q              Q           Q

subject to (68) or, using the constraint to substitute for Q as

                                                 [p - (1 - p)  (1 - c )]
                      W0 () = max -1 +
                                   c           [p + (1 - p) (c + (1 - ))]



                                                  74
Differentiating with respect to c we obtain

        (1 - p)  [p + (1 - p) (c + (1 - ))] - (1 - p)  [p - (1 - p)  (1 - c )]
                                 [p + (1 - p) (c + (1 - ))]2

which is negative if  is sufficiently small. So the optimal static rule is c = 0 for all .
Thus we have that
                                        [p - (1 - p) ]
                              W0 () =                   -1
                                          p -  (1 - p)
which is convex as

                           - (1 - p)  [p -  (1 - p)] + (1 - p) [p - (1 - p) ]
               W0 () =
                                              [p -  (1 - p)]2
                           (1 - p) p (1 - )
                       =
                           [p -  (1 - p)]2

and
                                (1 - p) p (1 - )                    (1 - p) p (1 - )
           W0 () = 2 (1 - p)                      3
                                                      = 2 (1 - p)                      >0
                                 [p -  (1 - p)]                     [p (1 + ) - ]3
as long as p > 1/2. Q.E.D.
    Consider now the dynamic problem (twice repeated) in (8). Because of the convexity
of W0 (), the dynamic benefits of pooling,  () = W0 () - [W0 (1) + (1 - ) W0 (0)],
are negative. The static benefits of pooling, , are positive for low levels of reputation
and negative for high levels. If  is sufficiently high we have that  () +  () < 0
and so we have the following counterpart of Proposition 1:

Proposition 9. In this example where condition (5) does not hold and uncertainty is welfare
reducing, under Assumptions 1 and 3, if  is sufficiently large then for all  there is separation
with probability 1 and  = 0 .




                                               75
