                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          REDEEMABLE PLATFORM CURRENCIES

                                            Yang You
                                         Kenneth S. Rogoff

                                        Working Paper 26464
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26464


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2019




We thank Dean Corbae, Robin Greenwood, Zoë Hitzig, Kathryn Holston, Shengwu Li, Laura
Xiaolei Liu, Xiaosheng Mu, Julien Prat, Andrei Shleifer, Harald Uhlig, Jiaxi Wang, Glen Weyl,
Randy Wright, David Yermack, David Zhang, and seminar participants at Harvard Business
School, Harvard Economics Department, Guanghua Peking University, PBCSF Tsinghua
University, University of Wisconsin Madison and also the Molly and Dominic Ferrante Fund for
research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Yang You and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Redeemable Platform Currencies Yang
You and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 26464
November 2019, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E42,G23,L51


                                         ABSTRACT

Can massive online retailers such as Amazon and Alibaba issue digital tokens that potentially
compete with bank debit accounts? There is a long history of trading stamps and loyalty points,
but new technologies are poised to sharply raise the significance of redeemable assets as a store
of value. Here we develop a simple stylized model of redeemable tokens that can be used to study
sales and pricing strategies for issuing tokens, including ICOs. Our central finding is that
platforms can generally earn higher revenues by making tokens non-tradable unless they can
generate a sufficiently high outside-platform convenience yield.


Yang You
Harvard University
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
yangyou@g.harvard.edu

Kenneth S. Rogoff
Thomas D Cabot Professor of Public Policy
Economics Department
Harvard University
Littauer Center 216
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
krogoff@harvard.edu
1        Introduction

        As technology blurs the lines between finance and tech firms, and as innovation in transaction
technologies continues to disrupt markets, many large platforms are issuing, or considering
issuing, their own digital credits or tokens. In principle, Tech firms with a large retail customer
base have a natural advantage in creating liquidity by ensuring that their tokens/credits can
be used for in-platform purchases. Early implementations include some that are focused on
in-platform payment convenience (e.g., Uber and Lyft cash), some began as in-platform and
have expanded to more general usage (e.g., Alipay and WePay), while some are designed from
the start as general-purpose transactions vehicles (e.g., Facebook's Libra coin).1 On a smaller
scale, but collectively significant, many apps and games offer forms of virtual currency.
        Of course, the idea of redeemable credits is hardly a concept new to digital apps, games
and currencies (albeit ICOs, with issuance of a large initial quantity, are a modern construct).
Airline and retail loyalty points have existed for decades; redeemable S&H green stamps were
first issued in the late 1800s, and had become so ubiquitous by the 1960s that the company
claimed to have issued more stamps than the US postal service.2 Nevertheless, despite their
long history, the theory of redeemable platform currencies (tokens) remains relatively underde-
veloped. The issue may be of broader significance in the future development of digital currencies
in that a central issue to regulators is whether new kinds of digital assets offer functionality
not embedded in traditional financial assets, and therefore potentially merit consideration for
differential regulatory treatment.
        Here we present a simple, tractable model of redeemable platform tokens that allows one
to explore a number of issues related to their design, features, and supply policy. In principle,
such tokens might constitute a prototype currency if they are made tradable (as opposed to
non-tradable).3 However, this does not mean aiming for a prototype currency is necessarily
an optimal strategy unless the tokens generate a considerable convenience yield to consumers
(compared to bank accounts). We show that maintaining tradability turns out to imply a num-
ber of issuance and pricing constraints that can limit a platform's profits from token issuance.
In addition, making tokens tradable constrains the ability of a platform to offer richer token
price/quantity menus or to incorporate memory features.4
    1
     There have long been experiments on a smaller scale: for example, Tencent introduced Q-coins for consumers
to purchase gaming and non-gaming service provided by Tencent (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tencent QQ).
   2
     See, for example, Lonto (2013) or Pollak (1988).
   3
     Tradability is hardly a universal feature of digital assets. Amazon does not permit gift cards balance transfer
to another user. Others might allow partial tradability, for example, United only allows 15,000 miles per year to
be transferred and charges 1.5 cents per mile transferred, plus a $35 service fee. Nakamoto enabled Bitcoin to be
tradable, and now people can buy and sell Bitcoins through brokers without limitations.
   4
     The advantages of trying to make loyalty stamps and points largely non-tradable have of course, long been



                                                         2
    To be clear, our stylized framework is partial equilibrium, and takes both the platform's cus-
tomer base and their outside banking options as given. In the core model, the gains from trade
derive from the platform's ability to earn a higher rate of return on its outside investments than
can small retail consumers, though we will also discuss convenience yield.5 We do not consider
gains from trade due to pseudonymity, for example, crypto-currencies that can potentially be
used for money laundering, tax evasion, and other illegal activities.6 Nor do we explore the case
where platform currencies supplant government fiat money as a unit of account.7
    Rather, we explore a narrower case where platforms issue redeemable digital tokens that
are indexed to fiat currency. Importantly, the tokens we analyze are more analogous to loyalty
points or platform cash than to so-called "stable coins," in that they have a fixed dollar value
when redeemed on the platform, but cannot be redeemed directly for cash. From the consumer's
perspective, such tokens may be attractive because they are either offered at a discount (the
primary focus of our analysis), pay interest, provide a money-like convenience yield, or some
combination of the three. For platforms, the advantages include being able to directly tap low-
interest retail consumers, to reduce transactions costs, and potentially to benefit from an array
of indirect advantages such as strengthening consumer loyalty; these advantages alone can in
some cases be significant enough to compensate for having to sell the tokens at a discount that
our model endogenizes.
    In general, in trying to persuade consumers to hold a significant number of tokens (and
thereby garner large seigniorage profits), the core dilemma is this: If the only transaction use
of the currency is within-platform, then beyond a relatively modest amount, the coins will
have to be sold at a discount that is increasing in the number of tokens sold, or alternatively
pay a rate of interest that diminishes the platform's surplus as well as exacerbates fragility
issues. Importantly, whether or not a token pays explicit interest can affect how it is taxed and
regulated with significant international differences across jurisdictions.
    To put the problem we study in context, the first part of the paper presents a brief history
of the evolution of different generations of redeemable platform assets from Green Stamps to
Ethereum. Even within each generation of redeemable platform assets, there are a wide array
of bundling and sales techniques. Although our highly stylized model links most closely to
understood by practitioners. Indeed, in 1972, in the case Federal Trade Commission versus Sperry and Hutchin-
son Trading Co., the Supreme court limited the ability of S&H to make their green stamps non-tradable (see
Middlebrook and Hughes, 2016).
   5
     Prat et al (2019) study ICO utility token pricing with a cash-in-advance constraint.
   6
     Implicitly we are aiming to look beyond the time when regulation sharply circumscribes such uses. Regulators
may also be concerned about potential vulnerabilities if and when crypto-currencies become more integral to the
global financial system, see Budish (2018), Raskin et al (2019), Raskin and Yermack (2018).
   7
      For examples of the growing recent literature on Bitcoin and the potential for crypto-currencies to compete
with fiat money, see Biais et al (2018), Athey et al (2016), Sockin and Xiong (2018), as well as Schilling and
Uhlig (2019).


                                                       3
tokens/cash on today's large retailer platforms (such as Amazon, Uber, Alibaba), we argue
that some of the insights have links both to earlier versions and to potential new generations of
redeemable assets.
   The second part of the paper presents our simple partial equilibrium model of platform
tokens and their liquidity. We begin by using the model to explore simple strategies where
all tokens are sold for the same price in an initial one-time auction, examining both the case
of non-tradable and tradable ("prototype currency") tokens. A central result is that the non-
tradable tokens can be sold at a higher price (for any given quantity) and yield higher profits
to the platform. Essentially, tradability forces the issuer to compete with future resale markets
and limits the power to charge a high price upfront. Conversely, and of potential significance in
designing future regulation, consumers' share of the gains from trade (due to differing discount
rates) tends to be higher with traded tokens.
   The next part of the paper explores more sophisticated issuance strategies in which platforms
use a price menu approach in their initial coin offering, that is, "buy more and save more".
The advantage of a price menu is that the platform can potentially exploit all the potential
gains from inter-temporal trade. But again, such an approach only can only work if the token
is non-tradable. Indeed, for tradable tokens, introducing a price menu adds nothing to the
platform's options. Later, when we introduce tokens with memory, the potential advantages of
non-tradability become even more apparent. Our analysis of embedded memory is reminiscent
of Kocherlakota's (1998) discussion of money as a crude form of memory. We also note similar
issues to the ones we study here potentially apply to a broader range of digital assets, including
gift cards, loyalty points, etc., where firms often impose significant restrictions on tradability.
   We then turn to the case where in addition to its "ICO" (initial coin offering), the firm
commits to make "seasoned coin offerings" (SCO) sufficient to keep the outstanding stock
of coins constant, that is replacing tokens that have been redeemed. Such an approach can
enhance credibility, since the platform has an incentive to preserve its ongoing revenue stream.
We show, however, that the prospect of future token sales again sharply discourages consumers
from holding more than a very limited number of tokens, even if the issuer can credibly commit
to its issuance policy (supported perhaps by a trigger strategy equilibrium.) Indeed, in this
case there is actually no longer any advantage to making the tokens non-tradable.
   The remainder of the paper goes on to relax a number of the simplifying assumptions of
the core model, incorporating the possibility of runs, introducing non-zero cost to platform
input goods, and allowing for a convenience yield. The most significant extension is to the
case of heterogeneous agents. Allowing for heterogeneity creates a number of subtle pricing



                                                 4
and issuance questions, for example, should platform token pricing be designed to peel off the
most active consumers? However, our main results, on tradability versus non-tradability, and
on how appetite for token holdings can be extremely sensitive to future issuance policy, appear
to generalize.
        The final section concludes, including a discussion of potential extensions.


2        Different Generations of Redeemable Platform Tokens

        Although modern redeemable tokens are linked to rapid advances in payment technologies,
the general idea is hardly a new one. Trading stamps such as Sperry and Hutchinson (S&H)
Green Stamps were prominent from the 1930s to the 1980s. S&H sold their stamps in negotiated
wholesale transactions to retailers, who in turn gave them as loyalty rewards to consumers
(essentially proportional to purchases). Consumers would then paste the stamps into books
and redeem them for a wide variety of consumer goods either at S&H stores or via its widely
distributed catalog (Pollak, 1988; Lonto, 2013). Although S&H was the largest vendor, there
were numerous other versions worldwide, for example, the United Kingdom's Green Shield
stamps.8 It is difficult to determine the exact scale of trading stamps, but during the peak of
trading stamps in the 1960s, S&H alone claimed to have printed tens of millions of catalogs per
year. Interestingly, although trading stamps were essentially as anonymous and as fungible as
currency, many of the trading stamp companies attempted to prohibit trade to the extent they
could, perhaps, in an effort to prevent a liquid market from emerging.
        Improvements in data processing helped enable modern customer loyalty programs. Al-
though airline and hotel programs are the most prominent, there are today a plethora of such
programs today around the world in different retail industries. Since American Airlines launched
the first airline frequent flyer program in 1981, the space has grown exponentially.9 Because
loyalty programs (in their current guise) are tabulated through a centralized system, the issuer
has far more scope to sharply limit tradability. Indeed most do, with enforcement over black
markets improving over time especially as government identity protocols have hardened. The
size and scale of loyalty programs are enormous, and publicly traded companies are required to
report points outstanding and the likely cost of these liabilities. The value of outstanding 20
trillion in airline points is the US alone is worth in excess of $200 billion dollars.10
        American Airlines, for example, reports that it foregoes over 7% of annual passenger revenue
    8
     One of the two authors of this paper can claim to have collected and redeemed both the US and UK version
of green stamps.
   9
     See, De Boer and Gudmundson (2012), who also discuss how the range and types of airline frequent flyer
programs have evolved.
  10
     See, example "What is a Reward Point Worth?" by Julie Weed, The New York Times, May 20, 2019.


                                                     5
                                                            Table 1: Generations of Redeemable Platform Tokens

          Generation            Technology              Circulation         Leading Examples          Redeemability          Tradability                Size
                                                        Mechanism

     First Generation:           Physical            Sold wholesale to      S&H Green stamps       Convertible to awards     Often legally      Peaked in the mid-60s
        TRADING                   stamps          retailers then pro-rata   (US), Green Shield       at trading stamp       prohibited, but   when S&H was printed 32
         STAMPS                (anonymous)             to consumers            stamps(UK)           stores, or by mail,      black market      million catalogs and 140
                                                                                                    after filling savers'                        million savers books
                                                                                                            books

    Second Generation:          Centralized        Bundled with sales,       Airline and hotel       Convertible for          Typically       American Airline awards
        LOYALTY                 Accounting        bonus mechanisms for      loyalty points, also    services of issuing      constrained       7-8% of yearly revenue
         POINTS                                      frequent buyers         supermarket and       company or partners       with limited        miles for points (8.5
                                                                                drug stores                                 black markets       billion outstanding in
                                                                                                                                              2018). Stock equals 20%




6
                                                                                                                                              one year's gross revenue

    Third Generation:           Centralized       Often sold at discount.   Uber & Lyft cash,      Generally redeemable     Generally none      Uber cash sells at 5%
      PLATFORM                  Accounting         Very convenient for           Starbucks         only on platform but       or highly          discount (rapidly
         CASH                                        in-platform use        stored-value cards,        still evolving        constrained        growing), 3.3 billion
                                                                            Amazon gift cards,                                                   Amazon gift cards
                                                                              Q-Coin, Gash+                                                     unredeemed in 2019

    Fourth Generation:         Cryptography,       Initial and recurrent        Ethereum,          Can be redeemable for     Tradable or       Ether can be used for
       TOKENS a                 Blockchain,             coin offerings       Telegram, Libra,      platform services, but   tradable with     smart contract services,
                               Cybersecurity         (evolving), aims to     Alipay, Wechat          usually aspires to         minor         Ether valued at over $60
                                Technologies      out-platform uses even           Pay                universal usage        restrictions              billion
                                                     to the places with
                                                    little financial arms
     a
         Stable coins are a special case also redeemable for cash.
due to redemption of frequent flyer miles, and the hangover of existing points amounts has
averaged over 20% of gross revenues in recent years.11 In table 1, we refer to trading stamps as
first-generation redeemable platform assets and loyalty points as the second generation.
    As Table 1 illustrates, third-generation redeemable assets include Uber and Lyft cash, Ama-
zon gift cards, Starbucks stored-value cards, Q-coins, and Gash+ (game cash issued by Gamania)
appear to be a very rapidly growing phase. A critical distinction between third-generation and
second-generation programs is that third-generation tokens are most typically sold for cash,
and often at a discount (Uber cash currently offers a 5% discount). This feature is in contrast
to 2nd generation assets which are mostly given as a reward, linked to purchases with better
terms for more frequent users.12 Importantly, third-generation platform tokens are very dif-
ferent from first and second generation in that they are extremely easy to use, often involving
smaller frictions than any other payment mechanism for in-platform purchases. The potential
scale of generation-three platform currencies which are closest in spirit to what we model in
this paper, is vastly larger than earlier loyalty programs simply because the technology has been
made much more attractive to consumers, and easier to maintain for suppliers.
    Finally, Table 1 lists the fourth-generation redeemable platform tokens. A critical differ-
ence is that unlike earlier generations, these tokens can, in principle, be transacted on a shared
infrastructure and seek usage beyond the issuer's platform. Massive technological innovations
attempt to provide credibility for the fourth-generation assets, for example, public ledgers cre-
ated from a blockchain without the need for a centralized intermediary. A prominent example
is Ether, which can be used (indeed, is required) for smart contracts on the Ethereum platform.
Stable coins such as Facebook's Libra are a somewhat different animal, in that in principle, they
are not only redeemable for platform services but can be redeemed for fiat currency, in many
countries as proposed. Whether or not the scale of generation-four platform tokens surpasses
generation-three assets is unclear, and much depends on the future of regulation. Finally, we
note that the lines between generations 3 and 4 are blurred; Amazon, for example, has shown
an interest in extending its financial reach outside of its platform through deals with Western
Union and others by Amazon cash.13 Some voluntary adoption might also happen if a digi-
tal currency provides sufficient convenience. For example, Q-coin first-issued in 2002, initially
designed to facilitate financial transactions within Tencent's platform, ended up being broadly
  11
     The 2019 annual 10-K reports Aadvantage balance is $8.615 billion and $3.362 billion redeemed in 2019,
while the total operating revenue is $45.8 billion. The size of redemption would be more sizable given the net
income and operating income are only $1.686 billion and $3.065 billion, respectively.
  12
     Needless to say, the legal issues behind these new payments mechanisms are still being sorted out, see
Middlebrook and Hughes (2016) for a discussion of how case law relating to earlier tokens and currencies might
impact on today's versions.
  13
     "Western Union Partners Amazon for Cash Payments," Yahoo Finance, September 19, 2019.



                                                      7
adopted by many online vendors and gaming companies as a payment method before the rise
of WeChat Pay and Alipay.


3         A Simple Model

         In this section, we develop a partial-equilibrium model to capture how consumers value a
token that is underpinned by future claims on platform consumption. The aim is to develop a
stylized framework that gives some general insights into how platform tokens might be designed
and sold in a modern context.


3.1        Consumer Demand

         We assume that one unit of the (perishable) platform commodity costs one dollar (there is no
inflation in the fiat currency), and provides one unit of consumption. In any given period t, the
consumer demands one unit of the platform commodity with probability p, and zero units with
probability 1 - p. All infinitely-lived consumers are identical with time discount factor  . The
fact that p < 1 captures that the consumer may not need platform consumption every period.
The normalization of a single period's consumption to 1 captures limits to the consumer's period
demand, but can be varied to study platforms that involve large lumpy expenditures; indeed
all the main results here will go through.14
         Consumers are risk-neutral and have a utility function that is linear in the consumption of
the platform commodity given by

                                                     
                                              Ut =          s- t s Cs                                         (1)
                                                     s=t

where s is the dummy of platform consumption shock in period s: s = 1 with probability p,
and s = 0 with probability 1 - p. s is i.i.d.


3.2        Valuing the Marginal Claim

         In all that follows, a critical issue is how a consumer values a credit that pays for her M th
unit of platform consumption, which will occur at some future date N  M , depending on the
exact timing of the consumer's needs for the platform good. The probability that the consumer
will use the M th token in period N is given by
    14
    Define  as the fiat currency price of a platform good. The scale of a platform depends on p. In our
analysis, the price of a unit good is normalized to one. But one can envision of a platform with low-frequency
consumption (low p) but a high fiat currency price. One can easily show that all results go through with an
arbitrary price of  for the platform good. That is, platform scale is irrelevant, only the consumption probability
matters.


                                                        8
                                                  N -1 M
                                     XN,M =            p (1 - p)N -M                                            (2)
                                                  M -1
           N -1                                      (N -1)!
where      M -1   is the binomial coefficient    (N -M )!(M -1)! .   Given consumers' linear utility function
(1), expression (2) governs the value of the marginal claim which is a central input to how much
a consumer is willing to pay for tokens.


3.3      Platform Currency and Issuance

       We now introduce the possibility that platform can issue a "currency" in the form of non-
interest-bearing tokens that can be converted to one unit of the platform commodity in any
given period. Of course, given the assumed utility function, the consumer will never need more
than one token in any given period. Importantly, the consumer is not required to use the
platform token and can always pay one dollar of fiat currency (that is, one dollar). As with
the consumer, the platform is risk-neutral. To be clear, whereas the platform guarantees the
purchasing power of its tokens on its platform, it does not offer to redeem for face value in fiat
currency.
       The platform discounts the future at   <  , to capture that as a large platform, it has better
outside investment opportunities than do small consumers.15 This wedge is the sole source of
gains from inter-temporal trade to justify token issuance in our baseline model. It immediately
follows that in an efficient equilibrium, with no other liquidity, capital constraints or credibility
issues, the consumers would purchase the entire present value of future platform consumption in
the initial period, with the allocation of the welfare surplus from trade depending on the relative
bargaining power of the two parties, for example depending on consumers' outside options. As
noted in the introduction, there may be many other reasons for gains from token issuance, but
for the moment, we will focus exclusively on the discount wedge.
       One critical issue is the extent to which the platform currency yields a flow of convenience
services for transactions inside the platform, and potentially for trade outside, an assumption
that is widely used to rationalize demand for currency that pays below the short-term market
rate of interest.16 For now, we assume the convenience yield is zero in all transactions, that
the token is only used for platform purchases, and that it does not effectively compete with fiat
  15
     As Demirg¨ uc
                 ¸-Kunt and Huizinga (2000) show, using bank data across 80 countries, the net interest margin
banks are able to earn (the difference between their deposit and lending rates) depend on an enormous range of
factors, including both explicit and implicit taxation, leverage market concentration, deposit insurance regulation,
macroeconomic conditions and many other factors. Regulation can be expected to play a similarly large role in
shaping the net interest margin for tech companies.
  16
     Digital currencies clearly can yield substantial convenience: consumers do not need to enter a security code
and wait for verification when they pay with Amazon credit. Alipay's convenience service makes Hangzhou a
"cash-free" city, where 80% of people make payments with their smartphones, rather than cash or credit card.



                                                         9
currency for trade outside the platform. We return to the convenience yield issue later, which
is clearly absolutely central to generation 4 platform tokens (from Table 1).


3.4         Assumptions

         Before proceeding to study token offerings, we initially make a number of assumptions to
simplify the analysis, and later discuss what happens when we relax them.

              1. Token issuance does not affect consumer demand for platform consumption. This ab-
                 stracts from a number of possible benefits, for example, if currency issuance increases
                 consumer time spent on the platform.

              2. Zero production cost. This assumption not only abstracts from the cost of produc-
                 ing platform intermediation services, but also from the cost the platform pays in
                 purchasing commodities to sell to consumers.

              3. No platform failure or bankruptcy (otherwise a default premium is built into the
                 token). Relatedly, if the platform issues tokens, these are assumed senior to any
                 other debt the platform may issue.

              4. The platform can make credible commitments to its future token issuance policy and
                 to redeemability.

              5. Any token issued by the platform is effectively a "stable coin" whose platform-use
                 value is fixed in terms of fiat money, and we assume no inflation.

              6. Platform tokens are tradable among consumers only if the platform allows it.

         These assumptions can be modified to get more general results. In particular, we later allow
for a convenience yield, a proportional cost of goods (relax assumption 2), and especially im-
portantly, relax the assumption that the platform can make credible commitments (assumption
4). Other extensions are possible.


4         Introduction of Platform Currency through ICOs and SCOs

         We now proceed to study the pricing and issuance strategies for a platform that introduces
tokens either through a once and for all "initial coin offering" (ICO)17 or through a combination
of an ICO and ongoing "seasoned coin offerings" (SCO). Note that if the platform did not engage
in any financial offerings, its value (per consumer) would simply be the expected present value
of sales:
    17
         A more precise term would be "initial token offering", however, we follow industry convention.


                                                           10
                                                       
                                                          p                                                 (3)
                                                     1 - 

       The first-best is that consumers transfer their entire willingness to pay to the platform in
the first period. It is achievable by issuing a life-long membership which enables pay once and
enjoy the free service for all time. The first-best discounted revenue:


                                                       
                                                         p                                                  (4)
                                                      1-
                                                                                   
       The present value of revenue after token issuance is bounded by [ 1-  p, 1- p]. We consider

a range of issuance policies and compare policies from the standpoint of the issuer.


4.1       Non-tradable Initial Coin Offering

       We first consider the case where the tokens issued by the platform are not tradable, and in
which the platform announces a fixed (per capita) quantity of tokens that it is going to sell, M .
Importantly, in order to sell the full quantity of tokens the platform has put up for sale, all the
tokens must be priced at the value of marginal token M , which is the last to be spent. Making
use of equation (2), we can solve for the token price in the non-traded case PI,N 18



                                                     N -1 M                     p
             PI,N =          N XN,M =           N         p (1 - p)N -M = [              ]M                 (5)
                                                     M -1                   1 -  (1 - p)
                      N M                 N M


                           p
       One may view      1- (1-p)   as the effective discount rate when the platform aims to issue an
                                                                                        p
extra token. To sell an additional token, all tokens sold must depreciate             1- (1-p)   which yields
higher surplus for consumers. Note that we have assumed platform sets the issuance quantity
M , but here it could equivalently set the token price P .19
  18
       The last equation uses a combinatorial identity where x =  (1 - p)

                                               M -1+k k     1 M
                                                      x =(     )
                                                  k        1-x
                                         k0

  An alternative and perhaps more intuitive approach to derive eq.(5) is through induction. Note that with one
token, the present value to the consumer is V (1) = p(1 +  (1 - p) +  2 (1 - p)p + ...) = 1-p (1-p)
                                                                                                    . Then, we
can solve V (M ) with an iterative iterative process. In a period when X th token spent, the expected value of
(X + 1)th token is always 1-p (1-p)
                                    where the value of X th token is one. Then, we have

                                                            p
                                          V (X + 1) =                V (X )
                                                        1 -  (1 - p)

Thus, the token price of M-token issuance is V (M ) = ( 1-p
                                                          (1-p)
                                                                )M .

  19
    The idea that the value and liquidity of a token depend on an underlying matching probability is reminiscent
of Kiyotaki and Wright's classic (1989) general equilibrium search-theoretic model of commodity money.


                                                         11
4.2    Optimal issuance

   To calculate optimal issuance, it is necessary to take into account both the gross profit
the platform gets from the ICO and the present value of foregone fiat money sales. As an
intermediate step, and to help intuition, it is useful to first calculate the level of currency issuance
that would maximize revenue ignoring foregone sales, in which case the platform maximizes
PI,N M , so that the first-order condition is given by.

                                   M                                                    M
                       p                            p                      p
                                       + ln                                                 M =0
                   1 -  (1 - p)                 1 -  (1 - p)           1 -  (1 - p)

which implies that
                                                             1
                                                M=          1- +p
                                                       ln     p

which depends positively on both  and p. Notice that the platform's discount rate   does not
enter this formula.
   Of course, the full maximization problem for the firm involves taking into account that if
a consumer purchases M tokens, then she will use tokens for her first M purchases instead of
paying in fiat currency. Thus the platform's complete maximization problem is given by

                                                       M         M                   i
                                     p                                     p
                           max{M                            -                          }
                            M    1 -  (1 - p)                          1 -   (1 - p)
                                                                 i=1
                                    Token Revenue                Foregone Cash Revenue

   Define RI,N as the total revenue for non-tradable token issuance. Then, we can rewrite the
firm's profit of token issuance as

                                     M                                 M
                     p                              p                       p                p
               M                            +                                   -                              (6)
                 1 -  (1 - p)                   1 -   (1 - p)              1 -              1 - 
              Revenue from Token Issuance           Revenue in Fiat Money           No Token Issuance


where the first two terms are the total revenue from token issuance RI,N and fiat sales after all
tokens are used.

                                            M                              M
                               p                         p                      p
                       M                        +                                   = RI,N
                           1 -  (1 - p)              1 -   (1 - p)             1 - 

   The third term in eq.(6) represents the value of the firm in the absence of currency issuance.
M  is a local optimum if



                   M                                   M -1                         M                      M
       p                             p                              p                          p
                        (M - 1)(                              -                         )+                     (7)
   1 -  (1 - p)                  1 -  (1 - p)                   1 -  (1 - p)               1 -   (1 - p)

                                                        12
    and



              Forgone Fiat Money Revenue




                                                                                                                        Token Price
                                                                 Gain


                                                                                    Loss




                                            1                2              3              4
                                                                    Issuance (M)


Figure 1 shows the gain and loss by reducing one token (from three to two). The issuer gains from the price
increase, but loses from revenue from the marginal token. Given three tokens are optimal in this example, this
figure corresponds to optimal issuance constraint eq.(7).




                                           M +1                         M                       M +1                                  M +1
       p                                                     p                       p                          p
                                                  < M(                      -                          )+                                    (8)
   1 -  (1 - p)                                          1 -  (1 - p)            1 -  (1 - p)               1 -   (1 - p)

    Figures 1 and Figure 2 illustrate inequalities (7) and (8). The gray areas represent the net
gain and loss from issuing one less (more) token (assuming the optimal number is 3). The blue
bars represent the present value of the of the foregone fiat money revenue from the M th token
             
issued [ 1-  p
            (1-p) ]
                    M . The dashed bars at the top represent the token price when M tokens are


issued [ 1-p      M                            
           (1-p) ] . (Here  appears instead of  .) For example, Figure 2 shows how if the

platform issues one token above the optimum of 3, it gains additional revenue from the extra
token issued, but suffers from the price decline on other tokens, as well as the present value of
the foregone fiat revenue on the marginal redemption.
                                                                                                                             1
    A few observations: First, clearly the optimal issuance level M is less than                                        1- +p          , which
                                                                                                                   ln     p
maximizes the firm's gross revenue from token issuance without taking into account the foregone

                                                                            13
              Forgone Fiat Money Revenue




                                                                                             Token Price
                                                   Loss


                                                                            Gain




                                           1   2          3        4
                                                   Issuance (M)


Figure 2 shows the gain and loss from increasing tokens issued from three (optimal) to four. The issuer loses
from the price decrease, but gains revenue from the extra token. Given three tokens are optimal, this figure
corresponds to optimal issuance constraint, eq.(8).


future sales in fiat money. Second, Appendix 2.1 shows that eq.(7) and eq.(8) are necessary
and sufficient conditions for the optimal issuance level. In another words, these two inequalities
pin down a unique M as the revenue-maximizing issuance quantity. Third, it is straightforward
to show that optimal issuance is monotonic in the key parameters   as long as the optimal
issuance level M  is larger than one. A low-  firm values present resources more and prefers
to issue more tokens. (Also see Appendix 2.1 for the proof.)
    Finally observe that with the pure ICO considered here, it does not matter if the platform
announces a quantity or a price, since there is complete information, provided the firm is
committed to selling all coins at the same price (perhaps because of regulation.) It is this very
constraint that leaves consumers some surplus when M > 1, and allows them to enjoy some of
the gains from token issuance.




                                                          14
4.3      Tradable ICO

   We begin by noting that once all individuals are holding at most one token, the token price
is governed by the willingness to pay of individuals who have fully depleted their token supply.
If the price is higher than their willingness to pay (WTP), no one wants to buy, and selling
pressure pushes the token price down. If the price is lower than the WTP, every consumer
without a token wants to buy one and this bids up the price. Thus, the token price is unique
when all individuals are holding at most one coin. Let P denote this unique and steady-state
price.


                                     P = p +  (1 - p)P

   The first term on the right-hand side denotes the present value of being able to consume
the coin in the next period, and second term denotes the present value of being able to sell it.
But this equation can be rearranged to yield


                                                 p
                                       P =
                                             1 -  (1 - p)

which is exactly the same as in the non-tradable case. Once all individuals have either zero or
one token, there are no longer any gains from inter-consumer trade; a token has the same value
to an individual whether she sells it or holds on until she has the first opportunity to use it.
Inducing individuals to hold more than one coin, however, requires that they expect the price to
appreciate at the rate  -1 every period, again assuming as we have so far that the convenience
yield is zero.
   Now suppose the platform wants to sell M tokens in an ICO, but where tokens are tradable;
what is the price? The key observation is that if there are M tokens, it will take (M - 1)/p
periods for the first M - 1 coins (per capita) to be depleted. (This is much faster than would
                                             M -1
be the case without trade.) In period 1 +     p ,      the price must reach its steady-state value of
P . The ICO price for M tradable tokens must be given by

                                           M -1        p
                                 PI,T =     p                                                       (9)
                                                   1 -  (1 - p)

   To compare the gross revenue from a non-traded ICO of M tokens with a traded ICO of
the same size, we first observe that when M = 1, tradability does not matter since all agents
are homogeneous. We then note from equation (5) that to issue one extra non-tradable token,
                                                         p
the platform needs to discount token prices by         1- (1-p)   while in the case of tradable tokens,



                                                  15
                                                                          1
equation (9) implies it would need to discount its price by  p .20 Thus to compare the price of
tradable tokens with that of non-tradable tokens (for any equivalent-size ICO), we need only to
compare the two discount factors. Proposition 1 answers this question.

Proposition 1 (Effective Discount Factor Dominance): The effective discount factor is
higher (closer to 1) for non-tradable ICO tokens than for tradable ICO tokens. (See Appendix
for the proof.)



                                               1        p
                                             p <                                                                (10)
                                                    1 -  (1 - p)


       Comments: Proposition 1 states that for any sale of M > 1 tokens in an ICO, the price will
be higher if the tokens are non-tradable. What is the intuition for this result, given that the
expected time to the redemption of the marginal token is greater in the case of non-tradability?
The answer has to do with the fact that the consumer's utility function is convex in time of
consumption.21 While commonly known that utility is concave in consumption for any given
period, it is less known that the utility is convex in the time of consumption. To illustrate this
convexity, consider the following two lotteries in time with the identical expected payoff.
       Lottery 1 (Price PC ): One dollar in period M + 2.
       Lottery 2 (Price PD ): One dollar in period M + 1 with 50% probability, and one dollar in
Period M + 3 with 50% probability.
       Lottery 1, sold at a price PC , delivers payoff one dollar with a "compressed" distribution in
time -- with 100% certainty in period M + 2. Lottery 2, sold at a price PD , delivers one dollar
payoff with a "dispersed" distribution in time -- with 50% probability in either period M + 1
or M + 3. As shown in Figure 3, if one dollar yields the same utility u(1) for any period, then
convexity implies that for a given expected cash flow, the more dispersed the distribution in
time, the higher it will be priced:

                                 1
                             PC = u(1)( M +1 +  M +3 ) > u(1) M +2 = PD
                                 2

       The initial ICO token price, in both the tradable and non-tradable case, depends on the
willingness to pay for the marginal token. Tradability compresses the distribution of the time
  20                                                                  1
       We can immediately derive the ICO revenue maximizing M =           1    for the tradable tokens case (ignoring
                                                                  -log ( p )
the opportunity cost of lost future fiat money sales). Proposition 1 implies the optimal revenue-maximizing
quantity of the tradable ICO is lower than that for non-tradable ICO.
  21
     The fact that additive utility functions are convex in time has been previously noted and studied experimen-
tally by DeJarnette et al. (2019).



                                                       16
Figure 3 plots the convex  -discounting function and shows the prices of the following two lotteries: Lottery 1
(price PC ): One dollar in period M + 2; Lottery 2 (price PD ): One dollar in period M + 1 with 50% probability,
and one dollar in period M + 3 with 50% probability. Convexity implies PC > PD .


required to spend the marginal token. In Figure 4, we plot the probability distribution function
of the period in which the marginal token is spent with M = 10 tokens and consumption
shock probability p = 0.5. All non-tradable tokens might be spent in as few as 10 periods if
consumption shocks arrive in every period ex-post, but will typically take a much longer time
                                                                                                    M -1
for most consumers. For tradable tokens, all consumers always use tokens in the first                p     = 19
                                                                           -1
periods. As shown in Figure 4, tokens start to deplete in the Period 19 ( Mp  +1) with probability
p = 0.5. The time distribution of expenditure for tradable tokens is compressed compared to
non-tradable tokens. Given the convexity of the utility function in time, tradability thus lowers
the token price.
    An alternative interpretation is that tradability creates a resale market that pushes the
platform to compete with itself. (This interpretation has a loose analogy to the Coase conjecture
albeit here consumers are homogenous.) The resale market introduces competition with the


                                                      17
          50
          40
   Probability (%)
    20    10
          0   30




                     10           15               20               25                                    30
                             Period when Marginal Token Spent (M=10, p=0.5)

                                 Non-tradable Tokens                         Tradable Tokens


Figure 4 plots the probability the period of the last token spent for tradable and non-tradable ICO respectively.
We pick M = 10 tokens issued and the probability of consumption is p = 0.5. The solid line plots the probability
distribution function of tradable tokens. The dashed line plots the probability distribution function of non-
tradable tokens.


future and reduces the token price. One might ask how a tradable token can sell for less than
a non-tradable token when the consumer always has the option of not trading it. The answer
is that with tradability, the platform cannot command as high a price precisely because the
consumer knows there is always an option of buying on the outside market in the future, and
this drives the requirement that the market price of a tradable token must rise faster than the
shadow price of a non-tradable token, as we have just proven. As we shall see in later sections
where we look at richer pricing strategies and memory functions, the potential advantages of
non-tradable tokens run much deeper than just this point.

    Of course, the proceeds from the ICO do not capture the entire story, since whenever a con-
sumer tenders a token for a later purchase, the platform has to forego fiat currency revenue that
it would have enjoyed absent any token issuance. But, as we next demonstrate in Proposition
2, the present value of future fiat revenue sales is also higher when tokens are non-traded, so a
non-traded token ICO is unambiguously more profitable than a traded token ICO.
    Recall that RI,N is the total revenue from non-tradable token issuance, given below eq.(6).


                                                       18
Define RI,T analogously.

Proposition 2 (Revenue Dominance): Tradability reduces the discounted revenue of the
issuer.
                                                   RI,N > RI,T




Proof of Proposition 2

       The present value of firm revenue from a one-time tradable token ICO, including both the
initial token sales revenue, and revenue from future fiat currency sales is given by



                                                  -1
                                                 Mp        p                p
                     RI,T =M × PI,T + 
                                                       1 -   (1 - p)       1 - 
                                                                       M                              (11)
                                                       p                     p
                                 < M × PI,N +                                      = RI,N
                                                   1 -   (1 - p)            1 - 

                            1
                                     p
       This inequality   p <       1-  (1-p)   holds as the   version of the condition proved in Propo-
sition 1.(That is, simply substitute   for  and the proof follows.) The only case where
tradability does not affect the discounted revenue is where p = 1 or  = 1.

       Comments: The logic is simple: The issuer starts to earn revenue in fiat money earlier with
non-tradable tokens than with tradable tokens.22 For the first M periods, all agents under both
types of ICOs have at least one token, and p percent of them use it each period. But starting
after period M , a rising fraction of agents in the non-tradable ICO have no coins, and thus need
to use fiat money for platform consumption. Under a tradable ICO, agents who hit zero coins
can buy coins from agents who have two tokens or more; in fact, all agents have at least one
                     M -1
coin for the first    p         periods. Thus revenue from fiat money is more backward loaded with
tradable issuance than non-tradable issuance, and hence has a lower present value.

       For only in-platform use, tradable tokens are strictly dominated by non-tradable tokens in
both revenues from token issuance and revenues from fiat money. To justify tradability, there
must be additional benefits outside our model. Of course, it is true that in our setup, we are
neglecting several potential merits of tradability. First, tradability makes the tokens liquid, and
potentially would allow the platform to pay a lower return due to a liquidity premium, albeit
  22                                                                                     -1
    With tradable tokens, no consumer would pay fiat money to the platform until period Mp  . If tokens are
                                                                     M -1
not tradable, a "lucky" consumer can spend all M tokens before period p and thereafter pay fiat money for
the platform consumption.



                                                         19
one that is likely lower than on fiat currency. Second, we have been assuming risk neutrality; if
agents are risk-averse in period utility, there would again be gains to tradability. Third, we have
eliminated the possibility that the tradable token can be used at other platforms or peer-to-peer
transfer. There are many crypto-exchanges that provide services for token trading, for example,
Coinbase or Bitpanda. If tradability allows broader use of the token, which might be translated
into a higher p in our model, this again could be an advantage of tradability that is outside the
scope of our model.


4.4       Consumer Surplus

       Token issuance yields gains from trade given that the platform's rate of return exceeds that
of retail bank consumers. However, the quantity-price tradeoff implies that the issuer is unable
to claim the entire surplus, and must share part of surplus from token issuance with consumers.
For completeness, and since the issue might be of significance to regulators, here we explicitly
derive consumer surplus.
                                             p
       Consumers derive utility             1-    from consumption but can pay for it in either tokens or fiat
money. The consumer's spending consists of two parts: token spending today, and the expected
expense in fiat money after depletion of tokens. For the non-tradable tokens, we can also write
the consumer surplus as the total willingness to pay for the first M tokens minus the cost of
purchasing the tokens.
       For non-tradable ICO tokens,


                                                                                             M
                                         p                                       p                p
              CSI,N (M ) =                              - M × PI,N -
                                        1-                                   1 -  (1 - p)        1-
                                                          Token Spending
                                  Consumption Utility                           Fiat Money Spending
                                            M                      i
                                                       p
                              =                                            - M × PI,N
                                                   1 -  (1 - p)
                                            i=1
                                                                            Token Spending
                                  Consumption Utility from First M Goods


       For tradable ICO tokens,


                                        p              M -1                    p              p
                     CSI,T (M ) =         - M × PI,T -  p
                                       1-                                  1 -  (1 - p)      1-

       Almost parallel to the Proposition 2, we can easily show that tradable tokens are preferred
by consumers: CSI,T (M ) > CSI,N (M ).23 Consumers benefit from tradability from both lower
  23
       The only difference is that consumers discount the fiat-money spending with  , rather than   on the issuer's
                     M               M -1
            p             p                    p          p
side.     1- (1-p)       1-
                              >       p
                                             1- (1-p)    1-
                                                              holds by Proposition 1.



                                                              20
token price paid today and the later fiat-money spending on expectation in future. In our
model, consumers always prefer a free market while the issuer benefits from more restrictions on
consumers for a more favorable split of welfare gain. CSI,N (M ) and CSI,N (M ) fully incorporate
the  convexity effect we discussed earlier, implying the price effect dominates for consumers.


4.5      Non-tradable ICO with a Price Menu

       We now consider the possibility that instead of selling all tokens at the same price, the
platform is allowed to offer a menu that relates the total price paid to the number of tokens
sold. Consumers are able to get a lower average price, the more tokens they buy. In this case,
it is easy to show that the firm can garner all the gains from trade and leave zero consumer
surplus.
       To derive the its optimal price menu, the firm makes use of eq.(2) which gives the marginal
value of the M th coin. For M tokens, it charges

                                              M                      i
                                                        p
                                                    1 -  (1 - p)
                                              i=1

       In this case, as M  , the platform gets the maximum possible discounted revenue (first-
best) out of consumers

                                               M                     i
                                                        p                     p
                                  limM                                   =
                                                    1 -  (1 - p)             1-
                                              i=1

       Consumers get zero surplus since the platform can design a price menu so that consumers
are indifferent along the menu. Thus, the design of price menu pushes up the average token
price and therefore total platform revenue corresponding to any given token issuance.24 , 25


                                              p            p             1
                                 PI,P M =       [1 - (              )M ]                                       (12)
                                             1-        1 -  (1 - p)      M

       It is quite straightforward to prove that a price menu approach adds nothing when the
tokens are tradable: if the platform sells at a lower average price to bulk, token buyers, it
cannot prevent the arbitragers from making a profit through resale. (Nor can it stop coalitions
of consumers from buying in bulk to get a lower average price.).
  24
     If consumers can share information efficiently and ship products at a low cost, one customer can arbitrage
along the price menu by aggregating demand from other consumers, buying a large quantity from the issuer at
a low price, and shipping products to others. In reality, customers are willing to accept price discrimination if it
is costly to arbitrage in the product market or if the purchased service is not transferable at all. For example,
users have to link their Uber accounts to their cell phone numbers. Thus the nature of some businesses can make
a price menu approach feasible in reality. However, for some durable goods, say an iPhone, the shipment cost is
quite small compared with the product value.
   25 p
     1-
          [1 - ( 1-p
                   (1-p)
                         )M ] M
                              1
                                > ( 1-p
                                      (1-p)
                                            )M = PI,N


                                                        21
4.6   Credibility of One-Time ICOs

   It is important to emphasize that in the ICO case we have considered until now, the platform
will be tempted to issue more tokens as the supply dwindles. Obviously, this could devalue the
existing base in the case of tradable tokens, but the possibility also turns out to be relevant even
in the non-tradable case. As we shall see in the next section, the consumer may regret having
bought so many tokens in the ICO and wish instead she had earned interest on her savings and
purchased more tokens later. Put differently, expectations of future issuance affects the shadow
price at which the implicit value of tokens will rise. Thus in both cases, traded and non-traded
ICOs, expectations of future issuance affects the current value of tokens. Our analysis, therefore,
assumes not only that the platform is credibly able to commit to the purchasing power of the
tokens when tendered, but also to its issuance strategy.
   As a private sector business subject to national laws and courts, a platform may have at
its disposal some devices for enhancing credibility not available to a sovereign currency issuer.
For example, it can be subordinated to a regulator who ensures that the platform's "white
paper" describing its token issuance policy cannot be violated without severe penalties. The
ICO tokens can be made senior to other debt and to any tokens issued in the future. Similarly,
the platform is legally bound to honor the fiat currency value of its tokens, so the exchange rate
is fixed. Obviously, many subtleties and nuances are surrounding all these issues, and the issue
of credibility is fundamental.
   In the next section, we consider a class of richer issuance strategies, beyond a one-time ICO,
that helps illustrate some of these points.


4.7   Non-tradable/tradable ICO+SCO (Price Only)

   Until now, we have considered one-time token issuance strategies that, over time, lead to
a shrinking supply of tokens as consumers redeem them for in-platform purchases. A true
prototype currency would not self-extinguish, particularly if the issuer wants to maintain the
possibility of eventual use outside the platform. In this section, we introduce the possibility that
after the initial ICO, the platform commits to subsequently engaging in routine "SCO" (seasoned
coin offerings) sufficient to maintain a constant steady-state supply of tokens. Although we are
going to continue to assume that the platform can credibly commit to its issuance strategy,
understanding how the expectation of ongoing sales affects the price of the initial ICO is also
relevant to understanding how lack of credibility might affect initial issuance and price.
   The introduction of SCOs turns out to change the calculus of token issuance quite funda-
mentally. In particular, we will demonstrate here the strong result that if SCOs are used to


                                                22
maintain a constant supply of tokens, then the maximum number of coins consumers will hold
is one per person. This result is the same whether tokens are tradable or not, and in fact the
tradable and non-tradable cases become equivalent. Importantly, this result applies only to
the kind of "memoryless tokens we have been considering so far; later we will introduce the
possibility that that platform can condition future token sales to individuals on past purchases.
   We begin with the case of non-tradable tokens. One new question in this scenario is how to
set the price in the SCO. In principle, there are three issuance strategies. (1) A no information
policy, in which all consumers are offered the same price in every SCO regardless of their
history in purchasing tokens and spending them. (In Section 5, we consider SCO issuance
with memory.) (2) A history-dependent policy where the platform can charge a price for SCO
tokens that is a function of the consumer's entire history with the platform. (3) A Markov policy
where issuance depends only on the consumer's current account information (holdings of tokens)
but is not path dependent. Policies (2) and (3) may seem very "un-money like" but actually
incorporate the richer possibilities that digital currencies offer, ideas that are seldom considered
in contemporary policy discussions say, about how retail central bank digital currencies might
replace paper currency.
   In this section, we will focus on the "no information" policy that is perhaps most likely to
be regulatory-compliant and least likely to run afoul of privacy concerns, though later we will
consider strategies with memory. The no information SCO strategy has very stark implications.
The basic problem the platform faces is that for any steady state M it tries to sustain, consumers
will only be willing to hold excess coins ­ more tokens that can be spent in one period ­ if they
anticipate that the price will be rising over time at the consumer's implicit interest rate ( -1 ).
But this is only possible in equilibrium if the quantity of tokens is falling over time ­ which is a
contradiction unless the excess coins yield sufficient transactions convenience services, which we
are abstracting from throughout most of this paper. Thus, the only steady-state coin holding
has every consumer entering each period with exactly one token. At the end of the period, the
platform will offer p tokens per person at price


                                                   p
                                        PS =                                                   (13)
                                               1 -  (1 - p)

which of course corresponds to the ICO price at M = 1. In a sense, we might refer to this equi-
librium as a "token-in-advance" model, since the consumer is always using tokens for platform
purchases. The same result holds with tradable tokens.

Proposition 3 (Token-in-advance Theorem): In any equilibrium with a constant supply
M of tokens, and with memoryless issuance strategy, M = 1 regardless of tradability.

                                                 23
Proof of Proposition 3:

       First, the token price needs to be constant in every period. If the token price is expected
to appreciate indefinitely at the interest rate, one token will eventually worth more than the
market value of the platform. However, the token price cannot exceed one because the value
of underlying consumption is bounded (at one by assumption). With a constant token supply,
the price must also be constant. Therefore consumers cannot get capital gains to substitute for
explicit interest payments, and the equilibrium token supply (per capita) cannot exceed one in
both tradable and non-tradable issuance.26
       Define RS as the total revenue of the ICO + SCO ("token-in-advance"):


                                          p                   p       p
                            RS =                         +       
                                      1 -  (1 - p)           1 -  1 -  (1 - p)
                                   Token revenue today       Token revenue in future

       The issuer nevertheless gains a higher discounted revenue from issuing one token than with
no tokens.


                                     p                ( -   )p
                          RS -                 =                    >0
                                 1 -   (1 - p)   (1 -  + p)(1 -   )

       Comments: Despite being able to earn ongoing revenues, the platform can only sell one
token in the first period, and only p < 1 tokens per period thereafter. Of course, from the point
of view of credibility, this ICO+SCO equilibrium might be easier to implement than the ICO.
Also, the "token in advance" model might be more viable in an environment where consumers
face liquidity constraints.



4.8      Comparison of ICO+SCO with Non-tradable ICO

       From a revenue perspective, an ICO+SCO allows the issuer to secure ongoing token revenue
from all future SCOs, rather than only from the one-time initial ICO. Also important is the fact
that by releasing tokens more slowly, the platform will be able to get a higher (un-discounted)
average price, that is, garners a larger share of the gains from trade. The disadvantage, of
course, will be the expectations of future SCO issuance limits how much the platform can
front-load revenue into the initial ICO. A natural question is whether a non-tradable ICO
issuance mechanism can beat the simple ICO+SCO with the "token-in-advance" constraint.
This involves comparing the discounted revenue of the non-tradable ICO:
  26
    No consumer would buy a second token since any consumer would prefer to invest in the risk-free asset and
wait to buy a new token from the market or from the issuer after the next consumption shock arrives.


                                                     24
                                          p              p        p
                       RI,N = M (                  )M +      (              )M
                                      1 -  (1 - p)      1 -   1 -   (1 - p)
                                      Revenue today            Revenue in future

Proposition 4 (ICO versus ICO+SCO Dominance): Under optimal issuance, the
non-tradable ICO dominates ICO+SCO if   is sufficiently low (   0). When the
consumption probability p is low (p  0) or   is high (    ), an ICO+SCO dominates the
non-tradable ICO. (See Appendix for the proof.)



       Comments: The tradeoff between ICO and ICO+SCO essentially depends on the size of
gains from ICO token issuance. For any parameters, it is easy to compare numerically with the
closed-form expression of RI,N and RS . Proposition 4 studies the dominance in three extreme
cases: When p is too small or the issuer's discount factor   is close to the consumer's discount
factor  , the issuer may prefer to do the ICO+SCO issuance mechanism because the issuer can
benefit from "token-in-advance" in every future period while the issuer cannot benefit a lot from
the large-quantity issuance in the ICO. For example, one can show that the ICO+SCO strictly
dominates the non-tradable ICO in the parameter space where the optimal issuance quantity is
2 (two) under the non-tradable issuance.27 The non-tradable ICO will dominate the ICO+SCO
when the issuer is impatient enough (  is small). The benefit of the front-loading cash flow
can be sufficiently large to offset the loss of future SCO revenue.
       Certainly, the ICO + SCO with a constant steady supply of tokens and a constant steady-
state price is much simpler than the optimal one-time ICO. It is also straightforward to show
that for reasonable parameters, it can be supported as a trigger strategy equilibrium if we
relax the no commitment assumption. Indeed, if the platform lacks credibility, the equilibrium
can devolve to the ICO + SCO case ("token-in-advance"). However, absent credibility issues
and when p and  are both close to one, the one-time non-tradable token ICO is much more
profitable.

  27
     We compute the revenue of a non-tradable ICO minus the revenue of an ICO+SCO when the optimal token
issuance is 2 under the non-tradable ICO. The revenue gap is strictly negative when   < 
                                      p
   Denote a = 1-p (1-p)
                        and a  =  1-  (1-p)
                                            . Conditional on M  = 2, we can show that RI,N < RS :

                                 a               a               a                 a
           RI,N - RS = 2a2 +         a 2 - a -       a = a 2 +       (a 2 - a) =       (a - a) < 0
                               1 - a           1 - a           1 - a             1 - a




                                                      25
5         Assumptions Revisited

5.1        Runs and Interest Payments

         As the model is constructed, the platform tokens are not subject to runs because agents
tender their tokens if and only if a consumption shock hits, and the good is assumed non-
storable. Of course, in reality, the offerings of platforms such as Alibaba and Amazon cover a
wide range of durable goods, which opens the possibility of having a panic with say, consumers
using their tokens to buy durables they do not yet need, despite storage costs. The platform
can deal with runs in standard fashion, for example, by reserving the right to suspend sales
temporarily, but the point is that even commodity-backed platform currencies are not immune
to runs absent a fully-credible outside guarantee.28 Of course, in principle, the proceeds from
token sales can be deposited in low return, but highly liquid, government securities. The
platform could have a guaranteed refund in fiat currency if it were to temporarily stock out
of goods in any given period; then, however, it would enjoy much smaller profits from token
issuance.29
         Some crypto-currencies have indeed adopted a business model of setting a fixed exchange
rate and claiming to hold all assets in treasuries, with the idea of making a profit by selling at
par, paying zero interest, and then making a profit from the interest-bearing government assets.
This approach, of course, has its fragilities. First and foremost, once international government
regulation requires these assets to be easily traceable by governments and fully compliant with
tax evasion and anti-money laundering laws, it is not at all clear that consumers will recognize
any "convenience yield". Second, even the most efficient crypto-currencies require considerable
business costs to run. Last be not least, they are ultimately subject to the same kinds of
fragilities as fixed exchange rate currencies and currency boards, where even slight temporary
illiquidities or fiscal weakness can lead to an immediate attack. (See, for example, Obstfeld and
Rogoff (1995).)30
         Another approach for the platform would be simply to create an outside bank to handle
its tokens, aiming to combine or leverage its token issuance business with a standard bank-like
lending business. This approach would thereby create a chaebol or keiretsu-like structure which
might allow the platform to use data across businesses to create synergies. The competition
between tech companies and banks is a critical area but beyond the scope of this paper. Our
narrow point here, though, is that the ability of chaebol and keiretsu to back tokens with
    28
       The classic reference on pure multiple equilibrium bank runs is Diamond and Dybvig (1983).
    29
       The platform can also adopt a policy of suspending service in a stockout to discourage runs.
    30
       For a discussion of the fragility of crypto-currencies, see Rogoff (2016).




                                                        26
platform goods does not necessarily constitute a significant advantage in itself.
     Finally, we note that in principle, platform tokens can pay interest "in-kind" (in tokens)
                                                                                     1-
rather than in fiat currency. In particular, suppose tokens pay interest equal to         on an ICO
      p
of   1-   tokens, which could be tradable. This policy is sustainable since it involves paying out
p tokens per period, exactly enough to replace tendered coins, assuming no runs. In a sense,
this is a different implementation of lifetime memberships. Another important interpretation
of the interest-bearing token we have just detailed is as a "security token" where effectively the
consumer owns a share of the platform, with payments in services. We leave "security tokens"
for future research.
     Why then, shouldn't the platform always make its tokens interest-bearing, or perhaps secu-
rity tokens per the above example? There are at least a couple of reasons. First, and perhaps of
the greatest concern in practice, is that the taxation and regulation of interest-bearing tokens
may be very different than non-interest bearing tokens, bringing the platform issuance under
banking and/or securities market regulation, with different results in different jurisdictions.
Current generations of tokens from Uber cash to Libra go through many gyrations to avoid be-
ing classified as securities, with non-payment of interest being a central condition in the United
States and most major jurisdictions.
     Second, in a more general model with uncertainty, the required interest rate will fluctuate.
And if the token market is relatively illiquid, it may be difficult to calibrate the interest rate
required to fulfill the platform's initial pledge to pay market interest. In general, paying interest
generates a different class of credibility issues, which are some cases may be more difficult to
navigate.


5.2       Non-zero Cost of Input Goods

     Assumption 2 posits zero cost of goods so that the entire revenue converts into platform
profit. We relax this assumption by allowing X proportion of platform sales to be attributable
to the input cost of goods. In this case, potential token demand is equal to gross sales by the
platform each period, and not just net revenues.
     The logic is straightforward: Token issuance adds financial income at the scale of gross
revenue, which can be much larger than the size of profit from net platform revenue. For
example, if an online retailer platform has a profit margin of 5%; the platform can issue tokens
with denomination 20 dollars for each one-dollar profit. If the platform can create an interest
return wedge of 3%, the value-added from token issuance will be 0.6 dollars, which account for
60% increase in the platform profitability.


                                                 27
       The pricing equations and issuance policy results remain the same as before when we relax
the zero cost of goods assumption, except that token prices are proportional to gross sales, not
net platform profit. The token prices only depend on the consumption probability, the sale price
of the commodity, and the effective discount rate. Thus the breakdown in cost and profit does
not affect the willingness to pay (WTP) for tokens. Thus, the value-added of token issuance is
wholly determined by the revenue and not affected by the cost of goods.
       The only change to the analysis from introducing non-zero input costs is to leverage up the
present value of the platform's profits from token sales. We consider the maximum leverage
effect from the benchmark platform value without token issuance to the first-best platform
value.
       The present value of platform without digital currency

                                                  
                                                     pX
                                                1 - 

       Under the first-best, the present value of platform profit is

                                                
                                           p-      p(1 - X )
                                        1-    1 - 

       The value to the platform of being able to leverage token issuance can be as high as


                                                             -  1
                                   Leverage(X ) = 1 +
                                                             (1 -  ) X

where Leverage(X ) is monotonically decreasing in X and   (increasing in the platform invest-
ment return), and orthogonal to the consumption probability p. A low X in practice makes the
token issuance to be spectacularly attractive for the online platforms with voluminous transac-
tions but low profitability. Thus, in principle, token issuance has great potential when internet
companies become financial service providers. Of course, as leverage increases, credibility prob-
lems become exacerbated and the platform becomes more vulnerable to runs per our earlier
discussion.


5.3      Convenience Yield

       One important potential merit of platform tokens is in providing a convenience yield for
the token holders.31 In the money-in-the-utility model (Sidrauski 1967), utility is increasing
and strictly concave in real money balances. In our model, a convenience yield would directly
  31
    For example, payment with Amazon credit can be settled immediately, rather than going through credit card
verification.



                                                     28
affect the token price by changing the effective discount rate. A larger convenience yield for
consumers clearly benefits the platform which can then discount its tokens by less.
         Convenience yield might be able to justify the issuance of tradable tokens if tradability
brings greater convenience for transactions. For example, suppose tokens can be used as a
digital unit to transfer money among consumers. In this case,


                                           (M, N ) <  (M, T )

         When tokens are more convenient to use, token holders are effectively more patient when
holding tokens and willing to pay more fiat money in exchange for them. Where the government
allows it, and where a single firm has dominant share across a large range of the economy, it is
possible in principle that a platform currency could yield a significant enough convenience yield
to compete with a government currency. For example, Alipay's success in China, particularly
in Hangzhou, brings together payments for online shopping, restaurants, investment funds -
even public transportation - into one unified digital payment system. This convenience has
persuaded the younger generation to start keeping a large proportion of their savings in their
Alipay's accounts. Tradable digital currency has great potential to be much more convenient
than cash if the infrastructure is appropriately built.
         Analytically, a convenience yield is quite straightforward to incorporate into our model if
it is linear in token holdings (it simply modifies the consumer's discount factor  ). A more
general treatment, allowing for decreasing returns, would be more challenging. In any event,
our read of the centuries-old history of money is that the government may initially allow or even
foster private innovation in transaction technology, but eventually the government regulates and
appropriates.32


6         Money Memory

         Up until now, we have shown that for a given level of token sales M in a one-time ICO, a
platform will earn a larger profit from a non-tradable token than from a tradable token, and a
larger profit still with a "buy more, save more" price-menu approach. If instead, the platform
attempts to maintain a constant supply of outstanding coins with the ICO + SCO, the tradable
and non-tradable cases turn out to be equivalent; whether or not the ICO + SCO can beat the
one-time non-tradable ICO depends on  and p.
         An important potential feature of a platform-backed currency ­ and in principle for any
    32
         Rogoff, 2016.



                                                   29
digital asset ­ is memory.33 A platform can fully observe a consumer's account information, the
full history of the account, and even the entire transaction history for each token. Making use
of this information, a platform can design a mechanism for the SCO that induces consumers to
hold M > 1 despite knowing that there will be future SCOs to replenish their stock.
    We show that profitability of the ICO + SCO can be considerably enhanced if the platform
can impose restrictions that tie a consumer's ability to purchase future SCO tokens at a favor-
able price to her past behavior. We consider in turn two simple mechanisms, one where the
platform can design a SCO based on the full history of consumer's actions (a history-dependent
mechanism), and a second where the platform can only design a SCO using current account
information (a Markov mechanism), but cannot price discriminate using the individual's his-
torical records. In practice, it might be hard to implement a full history-dependent mechanism
for many reasons: costly data storage and processing, the complexity of the issuance design for
each history, violation of privacy, or the consumer's sense of fairness. A Markov mechanism
might be easier to implement and also more acceptable to consumers.
                                                                                        p
    In the extreme, the platform can sell one token in the initial ICO for             1- ,   which is the entire
present value of future platform consumption to the consumer, but then commit to distributing
free tokens to any agent who tenders their token for consumption in any given period. This is,
of course, tantamount a membership system where the lifetime dues are paid once and for all
upfront.34
    Formally, consider a specific class of issuance policies where in any future SCO, a platform
only issues tokens to consumers with M - 1 tokens. Denote a as the ICO token price, b as the
SCO token price, and define token issuance mechanism (X, Y, a, b) where X is the amount of
tokens in the account, Y is amount of tokens to buy.            35   It is easy to check that "Buy M tokens
in the ICO, and buy one token after a consumption shock in SCO" is an equilibrium strategy
for consumers.36 Using the account information, a platform can collect full future revenue with
a finite amount of tokens.
  33
     Memory has been pervasively used in business practice. CVS prints coupons for different products once
consumers check out after scanning their CVS cards. Starbucks and McDonald's load customized special offers
to their mobile apps based on the analysis of customers' past consumption data. Platforms can easily incorporate
memory into tokens as a critical feature.
  34
     In Appendix 2.2, we consider rolling memberships for limited time horizons and provide closed-form solutions.
We also show that the discounted revenue from rolling memberships generates quantitatively similar revenue to
the price-menu case.
  35
     The extreme case discussed above can be written as follows: The price scheme of the ICO is (0, M, 1p- M
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                              , b),
(0, x, , b) if x = M . The price scheme of the SCO is (M - 1, 1, a, 0), (x, y, a, ) if x = M - 1 or y = 1.
  36
     First, consumers are indifferent between buying M tokens or never buying tokens. Thus, consumers have no
incentive to deviate to "Not buying at all". Second, consumers cannot benefit from buying more or fewer tokens
in the ICO since it costs more. Third, consumers would take free tokens in a SCO. Otherwise, consumers need
to pay fiat money for consumption.




                                                        30
6.1      History-dependent Issuance

       A history-dependent issuance can achieve the first-best in the sense that a platform can
punish any possible deviation from its issuance proposal. Under the case of perfect information,
a history-dependent issuance policy enables the platform to gain full control of consumer choices.
       We show that history-dependent issuance allows the maximum flexibility in the cash flow
arrangement. Consistent with Kocherlakota (1998), memory expands the set of feasible alloca-
tions. To illustrate this point, we expand the Markov SCO price menu to a history-dependent
SCO: If a consumer did not buy a token after a consumption shock before, the platform stops
selling tokens to the consumer (that is (x, y, a, ) for any (x, y ) pair); If a consumer buys a
token after each shock in the history, the platform offer one token at price b (that is, SCO:
(M - 1, 1, a, b), (x, y, a, ) if x = M - 1 or y = 1). In a richer framework, a platform can design
more sophisticated contingent issuance policies, but we leave this for future research.
       We start from the participation constraint


                                                   p    p
                                          Ma +       b
                                                  1-   1-

binds the minimum ICO price a with the maximum SCO price b. The minimum ICO price
must be higher than the ICO token price with price menu.37
       With history-dependent issuance, a consumer will be immediately excluded from the token
market once she chooses not to purchase after any consumption shock.38 Thus, the "now or
never" inter-temporal constraint restricts consumers to buy one token right after a consumption
shock if and only if


                                        p           p               p
                                (1 +      )b  [              ]M -1
                                       1-       1 -  (1 - p)       1-

       The constraint implies that the SCO token price cannot exceed the consumption value of
the marginal M th token: b  [ 1-p      M 39 The minimum ICO token price is equal to the
                                (1-p) ] .

price under information-free price menu.

                                        1 p             p
                                   a=        (1 - [              ]M )                                     (14)
                                        M 1-        1 -  (1 - p)

       A history-dependent issuance essentially incorporates memory into each token issued to
consumers. Each token is contingent on the sequence of past actions. The account history helps
            1 p
  37
     a> M     1-
                 [1 - ( 1-p(1-p)
                                 )M ] = PI,P M
  38
     Under a Markov policy, a consumer can still stay in the token market with probability 1 - p.
  39
     It is impossible to set the SCO price higher than the consumption value. Otherwise, consumers would prefer
to pay with fiat money rather than buying tokens.


                                                      31
the platform to achieve all possible cash flow allocations. A digital currency with memory thus
further improves the welfare of issuers; that is, data is extremely valuable for the issuer.


6.2       Markov Issuance (ICO+SCO)

       Under a Markov issuance policy, the issuer can only design issuance based on current hold-
ings, but cannot retrieve the full history of the consumer's behavior. Consumers may gamble
by procrastinating the purchase of the SCO token because the issuer cannot punish a deviation
based on their entire history. To incentivize consumers to buy the SCO token after a consump-
tion shock, the issuer must design an issuance policy that satisfies a new "no procrastination"
constraint:



           p                                        p                                      p               p
 (1 +        )b                     [(1 - p)(1 +      )b              +           p(                )M -1    ]
          1-                                       1-                                  1 -  (1 - p)       1-
                             No Consumption Shock: Still Use Tokens       Consumption Shock Arrives: Return to Fiat Money


       The left-hand side is to "purchase" a token at a price b right after a consumption shock.
The right-hand side is the payoff of procrastinating one period: without another consumption
shock (probability 1 - p), a consumer can still purchase a token at the SCO price b; if another
consumption shock arrives (with probability p), a consumer can never buy any token in the
future and must make purchases with fiat money.40 The "no procrastination" constraint pins
down the maximum SCO price.41


                                           1 p        - p      p
                                      a         (1 -      [             ]M )                                         (15)
                                           M 1-      1 - p 1 -  (1 - p)

       Use of account information provides additional value to the platform in two ways.42 First,
the Markov issuance policy allows the platform to commit to a lower future SCO price in order to
boost the ICO price. But this only works if the platform can condition future sales on holdings.
Second, the platform can continue to engage in short-term borrowing by selling tokens after
  40
       The present value of future spending in fiat money is
                    
                               p i          p                   1                    p                 p
                         (         ) =(              )M (        p
                                                                           )=(                )M -1 (    )
                   i=M
                             1 - p      1 -  (1 - p)      1-   1- (1-p)
                                                                                 1 -  (1 - p)         1-

  41
       The upper bound of the SCO price is lower than the consumption value of the M th token.

                                             - p      p                   p
                                       b         [             ]M < [              ]M
                                            1 - p 1 -  (1 - p)        1 -  (1 - p)
  42
    An important caveat is that the analysis here assumes the platform can commit, if it cannot then, of course,
it may be tempted to sell in later periods to consumers who choose not buy tokens initially.




                                                             32
every consumption shock.43


7      Heterogeneous Agents

      In our framework, the consumption probability p is the cornerstone for the token price.
The assumption maps into the reality that many technology companies take "Daily active
users" (DAU) as a significant parameter to focus on. In this section, we relax the assumption of
homogeneity and address the following three questions: Does consumer heterogeneity encourage
or discourage token issuance? Is it more profitable to only cater to frequent consumers or to
be more inclusive? Most importantly, does introducing heterogeneity overturn our conclusion
that if tradability does not produce sufficient convenience yield, then platforms may find the
issuance of non-tradable tokens more profitable?
      Heterogeneity raises a number of issues including for example, how a platform can price
discriminate. Our illustrative analysis suggests that in principle, however, heterogeneity will
not overturn our core results. Nevertheless, we show that heterogeneity reduces the benefits of
token issuance if the platform cannot price discriminate among consumers.
      For simplicity, we assume a society consisting of half frequent buyers pH and half infrequent
buyers pL . A platform aims to issue M tokens in total to all consumers, ML per infrequent
consumer at price PL , and MH per frequent consumer at PH respectively. We define a pooling
equilibrium (both types of buyers purchase a positive number of tokens at the same price) as
the case where PH = PL . In separating equilibrium (or price discrimination equilibrium) the
two types of consumers buy tokens at different prices (or one type of consumers stay out the
token market entirely). The issuance quantity and consumption frequency follows


                                              ML + MH
                                                      =M
                                                 2


                                                pL + pH
                                                        =p
                                                   2

7.1     Non-tradable ICO with Price Only

      If a platform cannot price discriminate, all consumers coordinate in a pooling equilibrium
where price PI,N is the same for everyone. The willingness to pay for the last token equals to
the
   43
      If we write down the token sale revenue after each consumption shock, the amount of tokens purchased in
ICO and SCO is M, 0, ...0, M, 0, ..., 0 with "no information" issuance of price menu. The Markov issuance policy
allows the platform to front-load cash flow in all SCO periods by M, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, ....



                                                      33
                                          pi
                                  (                  )Mi = PI,N            i  {H, L}
                                      1 -  (1 - pi )

       To issue M tokens, the corresponding price PI,N must satisfy:


                                      log (PI,N )                log (PI,N )
                                                       +                          = 2M
                                  log ( 1-p L
                                          (1-pL ) )         log ( 1-p H
                                                                    (1-pH ) )

                                                                                1
       To simplify notation, we define function f (p) =                                     and the non-tradable token
                                                                        log ( 1-p (1-p)
                                                                                        )
price can be written as the following:

                                                                   2
                                                                           M
                                                PI,N = e f (pL )+f (pH )

       After introducing heterogeneity, the new effective discount factor of non-tradable tokens is
         2
e f (pL )+f (pH ) . Proposition 5 compares the new effective discount factor with the discount factor
                                            1
                            p
under heterogeneity       1- (1-p) (=     e f (p) ) as first defined in Section 3.1.

Proposition 5 (Heterogeneity of Non-tradable Tokens): The token price with agent
heterogeneity is lower than the token price with homogeneous consumers of the same average
consumption probability. (See Appendix 1 for the proof.)


                                                      PI,N < PI,N



       Comments: Proposition 5 illustrates that agent heterogeneity leads to a lower average price
for the same token issuance. We note, however, that the magnitude of price sacrifice caused
by heterogeneity is not necessarily large since the curvature of function log ( 1-p          1
                                                                                  (1-p) )( f (p) ) is

small for  and p near one (since log(x) is approximately linear around x=1). The effect of
heterogeneity on revenue from fiat currency revenue (after the consumer uses up all her tokens)
is ambiguous. Regardless, the magnitude of impact on cash revenue is only a second-order
effect.44
  44
       Cash revenue with heterogeneity:
                           1                 pH                        pL
                               
                                [p H (     
                                                      )MH + pL (                 )ML ]
                           21-         1 -  (1 - pH )            1 -   (1 - pL )
                                                   pL +pH
  Cash revenue with homogeneity (where p =            2
                                                            ):
                                                   
                                                          p
                                                     p (            )M
                                                1 -   1 -   (1 - p)
   To quantify the impact of heterogeneity, we pick a set of parameters pH = 0.8, pL = 0.4,  = 0.9,   = 0.8
and plot the difference. The cash revenue difference is no more than 0.0005, while the total discounted revenue
is 4 without token issuance. The difference from cash revenue is less than 1.25 basis points. We conclude that
heterogeneity mildly discourages token issuance.


                                                             34
   Corresponding to our discussion of the homogeneous case, we next extend our analysis to
the impact of agent heterogeneity on the following four mechanisms: a non-tradable ICO, a
tradable ICO, a non-tradable ICO+SCO, and a tradable ICO+SCO. Lastly, we study a price
menu mechanism.


7.2     Tradable ICO

   With tradability, all consumers must receive the same token price in the ICO. Moreover, the
token price must be expected to appreciate to generate the risk-free return required to induce
agents of either type to hold more than one token. Frequent consumers gain more welfare
surplus since they are more likely to use the tokens. The token price under heterogeneity is
given by (See Appendix 2.3 for the derivation of the closed-form solution.):

                    M -1                             pL                           pH
          PI,T =     p     [(1 -   (1 - PL ) )                  +   (1 - PL )                ]
                                                 1 -  (1 - pL )               1 -  (1 - pH )

where
                                                               pL
                                                   log (1 +   2pH )
                                         =-                   1
                                                   log (1 -   2 pL )

   One can show two results: First, similar to the non-tradable case, heterogeneity reduces the
token price for tradable tokens. With tradability, the token price must appreciate at the rate
of interest regardless of the distribution of consumption probabilities.

Proposition 6 (Heterogeneity of Non-tradable Tokens): When M = 1, the token price
with heterogeneity is lower than the price with homogeneity. (See Appendix 1 for the proof.)


                                                 PI,T < PI,T



   Comments: Proposition 6 reveals that the token price under heterogeneity must be lower
than the token price under homogeneity when only one token per person left in the economy.
Heterogeneity can be viewed as a "friction" that limits the power of the platform to extract
consumer surplus; frequent consumers retain positive surplus under token issuance. From the
platform's perspective, revenue from token issuance is reduced by the consumer surplus if price
discrimination is not feasible. We will return to price discrimination later.

   Second, the token price of the tradable ICO is still lower than non-tradable ICO with
heterogeneity, even if prices are both lower than the case of agent homogeneity. Propositions 7
and 8 speak to the point that our conclusion about tradability is robust to introducing agent
heterogeneity.

                                                      35
Proposition 7 (Effective Discount Factor Dominance with Heterogeneity): Under
heterogeneity, the effective discount rate of non-tradable ICO tokens is still higher than that
of tradable ICO tokens. (See Appendix 1 for the proof.)
                                                 1                2
                                                p < e f (pL )+f (pH )



Proposition 8 (ICO Price Dominance with Heterogeneity): When M = 1, the token
price with tradability is lower than the non-tradable token price under heterogeneity (See
Appendix 1 for the proof).

                                                     PI,T < PI,N


       Comments: Proposition 7 is parallel to the Proposition 1 under the agent heterogeneity,
implying that the tradable ICO price discounts faster than the non-tradeable ICO price as the
quantity of tokens issued increases.45 Proposition 8 proves that the tradable token price is
lower than the non-tradable token price when M = 1 (Recall that token prices are the same
for tradable and non-tradable when M = 1 under homogeneity). Proposition 8 is unique to the
agent heterogeneity case since trading still occurs between high-type and low-type when less
than one token circulates in the economy. Thus, as in the homogeneity case, the tradable token
price is lower for any possible quantity of token issuance. Our core tradability result is robust
to heterogeneity of consumption probabilities.



7.3      Tradable/ Non-tradable ICO+SCO

       Similar to the homogeneous case, with tradability, there is no way to improve on a "token-
in-advance" policy (selling a tokens one period ahead). Frequent consumers are willing to
          pH                                                                pL
pay     1- (1-pH )   and infrequent consumers are willing to pay          1- (1-pL ) .   The new element here
is having to choose between issuing to frequent consumers with a high price and issuing to
everyone with a low price.
       Pooling Equilibrium: Low price, broad consumer base: If the platform wants every-
                                                         pL         46
one to buy its tokens, the price needs to be           1- (1-pL ) .
                                                              1
  45
     With tradability, the effective discount rate is always  p regardless of the consumption probabilities. Without
tradability, the effective discount rate is lower with consumption heterogeneity as shown in Proposition 6. Thus,
Proposition 7 is a tighter inequality than Proposition 1.
  46
     In the pooling equilibrium case, the platform may not want to issue the token one period ahead if

                                  pL          1       pL               pH
                                             < (    
                                                               +                 )
                              1 -  (1 - pL )  2 1 -  (1 - pL )   1 -   (1 - pH )



                                                         36
      Under a pooling equilibrium, consumption heterogeneity makes the issuer worse off since
the infrequent consumers drag down the token price.


                                                 pL               p
                                                            <
                                             1 -  (1 - pL )   1 -  (1 - p)

      Separating Equilibrium: High price, narrow consumer base: If the issuer only wants
                                                                                                  pH        47
to cater frequent consumers only, the token price will be offered at                            1- (1-pH ) .       Intuitively, the
platform should cater to frequent consumers (set a high price that only frequent consumers take
up) only when there is a significant gap between the probabilities for high and low types. The
issuer chooses the separating equilibrium if and only if

                                pL          1     pH               pL
                                           < (              +                )
                            1 -  (1 - pL )  2 1 -  (1 - pH ) 1 -   (1 - pL )

Proposition 9 (ICO+SCO Revenue Dominance with Heterogeneity) : Heterogeneity
reduces the discounted revenue of ICO+SCO issuance. (See Appendix 1 for the proof.)



                                                           RS < RS


      Comments: Proposition 9 verifies that the consumption probability heterogeneity causes
the platform to earn strictly less revenue regardless of the issuance policy. Under a pooling
equilibrium, infrequent consumers reduce the token price and make issuers unable to extract
surplus from frequent consumers. Under a separating equilibrium, the issuer has to forgo half
the population in the token issuance.



7.4      Price Menu Policies

      The price menu mechanism enables the separating equilibrium where frequent consumers
buy more tokens at a higher average price, and infrequent consumers buy fewer tokens at a lower
average price (or even excluded in the token market when pL is small enough). We provide the
condition for the separating equilibrium existence and its derivation in Appendix 2.4.
 47
      The welfare gain from token issuance is only from frequent consumers,
                                            1     pH                 pH
                                              (              -                 )
                                            2 1 -  (1 - pH )   1 -   (1 - pH )
 The revenue under separating equilibrium is
                                       1 1 -   (1 - pH ) pH                                
                    g (p H , p L ) =     [                               +                    pL               ]
                                       2   1 -  (1 - pH ) 1 -                            1 - 
                                        Frequent Consumers with tokens       Infrequent Consumers without tokens




                                                               37
8    Conclusion

    In this paper, we have studied to what extent large retailer platforms might have an advan-
tage in issuing non-interest bearing digital tokens (currencies) by leveraging the fact that there
are many consumers who are regular buyers, and who might find in-platform tokens appealing
and convenient, while potentially both saving the platform fees paid to financial intermediaries
as well as generating revenues of their own through a net interest margin.
    Our core finding is that it many cases, it may be advantageous to the platform to issue
non-tradable tokens rather than tradable ones, even if that means foregoing ideas of creating a
prototype currency, unless the prototype currency can be expected to create significant conve-
nience yield. Non-traded tokens give the platform the ability to implement more sophisticated
pricing strategies (for example a price menu approach), and to incorporate memory features.
    It is important to recognize that at the end of the day, a great deal depends on regulation,
taxation, and other policy choices affecting not only technology companies but also financial
firms. Nevertheless, the simple benefit for platforms we look at here (net interest margin) is
certainly an important one, especially if, as we assume, digital tokens give retail platforms access
to the same kind of low interest-rate lenders that banks have so long profited from.
    Our analysis has focused mainly on non-interest bearing tokens; if tokens can pay market
interest, this can solve many of the problems we have analyzed, and this is certainly one solution.
However, as discussed in the text, a pledge to pay market interest has its own issues, with
implications for taxation, regulation, credibility, governance, and implementation.
    The model presented here allows one to analyze a hierarchy of platforms depending on the
frequency with which the consumer accesses them, and potentially also the size of transactions,
and therefore how such differences might affect platform strategies when it comes to token/coin
issuance. Our analysis aims to be the first stab in understanding token issuance mechanisms but
does not intend to horse-race token with traditional financing approaches, like bonds or equity.
The huge range of crypto-currencies that have been issued to date, with ties to everything
from social networking to real estate provide fertile ground for empirical analysis. In principle,
it is also possible to exploit data on related token devices from the pre-digital commerce era,
including green stamps, loyalty points etc. although as we have previously noted, the technology
of this era did not allow for using data in the same way as today, and the issue of ICOs is new.
    The last part of our paper introduces a number of issues related to heterogeneity, which
opens up a host of interesting questions for future research. Loyalty programs and gift cards
have been around for a long time and are already economically significant, but new generations
of redeemable platform tokens are in an explosive growth phase and are set to play an increasing


                                                38
role in payments in the monetary economics of the future.




                                             39
Reference

Athey, Susan, Ivo Parashkevov, Vishnu Sarukkai, and Jing Xia. "Bitcoin pricing, adoption, and
   usage: Theory and evidence." (2016).
Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, Catherine Casamatta, and Albert J.
   Menkveld. "Equilibrium bitcoin pricing." Available at SSRN (2018).
Budish, Eric. "The economic limits of bitcoin and the blockchain." No. w24717. National
   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper (2018).
Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity."
   Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 3 (1983): 401-419.
De Boer, Evert R., and Sveinn Vidar Gudmundsson. "30 years of frequent flyer programs."
   Journal of Air Transport Management 24 (2012): 18-24.
Demirg-Kunt, Asli, and Harry Huizinga. "Financial structure and bank profitability." World
   Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2430 (2000).
DeJarnette, Patrick, David Dillenberger, Daniel Gottlieb, and Pietro Ortoleva. "Time lotteries
   and stochastic impatience." Working Paper (2019).
Justia Law, FTC v. Sperry Hutchinson Co., 405 U.S. 233 (1972)
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and Randall Wright. "On money as a medium of exchange." Journal of
   Political Economy 97, no. 4 (1989): 927-954.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R. "Money is memory." Journal of Economic Theory 81, no. 2 (1998):
   232-251.
Lonto, R Jeff. "The Trading Stamp Story." Studio Z.7 (2013): http://www.studioz7.com/stamps.html
Middelbrook, Stephen T. and Sarah Jane Hughes. "Substitutes for Legal Tender: Lessons from
   History for the Regulation of Virtual Currencies," in Research Handbook on Electronic
   Commerce Law, John A. Rothchild (ed.) (2016)
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. "The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates." Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 9 (1998): 73-96.
Pollak, Mary. "Green Stamps, A Case Study," Journal of Services Marketing, Volume 2 (1988):
   55-58.
Prat, Julien, Vincent Danos, and Stefania Marcassa, "Fundamental pricing of utility tokens",
   Working Paper (2019)
Raskin, Max, Fahad Saleh, and David Yermack. "How Do Private Digital Currencies Affect
   Government Policy?." No. w26219. National Bureau of Economic Research (2019).
Raskin, Max, and David Yermack. "Digital currencies, decentralized ledgers and the future of
   central banking." In Research Handbook on Central Banking (2018).


                                             40
Rogoff, Kenneth S. The Curse of Cash. Princeton University Press, 2016.
Schilling, Linda, and Harald Uhlig. "Some simple bitcoin economics." No. w24483. National
   Bureau of Economic Research, (2018).
Sidrauski, Miguel. "Rational choice and patterns of growth in a monetary economy.' The
   American Economic Review (1967): 534-544.
Sockin, Michael, and Wei Xiong. "A model of cryptocurrencies." Unpublished manuscript,
   Princeton University (2018).




                                            41
Appendix: Proposition Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1: Effective Discount Factor Dominance
                 1
                       p
    To show  p <     1- (1-p) ,   we rewrite the inequality linearly as

                                                   1          1
                                                           1+ p
                                        p >  p -                  (1 - p)


    Then, we define a function  ( ) and show  ( ) > 0 in the range of p  (0, 1):

                                                       1       1
                                                            1+ p
                                      ( ) = p -  p +               (1 - p)


    First, it is easy to find that  (0) = 0 and  (1) = 0. Then, we characterize  ( ) with the
first-order and second-order derivatives:

                                            1 1 -1    1 1
                                   ( ) = p -  p + (1 + ) p (1 - p)
                                            p         p

                 1 1     1
                           -2    1 1 1 -1         1
                                                    -2 1 1
            ( ) = ( - 1) p + (1 + )  p (1 - p) =  p     ( - 1)[1 - (1 + p) ]
                 p p             p p                   p p

    Note that  (0) = p > 0 and  (1) = 0. From the second-order derivative ( = 0  =
 1                                                                           1                              1
1+p ),   we find that  ( ) is monotonically decreasing when  <              1+p   but increasing when  >   1+p .

    Then, we show the existence of a unique  such that  ( ) = 0. Existence:  (0) = p > 0.
 (1) < 0 implies that  (1 - ) < 0 where           is a positive infinitesimal. By the continuity, there
must exists a   ( ) = 0. Uniqueness: If there is more than one root, say 0 < 1 < 2 < 1,
then  (1 ) =  (2 ) =  (1) = 0. By the continuity, there must exist 1 and 2 so that
                                                                                               1
 (1 ) =  (2 ) = 0 and 1 < 1 < 2 < 2 < 1. However, we know that  =                             1+p   is the only
root for  ( ) = 0 in the range of (0, 1). This violation implies a unique solution to  ( ) = 0.
    Last, we show that  ( ) > 0 holds when   (0, 1).  (0) = p > 0 implies  ( ) > 0 for
a positive infinitesimal . If there is a 3 where  (3 )  0, we can find a 4  ( , 3 ) so that
 (4 ) = 0.  (0) =  (4 ) =  (1) = 0 implies at least two roots for  ( ) = 0. It violates the
uniqueness of the solution to  ( ) = 0.
    To give a graphical illustration, we plot the gap between the two effective discount factors
as a function of  with p = 0.9 as in Figure 5.




                                                    42
                         (
                         '
                      - 
           1 - (1 - )
               




                                                                       

Figure 5 plots the difference between effective discount factors for the non-tradable and tradable tokens as a
function of  . The probability of consumption shock is set as p = 0.9.


Proof of Proposition 4: Non-tradable ICO dominance over ICO+SCO
    We consider three corner cases    0, p  0, and     :
    Case 1    0: maxM RI,N - RS = maxM M ( 1-p
                                             (1-p)
                                                   )M -                            p
                                                                                 1- (1-p)
                                                                                             [M ( 1-p
                                                                                                    (1-p)
                                                                                                          )M ]|(M = 1) -
  p
1- (1-p)
           =0
    When    0, ICO dominates because the issuer does not value future revenue at all. "Token-in-advance"
limits the issuer's ability to collect token revenue in the ICO period.
    Case 2 p  0: The gain to issue the second token is only second-order (a constant multiplies p2 ):


                                     p                   p                  2         2 2
                             (                )2 - (               )2
                                                                       [(    ) - (      ) ]p
                                 1 -  (1 - p)        1 -   (1 - p)        1-       1 - 
.
    But the loss is first order (a constant multiplies p):

                                                p                   p            
                                        (                )2 - (              )-    p
                                            1 -  (1 - p)        1 -  (1 - p)    1-

    The first-order loss is larger than the second-order gain. Thus, the optimal non-tradable ICO token issuance
is one. ICO+SCO strictly dominates non-tradable ICO with one token outstanding because SCO can frontload
                                                           p
cash flow and increase revenue by p[ 1-p
                                       (1-p)
                                             -          1-  (1-p)
                                                                  ]   in every future period.
                 
    Case 3             : The gain from the second token issuance is close to zero. The loss is ( 1-p
                                                                                                   (1-p)
                                                                                                         )2 -
( 1-p
    (1-p)
                
          )  - 1- 
                   p < 0. Thus, the optimal non-tradable ICO token issuance is also one. Similarly, the
ICO+SCO dominates the non-tradable ICO in this case.




                                                               43
                Appendix 1: Additional Proofs (Online Only)

                                   Kenneth Rogoff and Yang You

                                             July 5, 2020



Proof of Proposition 5: Negative Value of Heterogeneity in a Non-Tradable
ICO

   In this section of Appendix 1, we prove that heterogeneity reduces the token price of non-
tradable ICO tokens. See Section 6.1.
                                                                                              1-
   Define g (x) = log ( 1-x
                          (1-x) ) and it is easy to show g (x) < 0, g (x) =                x(1- +x) ,    and
              - )(1- +2x)
g (x) =   - (1x 2 (1- +x)2   <0
                                                                        (x)g (x)2 -2g (x)2 g (x)
   f (x) =     1
             g (x)   (defined in Section 6.1) and we have f (x) = - g           g (x)4
                                                                                                 .   Then, we
show f (x) > 0.


                                                                      x
            f (x)  g (x)g (x) - 2g (x)2  -(1 -  + 2x)log (                 ) - 2(1 -  )
                                                                  1 -  + x

   Then, the convexity of f (x) is equivalent to the inequality:


                                                      x         2(1 -  )
                           f (x) > 0  -log (               )>
                                                  1 -  + x    1 -  + 2x

   First, we show that the inequality holds for x = 1, that is

                                                     2(1 -  )
                                          -log >
                                                      1+

   We use monotonicity to prove the inequality:


                     2(1 -  )           -2(1 +  ) - 2(1 -  )   1    (1 -  )2
                 (            + log ) =                      +   =           >0
                      1+                      (1 +  )2             (1 +  )2 

   Thus f (x) > 0 holds when x = 1:


                             2(1 -  )           2(1 -  )
                                      + log < (          + log )| =1 = 0
                              1+                 1+
                          x              2(1- )
   Then, we show -log ( 1- +x ) >       1- +2x    by proving the following function is monotonically


                                                  A1.1
Appendix 1                                                                                       For Online Publication Only


increasing:

                      2(1- )           x
                  d[ 1-  +2x + log ( 1- +x )]                         (1 -  )3
                                                         =                            >0
                                        dx                   (1 -  + 2x)2 x(1 -  + x)

   Combining monotonicity and f (x = 1) > 0, we have

                           2(1 -  )             x       2(1 -  )
                                    + log (          )<          + log < 0
                         1 -  + 2x          1 -  + x     1+

   f (x) is a convex function on p  [0, 1]. The convexity of f (x) implies that heterogeneity
reduces the token price:

                                                2                      p
                             PN,I = (e f (pL )+f (pH ) )M < (                   )M = PN,I
                                                                   1 -  (1 - p)

Proof of Proposition 6: Negative Value of Heterogeneity in a Tradable ICO

   In this Appendix 1 section, we demonstrate that heterogeneity lowers the price of non-
tradable tokens. This proposition serves the analysis in Section 6.2. To prove the following
inequality:


                            p                                                             p
                   log (1+ 2pL )                                                 log (1+ 2pL )
                              H                                            H
               -           1
                   log (1- 2 pL )
                                          pL                     -       1          pH               p
(1 -  (1 - PL )                     )                +  (1 - PL ) log(1- 2 pL )                <
                                      1 -  (1 - pL )                            1 -  (1 - pH )   1 -  (1 - p)

   We simplify the inequality by defining pH - p = p - pL = ,


                                p
                       log (1+ 2pL )
                   -
                       log (1- 1
                                  H
                                                   (1 -  )2                           (1 -  )
    (1 - pL )                  2 pL )                                    <
                                        (1 -  (1 - pL ))(1 -  (1 - pH ))   (1 -  (1 - p))(1 -  (1 - pL ))


                                                                 p
                                                        log (1+ 2pL )
                                                                   H
                                                    -           1p )
                                                        log (1- 2
                                                                                         
                                 2 (1 - pL )                       L     <1+
                                                                                     1 -  (1 - p)

                                                                         pL
                                                         log (1 +       2pH )                        
                   log 2 - log ( (1 - pL ))                             1        < log (1 +                   )          (1)
                                                        log (1 -        2 pL )
                                                                                                 1 -  (1 - p)

   Then, we define a function

                                                                           pL
                                                           log (1 +       2pH )                       
              w(, pL , pH ) = log ( (1 - pL ))                            1         + log (1 +                 )
                                                           log (1 -       2 pL )
                                                                                                  1 -  (1 - p)

   We prove inequality (1) above in following three steps:


                                                             A1.2
Appendix 1                                                                             For Online Publication Only


   Step 1: We show that function w is monotonically decreasing in  .


                    pL
    w   1 log (1 + 2pH )              2                  1   1      2
      =            1     +                              < (-   )+ 2       <0
         log (1 - 2 pL ) (1 -  (1 - p))(1 -  (1 - pH ))   p+      p(p + )
                 negative                        positive


                                                                       pL
                                                             log (1+         )
   Thus w(, pL , pH ) > w(1, pL , pH ) = log (1 - pL ) log(1- 2
                                                              1
                                                               pH
                                                                p )
                                                                    + log (1 + p )
                                                                       2 L

   Step 2: we show that function w is monotonically increasing in pH , that is, equivalently we
prove the first-order derivative is positive:

                      w     log (1 - pL )     pL              pL
                         =-          pL                +              >0
                      pH    log (1 - 2 ) (2pH + pL )pH   (pH + pL )pH


                                               log (1 - pL )   2pH + pL
                                                             >
                                               log (1 - p2
                                                         L
                                                           )   pH + pL
                2pH +pL
   We know       pH +pL   is monotonically increasing in pH . A sufficient condition for the positive
first-order derivative is the following:


                                           log (1 - pL ) 2 + pL
                                                    pL >
                                           log (1 - 2 )  1 + pL


                                                                                     pL
                           (1 + pL )log (1 - pL ) - (2 + pL )log (1 -                   )>0
                                                                                      2

   Take the first-order derivative of the equation above,

                                                                                         pL
                                               1 + pL               pL    1+              2
                            [log (1 - pL ) -          ] - [log (1 -    )-                pL   ]
                                               1 - pL                2    1-              2

                                                                      1+x
   To sign the first-order derivative, we define h(x) = log (1 - x) - 1-x , x  [0, 1] and study its

monotonicity:


                                                     1       2
                                     h (x) = -          -         <0
                                                   1 - x (1 - x)2

   h(pL ) > h( p2
                L
                  ) implies that w is monotonically increasing in pH . Then, we only need to
show the inequality holds when pH  pL , that is:

                                                                                     log ( 3
                                                                                           2)
                       w(1, pL , pH )  w(1, pL , pL ) = log (1 - pL )
                                                                                 log (1 - 1 2 pL )




                                                      A1.3
Appendix 1                                                                                        For Online Publication Only


                log (1-pL )
     Step 3:           pL
                log (1- 2 )
                              is monotonically increasing in pL .

                                             1
                                             2                             1            pL
                                                 pL   log (1 - pL ) >          log (1 -    )
                                          1-      2                     1 - pL           2

                                                                                  pL
                                                                           1-      2               pL
                                       (1 - pL )log (1 - pL ) >               1        log (1 -       )
                                                                              2
                                                                                                    2
                              (1-xpL )
     We show k (x) =             x     log (1     - xpL ) is monotonically increasing in x  [0, 1],

                                                  1                    pL  xpL pL
                                  k (x) = -         2
                                                      log (1 - xpL ) -    > 2 -   =0
                                                  x                     x   x   x

                 1                                                      log (1-pL )
     k (1) > k ( 2 ) implies monotonicity of function                          pL ,
                                                                        log (1- 2 )


                                                                                             -1
                                  log (1 - pL )         log (1 - pL )                       1-pL
                                           pL > limpL 0               =                             =2
                                  log (1 - 2 )          log (1 - p2
                                                                  L
                                                                    )                        -1
                                                                                              2
                                                                                              pL
                                                                                            1- 2


     Combining all three steps above, we can show that Appendix 1 eq.(1) holds:


                                                                3         9
                                          w(1, pL , pL )  2log ( ) = log ( ) > log (2)
                                                                2         4

     Appendix 1 eq.(1) is equivalent to the inequality of Proposition 6, which implies the tradable
ICO token price with heterogeneity is lower than the price with homogeneity.


Proof of Proposition 7: Effective Discount Factor Dominance with Hetero-
geneity

     This Appendix 1 section revisits the effective discount factor dominance in Proposition 1 and
proves that the effective discount factor is still lower when tokens are tradable. This proposition
supports the analysis in Section 6.2. With heterogeneity, the effective discount factor of non-
                                      2
tradable tokens is e f (pL )+f (pH ) while the discount factor of tradable tokens remains the same
 1          2                 1
                                            pH +pL
 p : e f (pL )+f (pH ) >  p where              2       = p.
     Case 1 p < 0.5: the convexity of f (x) implies that the non-tradable discount factor is higher
than the case where pL = 0, pH = 2p.

                                  2                     2
                                                                 2log ( 1-2 p
                                                                                 )              2p
                      e f (pL )+f (pH )  e f (0)+f (2p) = e               (1-2p)       =(                 )2
                                                                                            1 -  (1 - 2p)

     Applying the formula in Proposition 1,




                                                                 A1.4
Appendix 1                                                                                        For Online Publication Only



                                                     2p                1       1
                                             (                 )2 > ( 2p )2 =  p
                                                 1 -  (1 - 2p)

    Case 2 p  0.5: the convexity of f (x) implies that the non-tradable discount factor is higher
than the case where pL = 2p - 1, pH = 1:

                                                          2                   2
                                                   e f (pL )+f (pH )  e f (2p-1)+f (1)

    After taking logs, we need to prove:


                                                           2           1
                                                                      > log
                                                   f (2p - 1) + f (1)  p


                                                                    (2p - 1)
                                     (2p - 1)log (                              ) > log
                                                               1 -  +  (2p - 1)

    Similarly, applying Proposition 1,

                                                (2p - 1)                        1
                       (2p - 1)log (                        ) > (2p - 1)log ( 2p-1 ) = log
                                           1 -  +  (2p - 1)

                                             pL +pH
    For pL , pH  [0, 1] and p =                 2   ,    the effective discount factor of non-tradable tokens still
dominates that of tradable tokens in the heterogeneity case, that is

                                                           1              2
                                                         p < e f (pL )+f (pH )


Proof of Proposition 8: ICO Price Dominance with Heterogeneity

    This Appendix 1 section compares the tradable and non-tradable ICO price when only one
token is issued (M=1). This proposition serves the analysis in Section 6.2. When only one
token outstanding, the non-tradable token price is higher than the tradable token price if and
only if:


                                p                                                          p
                       log (1+ 2pL )                                              log (1+ 2pL )
                                  H                                            H
                   -           1
                       log (1- 2 pL )
                                              pL                     -       1          pH                    2
 (1 -  (1 - pL )                        )                +  (1 - pL ) log(1- 2 pL )                < e f (pL )+f (pH )
                                          1 -  (1 - pL )                            1 -  (1 - pH )

                   pL                               pH
    Define x =   1- (1-pL )        and y =        1- (1-pH ) .    We know 0 < x < y <  < 1.
    We aim to rewrite the inequality as a function of x, y,  .Thus, we express pL and pH in x
               1- x                      1- y    pL            x(1-y )
and y : pL =     1-x ,        pH =         1-y , pH        =   (1-x)y .   The non-tradable token price is rewritten in
x and y as the following:


                                                                 A1.5
Appendix 1                                                                                                          For Online Publication Only


                                                                                   p
                                                                          log (1+ 2pL )
                                                                      -              H                                2
                                                                                  1p )
                                                                          log (1- 2
                           x +  (1 - pL )                                            L    (y - x) < e f (pL )+f (pH )

   We subtract x from both side, take log, and replace pL , pH with x, y . Then, we move two
terms with x only to the left-hand side, and the other two terms depending on both x and y to
the right-hand side:

                                                                                                                      2
                                                    1- x                                                          1       1
                          log ( (1 -                  1-x ))                 log (y - x) - log (e
                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                               log (x) log (y )   - x)
                                                  1 1- x
                                                                        >
                          log (1 -                                                                           1 x(1-y )
                                                  2  1-x )                                   log (1 +        2 (1-x)y )
                                             LHS                                                         RHS

   The LHS (left-hand side of the above inequality) is a function of (, x) and the RHS
(right-hand side of the above inequality) is a function of (x, y ). We first show the RHS is
monotonically decreasing in y . However, it is hard to show it with algebra. We use a graphical
proof with the three-dimensional surface in Appendix 1 Figure 1 and the two-dimensional plots
in Appendix 1 Figure 2 to illustrate monotonicity.
   The upper bound of RHS is reached with y  x


                                                                                                                   y -x
                                                1
                                                    2
                                                        1
                                                                                   log (limyx                       2                 )
                                                    +                                                           1       1
             log (y - x) - log (e            log (x) log (y )         - x)                               e
                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                                             log (x) log (y )   -x
   limyx                                                                       =
                       log (1 +          1 (1-x)y                                                    log ( 3
                                                                                                           2)
                                         2 x(1-y ) )
                                                                    1
             log (limyx                                                                 2            )
                                                                                   1         1                                    1
                           (                  2
                                                             ))(       1
                                                                            ) 1 log (x) + log (y )
                                                                               e                              log ( log(x)2         1    1
                                                                                                                                               )
                                      1              1     2       log (y )2 y                                                             x
                               (
                                   log (x)
                                             +
                                                  log (y )
                                                           )                                                              2     log (x)2 x             log (2)
         =                                                                                               =                                         =
                                                     log ( 3
                                                           2)                                                             log ( 3
                                                                                                                                2)                     log ( 3
                                                                                                                                                             2)

                                                                               log (2)
   The rest of the proof shows that LHS >                                      log ( 3 )
                                                                                         .   LHS is only about pL and the minimum
                                                                                     2

of LHS is achieved at p         
                       L where pL satisfies the F.O.C:




         1                            0.5                         log ( (1 - pL ))   2 - p
                log (1 - 0.5pL) =              log ( (1 - pL )) -                  =      L
      (1 - pL )                   (1 - 0.5pL )                    log (1 - 0.5pL )   1 - pL


   We substitute the F.O.C into the LHS to find the lower bound:

                            1- x
              log ( (1 -      1-x ))                           log ( (1 - pL ))  log ( (1 - pL ))   2 - p L
                                                       =                                          =        2
               log (1 -   1 1- x                               log (1 - 0.5pL )  log (1 - 0.5p  )   1 - p
                          2  1-x )                                                            L           L




                                                                              A1.6
Appendix 1                                                          For Online Publication Only


   A trivial fact is that

                            9             3                  log (2)
                              > 2 - 2log ( ) > log (2) - 2 >
                            4             2                  log ( 3
                                                                   2)


   To summarize, all proofs above show the following inequalities hold for any pair (pL , pH ). It
implies that the tradable ICO token price is still lower than the non-tradable ICO token price
with agent heterogeneity.


                                       log (2)
                            LHS  2 >            = limyx RHS  RHS
                                       log ( 3
                                             2)




                                              A1.7
Appendix 1                                                                 For Online Publication Only




                                                Appendix 1 Figure 1
                   2        1.5
             Function Value
                    1
                   .5
                   0




                                  0        .2        .4              .6      .8          1
                                                             y

                                      x=0.01     x=0.1           x=0.3    x=0.4      x=0.5
                                      x=0.6      x=0.7           x=0.8    x=0.9


                                                Appendix 1 Figure 2




                                                          A1.8
Appendix 1                                                           For Online Publication Only


Proof of Proposition 9: ICO+SCO Revenue Dominance with Heterogeneity

   This Appendix 1 section shows that the platform earns less revenue with agent heterogeneity
regardless of issuance policy. This proposition serves the analysis in Section 6.3.
   Consider a small perturbation



                                     1 -   (1 - pH )       1 -   (1 - 2)        - 
 g (pH + , pL - ) - g (pH , pL )                      -  >                -  =     >0
                                     1 -  (1 - pH )        1 -  (1 - 2)        1+

   That says, given only catering to frequent consumers, an issuer would prefer a more dispersed
consumption probabilities.


                                          1 -   (1 - 2p) p      1 -   (1 - p) p
             g (pH , pL ) < g (2p, 0) =                       <
                                          1 -  (1 - 2p) 1 -     1 -  (1 - p) 1 -  
                                                               Revenue under homogeneity

   The revenue from "Separating Equilibrium: High price, narrow consumer base" is strictly
lower than the revenue when agents are homogeneous. As we have already showed, the issuer
also earns a lower revenue from the "Pooling Equilibrium: Low price, broad consumer base".
Thus, the issuer is worse off with consumption frequency heterogeneity.




                                                  A1.9
                                   Appendix 2 (Online Only)

                                      Kenneth Rogoff and Yang You

                                                  July 5, 2020



Appendix 2.1: Monotonicity of Non-tradable ICO Optimal Issuance

      Appendix 2.1 shows that the optimal issuance quantity M  of non-tradable ICO tokens is
weakly decreasing in   when the optimal issuance is larger than one. We consider a local
optimum Ml which satisfies eq.(7) and eq.(8). M  is a local optimum that achieves maximum
discounted revenue.
                       p
      Define a =     1- (1-p) .   First, we show F (M ) = M aM - (M - 1)aM -1 is monotonically
                                               ¯ ] where M
decreasing for any integer in the range M  [1, M         ¯ is the largest integer so that
   ¯ )  0.1 We prove the monotonicity by showing F (M ) - F (M - 1) < 0:
F (M




  F (M ) - F (M - 1) = aM -2 [M a2 - 2(M - 1)a + (M - 2)] = aM -2 [M a - (M - 2)](a - 1)


         ¯ )  0 implies that a         ¯ -1
                                       M
      F (M                              M¯ .   We can show

                                         ¯ -1
                                         M                 M -1
               [M a - (M - 2)]  M          ¯  - (M - 2)  M      - (M - 2) = 1 > 0
                                          M                 M

                                                                                   ¯ ].
      (a - 1) < 0 by construction. Thus, we know F (M ) < F (M - 1) for any M  [1, M
      The optimality conditions eq.(7) and eq.(8) can be rewritten as


                                                           p
                                         F (Ml ) > [                 ]Ml
                                                       1 -   (1 - p)


                                                           p
                                      F (Ml + 1) < [                 ]Ml +1
                                                       1 -   (1 - p)

      Given Ml , eq.(7) must still holds for any lower   . Eq.(8) might be violated, that is, issuing
an extra token (the (Ml + 1)th token) is profitable. If eq.(8) holds, Ml is still an local optimum
  1
      F (M ) > 0 says that issuing an extra token generates a higher token revenue.



                                                       A2.1
Appendix 2                                                                           For Online Publication Only


for the lower   . If violated, there must exist a Ml  Ml + 1 so that2


                                                                 p
                                              F ( Ml ) > [                 ]Ml
                                                             1 -   (1 - p)


                                                                 p
                                          F (Ml + 1) < [                   ]Ml +1
                                                             1 -   (1 - p)

      For any lower   , we can always find a larger local optimum Ml for each local optimum Ml .
      In the last step, we show Ml = M  , that is local optimum is unique and thus equivalent to
the global optimum. In other word, eq.(7) and eq.(8) are the necessary and sufficient conditions
for the optimal token issuance quantity.
      The uniqueness of the local optimum is equivalent to the uniqueness of the root for F (x) =
                        p
[a ]x where a =       1-  (1-p)      < a and x  1. Then M  = Ml = x . We know that F (1) = a > a
and limx F (x)  0  limx ax . Thus, there is at least one root for F (x) = [a ]x .
      Take logs on both sides:


                                         log (xax - (x - 1)ax-1 ) = xlog (a )

      If there are two roots x1 < x2 , we can find two roots x1 and x2 for the first-order derivative
            dlog (xax -(x-1)ax-1 )       d(xlog (a ))
equality               dx            =       dx         where x1 < x1 < x2 <x2 < .
      Then we compute the first-order derivatives of both sides and illustrate that the equality
has one root at most:


                             log (a)(xax - (x - 1)ax-1 ) + ax - ax-1
                                                                     = log (a )
                                        xax - (x - 1)ax-1


                                                              a-1
                                       log (a) +                        = log (a )
                                                           xa - (x - 1)


                                                          1           1
                                          x =                -
                                                        1 - a log (a) - log (a )

      The equality of derivatives is essentially linear in x. Thus, it is obvious that the above
equality has at most one root. This contradiction implies that F (x) = [a ]x can not have two
roots x1 and x2 . Thus, any Ml satisfies eq.(7) and eq.(8) must be the global optimum M  .
      Thus, a lower   (better outside investments) incentivizes the platform to issue more tokens.
                                                             
  2
      The violation of eq.(8) implies F (Ml + 1)  [ 1-  p
                                                       (1-p) ]
                                                               Ml +1
                                                                     . But for M  , the revenue gain from issuing
                                                                     
an extra token must be negative, that is, F (M ) < 0 < [ 1-  p
                                                            (1-p) ]
                                                                    M
                                                                      . From Ml to , another local optimum
must exists.



                                                             A2.2
Appendix 2                                                              For Online Publication Only


Appendix 2.2: Rolling membership

   In our framework, membership, as a long-term commitment, can also be used to back a
platform token. The membership allows token holders to consume platform goods within the
membership period. We have already considered the case of life membership in Section 3, which
allows the platform to extract the maximum surplus from the consumer, but entails credibil-
ity issues. In Appendix 2.2, we consider shorter membership periods. A familiar example is
Spotify. Spotify buys copyrights from music producers and provides membership to consumers.
Consumers can listen to a range of music whenever they want within a limited period. One
major advantage of membership is that a platform can lock in consumption for a certain period
without having to provide an implicit interest rate in the form of a rising price. We show that
membership issuance has similar properties to a price menu, albeit with certain differences we
shall detail below.
   Denote PI,M em (N ) as the price of membership token valid for N periods. PI,M em (N ) can
be written as a combination of marginal claims as well:


                  N                  N                                       N
                                                   n-1 M                                      1 - N
 PI,M em (N ) =             Pn,M =             n        p (1 - p)n-M =              n p = p         (1)
                                                   M -1                                        1-
                  n=1 M n            n=1 M n                                 n=1


   One unit of membership token can satisfy all individual demand for N periods. We set
      M
N =   p   to make each membership delivers M commodities in total, comparable to M tokens
with an ICO or ICO+SCO. We consider two cases: a. A one-time fixed, finite-term ICO
                                                                         M
membership token, that is to issue membership tokens available for       p   periods and then switch
back to fiat money after. b. An ICO+SCO membership token, that is to issue membership
                       M
tokens available for   p   periods and then issue again whenever senior tokens expire.
   For the ICO membership issuance, the total revenue is


                                                   1 - N  M   p
                                  RI,M em = p            + p
                                                    1-       1 - 

   For the ICO+SCO membership issuance, the total revenue is

                                                                   M
                                               PN,         p 1 -  p
                                RS,M em =           M   =
                                            1 -     p     1 -  1 -  M
                                                                    p


   The discounted values of ICO and ICO+SCO membership are close to the non-tradable ICO
and ICO+SCO that employ a price menu mechanism correspondingly. With the ICO issuance,
the membership token gains slightly more revenue from the token issuance, but slightly less


                                                   A2.3
Appendix 2                                                                           For Online Publication Only


revenue in fiat money.3 With the ICO+SCO issuance, the revenue ratio of the membership
issuance to the price-menu issuance is approximately one.4


                                                  RI,M em  RI,P M

                                                  RS,M em  RS,P M

       The most prominent advantage of membership is the simplicity: a single price is sufficient
to claim the entire surplus from consumers. Tradability does not matter in this scenario since
everyone shares the same willingness to pay to depend solely on the valid periods remaining. The
main caveat is the moral hazard; that is, consumers may over-consume with the membership
or claim the goods and resale to other consumers without the membership. The membership
currency is only applicable to industries with modest or zero marginal cost or non-transferable
products, e.g., music and movies.


Appendix 2.3: Solution of Tradable ICO Price with Heterogenity

       This section solves the closed-form solution for the tradable ICO token price under hetero-
                                                                                                         M -1
geneity as the section 6.2. The price path would be the following: Before period                          p ,   the
                                                                          M -1
token price appreciates at the interest rate. From period                  p     to the period when only frequent
consumers hold tokens, infrequent consumers have at most one token left in hands and start to
pay for the platform consumption with fiat money (The token usage speed also slows down).
                                           1
When only frequent consumers hold tokens ( 2 tokens remain in the economy), the token price
             pH
will be    1- (1-pH ) .   The price path described above is the unique equilibrium for stable tokens
under agent heterogeneity.5
   3
       We compute the revenue difference:

                                            p         M
                                                           M    p           p        M   M    p
                RI,M em - RI,P M = [                    -  p ]      - [                - p ]
                                        1 -   (1 - p)          1 -      1 -  (1 - p)         1-
                            M       M
                     p
  Define h( ) =    1- (1-p)
                                -   p   and pick p = 0.5 and m = 10. The range of h( ) is (-0.015, 0]. In this case,
the revenue gap is no more than 1.5 percent of the total revenue difference between the first-best ( 1p
                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                        ) and the
                                        
revenue with no token issuance ( 1- 
                                    p
                                      ).
   4
     We calculate the revenue ratio of the ICO + SCO tokens:
                                                           M        p            M
                                           RS,M em   1 -  p 1 - 1-  (1-p)
                                                   =       M             M
                                           RS,P M    1 -   p 1 - 1-p
                                                                   (1-p)
                                                           p      M
               RS,M em                                   1- (1-p)
  The ratio    RS,P M
                          1. Define a function g ( ) =        M       . For example, we pick p = 0.5 and M = 10, the
                                                            p
                                                                                     R
                                                                                   S,M em
ratio ranges from 1 to 1.02 when   (0, 1). The narrow range of g ( ) bounds R       S,P M
                                                                                          close to 1.
   5                                                                                                    -1
     The infrequent consumers do not sell the last token to the frequent consumers before the period Mp     because
they know the token will appreciate at the interest rate and they can get an extra benefit if a consumption shock
hits in the next period. As long as the token is tradable, there is no reason for any consumer to stay out of
                             -1
the market. In the period Mp    , is it possible that infrequent consumers have already sold all tokens to frequent


                                                         A2.4
Appendix 2                                                                     For Online Publication Only


                    M -1
    From period      p     to the period when only frequent consumers hold tokens, infrequent
consumers are indifferent between selling the token to frequent consumers or holding the token
for future personal consumption, that is,


                                        Pt =  [(1 - pL )Pt+1 + pL ]                                        (2)

                                                                         1
    The next step is to compute the number of periods until              2   of all tokens are depleted after
which no infrequent consumer holds any tokens. Define x(t)  (0.5, 1) as the quantity of tokens
left in the economy. As long as there are any tokens being held by infrequent consumers, there
          1                                                 1
must be   2   held by frequent consumers and x(t) -         2    left in the hands of infrequent consumers
(Otherwise, an infrequent consumer will sell her token to a frequent consumer in the trading
phase).
                M -1
    In period    p ,   the quantity of tokens outstanding x(0) = 1. From period t to t + 1, there
    1
are 2 pH + 1         1
           2 (x(t) - 2 )pL being used in this period. Thus,


                                                 1    1       1
                                x(t + 1) = x(t) - pH - [x(t) - ]pL
                                                 2    2       2

    We can solve the expression of x(t),

                                        pH  1      1            pH  1
                           x(t + 1) +      - = (1 - pL )(x(t) +    - )
                                        pL  2      2            pL  2


                                            1        pH  1   pH   1
                                 x(t) = (1 - pL )t (    + )-    +
                                            2        pL  2   pL   2

    Denote  as the number of periods to deplete tokens among infrequent consumers. Then 
should be the smallest integer so that
                                                           1
                                                  x( ) 
                                                           2

                                                                 pL
                                                   log (1 +     2pH )
                                           =-                   1                                          (3)
                                                   log (1 -     2 pL )

                                                                                          M -1
    Combining Appendix 2 eq.(2) and eq.(3), we can write the price in period               p     as a weighted
average willingness to pay of frequent and infrequent consumers:
consumers? This is not an equilibrium either. When an infrequent consumer knows at least one frequent consumer
is holding more than one token, she knows that the token price will continue to appreciate by the interest rate
over the next period. Thus, the only equilibrium is the one where infrequent consumers are indifferent between
holding the last token or not.




                                                    A2.5
Appendix 2                                                                            For Online Publication Only




                    M -1                            pL                           pH
       PI,T (t =         ) = (1 -   (1 - pL ) )                +   (1 - pL )
                      p                         1 -  (1 - pL )               1 -  (1 - pH )

   Where  represents the number of periods until only frequent consumers hold tokens solved
above. The token price under heterogeneity is

                        M -1                             pL                           pH
          PI,T =         p     [(1 -   (1 - pL ) )                  +   (1 - pL )                ]
                                                     1 -  (1 - pL )               1 -  (1 - pH )

Appendix 2.4: Separating Equilibrium for Price Menu with Heterogeneity

   This appendix section formalizes our discussion in Section 6.4 and derives the condition for
when a separating equilibrium strictly dominates the pooling equilibrium; that is, if price menu
is allowed, the platform offers a price menu so that frequent consumer buy more tokens at a
higher price while the infrequent consumers buy fewer tokens at a lower price, rather than the
same price and quantity.
   To maintain a separating equilibrium, the following two incentive constraints and two par-
ticipation constraints need to be satisfied:
   For frequent consumers,

           i=MH                                            i=ML
                           pH                                              pH
                   (                  )i -MH PH                    (                  )i -ML PL    (IC)
                       1 -  (1 - pH )                                  1 -  (1 - pH )
             i=1                                            i=1
              WTP for MH Tokens                               WTP for ML Tokens


                                             i=MH
                                                             pH
                                  M H PH             (                  )i         (PC)
                                                         1 -  (1 - pH )
                                              i=1

   For infrequent consumers,

          i=ML                                             i= M H
                         pL                                                 pL
                   (                )ML -ML PL                      (                  )i -MH PH   (IC)
                     1 -  (1 - pL )                                     1 -  (1 - pL )
           i=1                                               i=1
              WTP for ML Tokens                               WTP for MM Tokens


                                             i=ML
                                                             pL
                                   ML P L            (                  )i        (PC)
                                                         1 -  (1 - pL )
                                              i=1

   The total discounted revenue is




                                                           A2.6
Appendix 2                                                                                For Online Publication Only




             1                   pH        pH         MH      pL       pL
        Rev = [MH PH + ML PL +      (                )   +       (               )ML ]
             2                 1 -   1 -   (1 - pH )       1 -   1 -   (1 - pL )
                     Token Revenue
                                                                       Fiat Money Revenue


       The optimal token prices for frequent and infrequent consumers are

                                                           i=MH        pH        i
                                            ML PL +        i=ML +1 ( 1- (1-pH ) )
                                     PH =
                                                             MH


                                                     i=ML    pL        i
                                                     i=1 ( 1- (1-pL ) )
                                            PL =
                                                             ML

       We plug in MH = 2M - ML and rewrite the revenue as a function of ML ,6

                            i=ML                           i=2M -ML
                                         pL                                       pH
               R(ML ) =2           (                )i +                  (                  )i
                                     1 -  (1 - pL )                           1 -  (1 - pH )
                             i=1                           i=ML +1
                              p  H      pH                    pL      pL
                           +      
                                   (  
                                                 )2M -ML +       (              )ML
                             1 -  1 -  (1 - pH )           1 -  1 -   (1 - pL )
                                                                


       If we neglect the discrete choice of ML and MH , we write the first-order derivative at point
ML = M . The first term is the loss of token issuance by pooling two types in the pooling
equilibrium.7 The second term is the gain in fiat money revenue by persuading infrequent
consumers to buy more tokens (that is, the platform can get fiat money from frequent consumers
sooner).

dR(ML )                  pL                    pH                         pH                    pL
        |ML =M = 2[(                )M - (                )M ] + [(     
                                                                                   )M - (                 )M ]
 dML                 1 -  (1 - pL )        1 -  (1 - pH )           1 -  (1 - pH )        1 -   (1 - pL )
                                     Loss from Token Revenue                                  Gain from Fiat Money Revenue


       The platform would prefer to choose a separating equilibrium if the platform can gain
   6
     The optimal issuance policy (ML , MH , PL , PH ) can be solved from the revenue maximization problem with
incentive constraints and participation constraints.
  For frequent consumers,
                                                           i=MH
                                                                          pH
                                      MH PH - ML PL               (                  )i
                                                           i=ML
                                                                      1 -  (1 - pH )

  For infrequent consumers,
                                                           i=MH
                                                                          pL
                                      MH PH - ML PL               (                  )i
                                                           i=ML
                                                                      1 -  (1 - pL )

  The optimal ML is pinned down by the F.O.C
                                                        dRev (ML )
                                                   0=
                                                          dML

                                                                                                     i=M     pL         i
   7                                                                                                 i=1 ( 1- (1-pL ) )
       In the pooling equilibrium, every consumer chooses the price quantity-price pair (M,                 M
                                                                                                                            ).


                                                        A2.7
Appendix 2                                                                    For Online Publication Only


sufficiently large profit from high-frequency consumers. The condition is8

                                                            
                                   ( 1-  pH
                                        (1-p ) )
                                            H
                                                M -(    pL
                                                     1-  (1-pL ) )
                                                                   M
                                                                        <2
                                    ( 1-p        M      pL
                                        (1-pH ) ) - ( 1- (1-pL ) )
                                          H                        M




  8
      A platform would choose the pooling equilibrium for sure if   <  = 1.


                                                    A2.8
