                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DO MINIMUM WAGES REDUCE EMPLOYMENT IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES?
          A SURVEY AND EXPLORATION OF CONFLICTING EVIDENCE

                                          David Neumark
                                    Luis Felipe Munguia Corella

                                        Working Paper 26462
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26462


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2019




We are grateful for helpful comments from Haroon Bhorat, Stijn Broecke, Ravi Kanbur, Marieke
Vandeweyer, seminar participants at Beijing Normal University, Renmin University, and DIW-
Berlin, and anonymous reviewers. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by David Neumark and Luis Felipe Munguia Corella. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment in Developing Countries? A Survey and Exploration
of Conflicting Evidence
David Neumark and Luis Felipe Munguia Corella
NBER Working Paper No. 26462
November 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. J18,J23,O15

                                        ABSTRACT

Evidence from studies of the employment effects of minimum wages in developing countries is
mixed. One interpretation is that there is simply no clear evidence of disemployment effects in
developing countries. Instead, however, we find evidence that the heterogeneity is systematic,
with estimated effects more consistently negative in studies with relatively more features for
which institutional factors and the competitive model more strongly predict negative effects.
These features include whether studies:(i) focus on vulnerable workers; (ii) use data for the
formal sector; (iii) cover countries where minimum wage laws are strongly enforced; and (iv)
estimate effects for countries and periods with binding minimum wages.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Luis Felipe Munguia Corella
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
lfmungui@uci.edu
I. Introduction

        Minimum wages have been a controversial subject among policymakers and economists in the

United States and many other countries.1 The evidence on employment effects in developing countries is

quite mixed. In the studies we survey in this paper, simple averaging of all of the reported estimates yields

a fairly modest negative employment elasticity of -0.061, and averaging the authors' preferred estimates

from each study yields an elasticity of -0.102. However, looking across all the studies reveals considerable

heterogeneity, with many negative estimates (some substantially larger in absolute value than these

averages) but also many (although fewer) positive estimates.

        The goal of our analysis is to examine the evidence from the large set of studies we survey, to try to

understand this heterogeneous evidence and what we can learn from it. Is there simply no consistent

evidence of negative employment effects of minimum wages in developing countries? That is, do we get

heterogeneous effects ­ with both positive and negative estimates ­ even when studies are similar in

looking at workers likely to be affected by minimum wages both because of their skills and because of the

nature of a country's minimum wage law? Or, instead, is the heterogeneity in estimated minimum wage

effects more systematic, with negative effects where we would expect them ­ e.g., for vulnerable low-skill

workers where minimum wage laws are strong and binding ­ but not for higher-skill workers or where

minimum wages laws are weaker and/or less binding?

        We pursue these questions by conducting a version of a meta-analysis of a large set of studies of

minimum wage effects in developing countries. Our focus is on understanding the differences in estimated

employment effects across studies, which contrasts with the more common foci of meta-analyses on

arriving at a single estimate from a body of studies and on publication bias (e.g., Belman and Wolfson,

2019; Broecke et al., 2016). Our analysis also contrasts with general surveys of the evidence for developing

countries (Belman and Wolfson, 2016; Bhorat et al., 2017). Still, there are clearly complementarities

between our approach and that of other surveys or meta-analyses.

        It is important to consider how to interpret our evidence. There are three important points. First,

stronger and more consistent evidence of adverse employment effects under conditions where we would



                                                      1
expect adverse effects ­ e.g., for less-skilled workers, when minimum wages are binding or strongly

enforced, or in the formal sector ­ would not negate the fact that estimated employment effects in

developing countries vary. But such evidence would be informative about the institutional settings and

contexts in which minimum wages reduce employment ­ such as when they are imposed in the formal

sector and are strongly enforced.

        Second, such evidence could indicate that minimum wages have more adverse consequences when

they have the greatest potential benefits ­ i.e., for low-skilled workers for whom they are effective at

raising wages. Of course, evidence that minimum wages reduce employment of lower-skilled workers does

not imply that minimum wages are the wrong policy choice. However, such evidence would imply that

minimum wages in developing countries reflect more of a tradeoff between higher wages and lower

employment than what one might conclude from a simple overview of the heterogeneous evidence.

Ultimately, we think the wisdom of higher wages in developing countries should hinge more on whether

they help raise incomes of low-income families.2

        And third, this kind of evidence may speak to the right model of the labor market to use in thinking

about labor market policy and other questions in developing countries. If evidence on employment effects

of minimum wages is inconsistent for studies of less-skilled workers, in the formal sector, when minimum

wages are binding and enforced, then it is possible that the monopsony model may better explain the

evidence than the competitive model.3 In contrast, consistent evidence of disemployment effects in studies

meeting these criteria, despite less consistent evidence in studies where negative employment effects are

less likely to arise, would bolster the competitive characterization of labor markets (although it could still

be possible to reconcile such evidence with monopsony).

        We conclude that one can draw firmer conclusions about the employment effects of minimum

wages in developing countries than first meets the eye when simply looking at all the estimates. We find

that the estimated employment effects of minimum wages in developing countries are more likely to be

negative, and larger negative, when estimates focus on data and sectors for which the competitive model

predicts disemployment effects, and in institutional settings in which we would expect the minimum wage



                                                       2
to have more adverse impact. Specifically, there is more consistent evidence of negative employment

effects when the minimum wage is binding, where minimum wage enforcement is stronger, for estimates of

effects in the formal sector, and when the data focus on more vulnerable (lower-wage) workers.

        One dimension we do not explore is whether monopsony power is sometimes relevant. We do find

that positive estimates are more prevalent in studies with only one feature or no features for which the

competitive model and institutional factors predict negative effects. Monopsony is a potential explanation,

but not the only one; for example, the standard two-sector competitive model predicts positive employment

effects in the informal sector.

II. Meta-Analysis in the Context of Minimum Wages Studies

        Meta-analysis developed as a method of combining results from existing studies, to derive

conclusions from a body of research on a particular question or effect. In medicine, for example, early

meta-analyses studied the evidence from randomized, controlled clinical trials, addressing the problem that

individual medical studies sometimes lack enough observations to reach reliable statistical conclusions

about the effect of the treatment studied. A meta-analysis pooling the evidence across studies can yield a

more precise estimate of the impact of treatment, or other outcomes, than individual studies contributing to

the pooled analysis. The technique was also applied, in the middle of the last century, to research in

agricultural science, psychology, education, and sociology, although the term "meta-analysis" was

apparently coined by Gene Glass in 1976, who described it as "analysis of analyses." (See the history of

meta-analysis described Hunt, 1997).

        Meta-analyses in economics also pool results, often in meta-regressions used to estimate an

average effect (or treatment) size, and sometimes to estimate the impact of study features on the estimated

effect size. Economists have been quite concerned with "publication bias," which considers the possibility

that some results are not published because of editors' and reviewers' (and perhaps authors') prior views, or

because of diminished interest in statistically insignificant results, either of which can lead to bias in

average estimates based on published work. Economists using meta-analysis also consider some of the

more conventional problems that can arise in regression models ­ such as heteroskedasticity resulting from



                                                        3
variation in precision of estimates across different studies owing to sample sizes or empirical strategies.

        These same questions carry over to meta-analysis in the minimum wage literature. These analyses

have pooled results to obtain estimates of the effect size ­ typically the magnitude of the elasticity of

employment to the minimum wage. They have also been used to test for publication bias, and to try to

interpret and systematize results that vary across studies done using different techniques, different data, or

estimating effects for different groups. Our work in this paper is most closely related to meta-analyses that

try to identify what features of studies explain heterogeneity of the estimated effects.4 For instance, Card

and Krueger (1995) conduct a meta-analysis of time-series studies of the effect of the minimum wage on

teen employment in the United States, and conclude that it is very likely that the results are affected by

publication bias, induced by editors' and authors' tendencies to look for negative and significant estimates

of the employment effects of the minimum wage, a conclusion shared by Doucouliagos and Stanley (2009),

who also conclude that there is little or no evidence of a negative effect of the minimum wage once one

corrects for publication bias. In contrast, Neumark and Wascher (2007) find that the results of published

time-series studies of minimum wage effects are consistent with structural change and that the evidence

does not reject the null hypothesis of no publication bias. The most recent meta-analysis of the minimum

wage literature (Belman and Wolfson, 2019), based on newer studies that tend to use panel data with sub-

national minimum wage variation, finds little effect of publication bias and more evidence of minimum

wage-employment elasticities for teens and other low-skill groups of around -0.1. And a smaller meta-

analysis of studies of emerging economies (Broecke et al., 2017) finds more evidence of publication bias.

        Our analysis is, in a sense, a meta-analysis, in that it is, to quote Glass, and "analysis of analyses."

In particular, we conduct a version of a meta-analysis of a large set of studies of minimum wage effects in

developing countries. However, in contrast to the main focus of meta-analyses of the minimum wage on

questions like publication bias, or arriving at a single estimates from a body of studies (e.g., Belman and

Wolfson, 2019; and Broecke et al., 2016), and also in contrast to general surveys of the evidence (e.g.,

Belman and Wolfson, 2016; Bhorat et al., 2017), our focus is explicitly on understanding the differences in

estimated employment effects across studies.5 Some meta-analyses do study sources of variation in



                                                       4
estimated effects. In particular, Belman and Wolfson (2016) is a broad survey of the effects of minimum

wages on many different outcomes, and does not ­ in contrast to the present paper ­ focus on reconciling

conflicting evidence, but more on issues of empirical methods. Broecke et al. (2017) use a meta-analysis to

analyze 14 emerging economies, and present some evidence on differences for vulnerable workers and the

formal sector. But both studies, as well as Doucouliagos and Stanley (2009), focus in large part on

estimating the overall effect of the minimum wage on employment, and on publication bias.

        We have some criticisms of using meta-analysis to study these questions with regard to the

minimum wage literature (see Neumark, 2016). First, it is very hard to distinguish between publication bias

and other sources of patterns in the published evidence consistent with publication bias. For example, meta-

analyses like Doucouliagos and Stanley's argue that if published negative estimates of minimum wage

effects have larger standard errors, this is evidence of publication bias. However, the same phenomenon

can arise if studies using better research designs lead to "truer" estimates, which happen to be negative, but

also have larger standard errors because the research designs demand more of the data. Second, averaging

across estimates from studies of minimum wage effects, as meta-analyses do, is problematic. The

populations studied vary, and this and other factors can influence how binding the minimum wage is,

generating variation in estimated effects that there is no reason to simply average. For example, Neumark

and Wascher (2007) show that studies more sharply focused on workers most likely to be affected by

minimum wage increases reveal clearer evidence of disemployment effects. Among other factors

potentially influencing the magnitude of the effect is of course how binding the minimum wage is, which

may not be captured well in a standard regression framework (Neumark and Wascher, 2002). In short, the

meta-analysis "paradigm" for combining estimates from many similar studies ­ say, randomized trials of a

drug (Hunt, 1997) ­ carries over poorly to the minimum wage literature (and likely many other literatures

in economics), although it can still be useful in identifying features of studies that lead to differences in

estimates.

        Because of these issues, our analysis does not follow the usual meta-regression approach of

estimating average effects and testing for publication bias, although we do estimate some meta-regressions



                                                        5
to help interpret our data by estimating relevant conditional differences across studies. Rather, we

summarize, in a variety of ways, how estimated minimum wage effects vary based on features of the

studies we examine. In particular, we summarize how the results vary with the inclusion of different study

features among those that more strongly predict negative employment effects, and different combinations

of them. We do not embed this analysis in a single meta-regression capturing all combinations of study

features, because we are simultaneously considering study features that can exist in very many different

combinations. But by considering the evidence on different combinations of study features, we go beyond

the usual meta-regressions used in the minimum wage literature, which do not study combinations of study

features at all (Belman and Wolfson, 2019; Broeke et al., 2017). Moreover, in terms of the substantive

question we ask, our focus on differences across developing-country studies in features for which the

competitive model and institutional factors are more likely (or not) to predict negative employment effects

is, to the best of our knowledge, unique.

III. Studies Included

        We reviewed 61 papers on the employment effects of minimum wages in developing countries ­ all

of the papers we identified that met our study criteria. To select these papers, we searched on Google

scholar for published journal papers as well as unpublished papers, covering all the regions in the

developing world.6 We searched using keywords related to minimum wages and developing countries. Our

search was conducted from April 2017 to August 2017. We also consulted recent surveys (Belman and

Wolfson, 2016; Broecke et al., 2017) to check for any papers we missed, which resulted in adding two

additional papers from Belman and Wolfson (2016).7 We focused mainly on recently published papers

(published since 2000), because we wanted to analyze the burgeoning wave of minimum wage papers in

developing countries; of the 61 in our survey, 93.4% were published after 2000.8 Most of the papers are in

English, but we also include papers in Spanish and Portuguese. We also restricted the analysis to papers

that report employment elasticities with respect to the minimum wage, or for which we had enough

information to compute these elasticities.9

        We created a data set of all estimates from these papers, as well as information on the statistical



                                                      6
significance of the estimates. However, because many papers present estimates that the authors do not view

as credible (e.g., showing the estimates for panel data specification without the fixed effects), we also tried

to extract the authors' main or preferred estimates from each study. Specifically, we read each paper in

detail and selected preferred estimates following three rules. First, in some cases the authors specifically

say that a subset of estimates are their preferred results. This kind of statement is based, for example, on the

authors presenting specifications missing some controls (e.g., year fixed effects), while arguing that the

controls are needed to correctly estimate the effects of minimum wages. Second, in the absence of such an

explicit statement, authors often summarize what they say are their main findings, underscoring some

specific estimates by referring only to these estimates in the abstract, the introduction, or the conclusion.

Third, absent either of these conditions, if estimates are reported for many regions in a country, we select

the estimate for the whole country as the preferred result. In applying these rules for selecting preferred

estimates, rule one overrode rules two and three, and rule two overrode rule three. Thus, for instance, if the

authors point out that their preferred result is for region A, we use region A as the main result instead of the

estimate of the whole country. However, in the spirit of a meta-analysis, we do not impose (or even offer)

our subjective assessments of which studies are more credible, and do not discard studies or estimates that

could plausibly be viewed as less credible or plausible.10

        Finally, it is important to mention that studies sometimes report estimates for different groups or

sectors, like all workers and more vulnerable workers, or the formal and the informal sector. We capture all

of these estimates, but also flag ­ when the authors do ­ the subset of these estimates preferred by the

authors, based on the rules above.

        We believe that in analyzing the set of estimates from a research literature, it makes sense to focus

on the preferred estimates. For example, suppose there are two papers estimating the effect of policy X, and

both authors believe that one needs to instrument for policy X to get the causal effect. If one paper presents

only the instrumental variables (IV) estimate, while the other presents both the OLS and the IV estimate,

then why give weight to the OLS estimate in summarizing the evidence? Neither author believes the OLS

effect is of interest, and the second author chose to include it for some other reason ­ perhaps to confirm



                                                       7
the expected direction of the bias in the OLS estimate, for which the IV corrects.11 At the same time, we

understand that the selection of preferred estimates potentially allows for an element of subjectivity

compared to simply capturing all estimates in the surveyed papers; our use of a set of rules for identifying

authors' preferred estimates is intended to mitigate any concerns regarding our decisions about which

estimates to study.

        Across the 61 studies, there are 1,250 total estimates. There are 15 studies that report the effects of

the minimum wage on the probability of being employed (or something closely related), rather than an

elasticity, but for which we could recover estimates of elasticities. We compute these elasticities using

reported means of employment rates and the minimum wage if the paper reported them; if these were not

reported, we used alternative data sources to obtain these averages and estimate the elasticities. The data

sources and calculations for this subset of studies are described in Appendix Table A1.12

        Table 1 reports descriptive information on the estimated minimum wage-employment elasticities

in the studies we surveyed. Across all the estimates in the surveyed studies, the average estimated elasticity

is -0.061, the maximum elasticity is 4.51, and the minimum is -4.73. We identified 229 preferred

estimates, using the rules discussed above. The average elasticity for this subset of estimates is -0.102,

with a maximum of 2.19 and a minimum of -2.53. The standard deviation is 0.497, very similar to the

standard deviation for all estimates (0.451). Note that the authors' preferred estimates exclude some more

extreme elasticity estimates.

        Figure 1 provides histograms for the two sets of estimates, to provide more evidence on their

distributions. We plot only estimates between -1 to 1 to make the figure easier to read.13 Panel A provides

the histogram for the full set of estimates, and Panel B for the preferred estimates. The negative means and

medians of the estimates are clear for both sets of estimates, as is the fact that there clearly are positive

estimates. Note also that the medians are closer to zero.

IV. Classifying Studies/Estimates, and Predictions for Employment Effects

        The key question we assess is whether there are systematic differences across studies and estimates

that explain the variation in estimated employment effects. In particular, we classify the estimates in the



                                                        8
studies in our survey by specific features of the estimates. We then ask whether features of estimates more

likely to predict negative effects either based on economic theory ­ specifically, the competitive model of

the labor market ­ or because of institutional factors, in fact do so. As an example, the competitive model

of the labor market would predict that less-skilled workers are more adversely affected by a higher

minimum wage. We classify estimates based on four features. Appendix Table A2 lists the studies we use,

the preferred estimates as discussed earlier, and the classification of studies and estimates ­ which we now

discuss in detail.

Binding minimum wages

        The first feature we use to classify estimates is whether minimum wages are binding. There are

different ways to measure the bindingness of minimum wages. One measure sometimes used in the

minimum wage literature is a projected fraction affected, an estimate of the fraction of workers earning

below the minimum wage before an increment. However, only 12 of 61 papers that we reviewed report this

measurement. Instead, we use as a proxy for bindingness evidence of a positive effect of the minimum

wage on average wages ­ evidence that is reported much more commonly (in 44 of the 61 papers). A

potential limitation of this "binding" measure is that the effect on wages depends on the employment

response. But we are less concerned with the precise magnitude than with whether the study provides

evidence that wages of employed workers are increased, and we do not think that anyone's reading of the

minimum wage literature is that the employment response to a minimum wage is ever so strong that it

would obscure evidence of a positive effect of the minimum wage on wages. Indeed, this is consistent with

the evidence we report below; most studies that test for an effect on wages find such an effect, consistent

with binding minimum wages.

        If the study reported a statistically significant positive effect of the minimum wage on wages, or

evidence of a spike in the wage distribution at the minimum wage (based on visual inspection of figures as

described by the authors), we classify the corresponding employment estimate as pertaining to a binding

minimum wage. If evidence was reported and does not indicate a positive effect on wages, we classify the

study as pertaining to a non-binding minimum wage. Our third category is "no data," meaning that the



                                                      9
study did not report evidence on effects on wages; this third category is retained in our analysis, rather than

dropping these observations.14 We would expect more evidence of adverse effects of minimum wages on

employment when minimum wages are binding, at least under the competitive model.15

Sector

         The second feature we use to classify estimates is whether the estimate was for the formal sector,

the informal sector, or both (total employment). In the formal (also called "covered") sector, minimum

wage laws apply, in principle at least. Minimum wage laws do not cover the informal sector. The informal

sector can be defined by firms that operate illegally, by self-employed workers and, as in Chun and Khor

(2010) and Del Carpio et al. (2015), by small firms that enforcement authorities do not visit. In developing

countries, both sectors can be sizable. The distinction between the effects for the formal and informal sector

in developing countries is important. A high share of jobs is estimated to be informal: 46.8% of jobs in

Latin America (ILO, 2015a), 66% in Sub-Saharan Africa (ILO, 2015b), and 68.2% in Asia-Pacific (ILO,

2018).

         Some papers do not report if their estimates cover the formal sector, the informal sector, or both

sectors. However, we were able to classify these papers by analyzing the data used. For example, for

Mexico there are two main employment surveys ­ the Employment and Occupation Survey, and Social

Security Administrative Data. The former has data on both sectors; hence, if the author uses total

employment from this survey, we know that the estimates cover both sectors. The latter survey only has

data for formal-sector workers, and thus we know that estimates using this survey are for the formal sector.

All the estimates could be classified along this dimension.

         The prediction from the standard two-sector competitive labor market model is that a higher

minimum wage reduces employment in the formal sector, because in the formal sector minimum laws (and

other labor regulations) apply and are more likely to be enforced. However, employment in the informal

sector may increase, depending on informal sector wages and the expected value of search for formal-

sector work while employed vs. not employed in the informal sector (Harris and Todaro, 1970; Mincer,

1976). However, some recent work has highlighted the potential for different effects in the informal sector.



                                                      10
For example, Gindling (2018) argues that some evidence points to wage increases in the informal sector

from "lighthouse effects" that may arise because employers have to compete for workers with the formal

sector, leading to minimum wages constraining the wages employers pay in the informal sector and hence

reducing employment there.16 Other studies, in contrast, have found no effect on wages in the informal

sector (Papps, 2012; Carneiro and Corseuil, 2001). Thus, we should expect adverse employment effects of

minimum wages in the formal sector ­ at least under the competitive model ­ whereas the prediction for the

informal sector is perhaps less clear.

Enforcement

        Our third feature of estimates is the degree of enforcement of the minimum wage law, which we

break into three categories. Countries with no enforcement are those whose laws do not penalize violations

of the minimum wage law. Countries with weak enforcement have low-cost fees for a violation. And

countries with strong enforcement are those that specify severe penalties for not abiding by the law, like

time in prison or shutdown of the company. The prediction, of course, is that minimum wages should have

more impact generally, including reducing employment (according to the competitive model), when

minimum laws are more strongly enforced. All the estimates are classified in one of these three categories.

        The classification of enforcement is developed and described in Munguía Corella (2019). He

systematizes labor codes and minimum wage laws by country, and constructs an indicator for the degree of

enforcement, using the ILO's "Database of National Labour, Social Security and Related Human Rights

Legislation" (NALEX).17 NALEX compiles records of labor laws for 196 countries and 160 territories. As

an illustrative example, Ghana does not have any penalty specified in its Labor Act of 2003; the Act

established a Tripartite Committee that oversees the minimum wage rate, but does not specify what

happens when an establishment fails to abide by the law. Hence, Ghana is classified as having "no

enforcement." In contrast, in Bolivia fines are costly (up to 1,447 USD per violation), and the authorities

can shut down an establishment in case of repeated violations. Hence Bolivia is classified as having "strong

enforcement." Given the constraints of the data used to classify enforcement, the degree of enforcement is

assigned at the country level and does not change over time.



                                                     11
        There are some potential challenges in the analysis classifying estimates based on enforcement.

First, the enforcement measure captures potential penalties. It is possible that in some countries, even if the

law is stringent, actual implementation is weak, owing to weak institutions in the country, a lack of labor

inspectors, or corruption among the enforcement authorities. However, in a more standard panel data

analysis of the effects of minimum wages in developing countries, Munguía Corella (2019) finds stronger

adverse employment effects when the law dictates stronger enforcement, without regard to how well labor

laws are enforced (although also finding that enforcement has stronger effects in countries with more

effective labor market regulations, based on a World Bank index). Thus, the enforcement variable should

provide some information about a country's commitment to its minimum wage laws. Second, the

enforcement of the minimum wage could be endogenous. For instance, if, in some countries, the minimum

wage is destroying low-skill employment, workers (or policymakers) might adopt weak enforcement "on

the ground," despite what the law says, to mitigate the adverse effects, making it difficult to estimate the

exogenous effect of enforcement.18

Vulnerability/low-skill

        Finally, the fourth feature of estimates we use in our classification is whether the estimate is for

low-skilled or "vulnerable" workers, or instead for all workers. We classify studies or estimates for

vulnerable workers as those estimated for young adults, for women, or for unskilled workers. The

competitive model of labor markets, of course, predicts that we should find stronger evidence of adverse

employment effects of minimum wages in data on vulnerable workers because their wage is more likely to

directly affected by the minimum wage. However, if the minimum wage is very low, it is possible that it is

not binding even for low-wage, vulnerable workers. All the estimates are classified as pertaining to either

vulnerable workers or all workers.

V. Differences in Estimated Employment Effects: Evidence

        We now turn to our analysis exploring how estimated employment effects vary with features of the

estimates. In particular, we focus on whether the evidence is more consistent with negative employment

effects for estimates based on one or multiple features that predict more adverse employment effects of



                                                      12
minimum wages, and conversely whether there is less evidence of negative effects when these features are

absent.

Differences in estimates: one-way comparisons

          We begin, in Table 2, with univariate comparisons across estimates. Table 2 reports the number

and percent of estimated employment elasticities with respect to the minimum wage that are negative and

significant, insignificant, or positive and significant, for estimates with each of the four features by which

we classify them: binding minimum wages, sector, enforcement, and type of workers; we classify estimates

as significant based on a significance level of 5%.19 This table is based on the authors' preferred estimates

of the employment elasticity, summarized in the second row of Table 1 and in Panel B of Figure 1.

          To better understand what is reported in Table 2, consider a specific example. Bhorat et al. (2014)

analyze the effects on formal-sector wages and employment in South Africa. Their results indicate that the

elasticity of wages with respect to the minimum wage is between 0.176 and 0.22 (statistically significant).

Hence, these results are classified as "binding." For employment effects, they have two preferred

elasticities (based on different econometric models); both are negative but only one is statistically

significant. Hence, this study results in one negative and significant elasticity and one insignificant

elasticity reported in the "Binding" row of Panel A in Table 2, and one negative and significant elasticity

and one insignificant elasticity reported in the "Formal" row in Panel B. Because South Africa has weak

penalties, this study is also coded as having one negative and significant elasticity and one insignificant

elasticity in the "Weak" row in Panel C. And finally, these estimates cover all workers, rather than just

vulnerable workers, and hence this study results in one negative and significant elasticity and one

insignificant elasticity in the "All workers" row in Panel D. In the "Total" column, the rows in each panel

add to the total number of estimates (229), because all the estimates are classified by each of the four

features.

          Panel A of Table 2 reports results based on whether the minimum wage is binding, non-binding, or

there are no data on wages with which to classify the study and its estimates. There is somewhat more

evidence of negative employment effects when minimum wages are binding (or are likely to be binding ­



                                                       13
as discussed below). For the estimates based on binding minimum wages, 38.2% of the elasticities (63

estimates) indicate negative and significant effects on employment. Only 6.7% of the results (11) with a

binding minimum wage report positive and significant elasticities. In 55.2% of the cases (91) the estimated

employment elasticity is insignificant. Thus, for binding minimum wages, if the estimated elasticity is

significant, the evidence points much more strongly to adverse employment effects than to positive

employment effects, although the share of negative and significant employment elasticities is lower than

the share of insignificant elasticities.

        There is only a small number of estimated elasticities from studies where the minimum wage is

non-binding (11), and nearly three-quarters of them (72.7%) report an insignificant employment elasticity.

However, the remainder (27.3%) of the estimated employment elasticities are negative and significant.

        There is a sizable number of studies with no information on whether the minimum wage is binding

(53 estimated elasticities). Among these, the results are very similar to the estimates based on studies

reporting that the minimum wage is binding, with 37.7% of the estimated employment elasticities negative

and significant, and 43.4% insignificant. Given the distribution of estimates (and studies) as having binding

or non-binding minimum wages in the first two rows ­ with nearly all indicating that minimum wages are

binding ­ it seems likely that in most of the unclassifiable studies the estimated minimum wage effect is in

fact for a binding minimum wage. For instance, as shown in Appendix Table A3, China has four studies

classified as "no data," but it has four that are classified as binding, and only one classified as non-binding,

so it seems plausible that the minimum wage is binding in the first four. Similarly, Brazil has three studies

classified as "no data," 12 classified as binding, and none classified as non-binding. Thus, it seems

reasonable to view the results in the "No data" row of Table 2 as largely reinforcing the conclusion that

estimates of the effects of binding minimum wages point to disemployment effects, although to be more

agnostic we continue to treat these two groups of studies separately, and to study binding minimum wages

we focus on the estimates for which we can explicitly classify the data as pointing to a minimum wage that

is binding.

        Panel B reports results for estimates classified by sector ­ formal or informal. The results tend to



                                                       14
point to evidence of negative employment elasticities in both sectors. However, there is more evidence of

positive effects for estimates based on the informal sector, and a little more evidence of negative effects for

the formal sector. For the formal-sector estimates, 38.4% of the estimated elasticities (53 estimates) point to

negative employment effects, while only 7.2% (10) point to positive employment effects; 54.3% of

estimates (75) are insignificant. For the informal sector, the percentage of positive and significant

employment elasticities is more than double that for the formal sector (18.8% vs. 7.2%), although still,

more estimates are negative or insignificant (33.3% negative, and 47.9% insignificant). For estimates

covering both sectors, the percentage of estimates that are negative and significant is similar, and the

percentage of insignificant estimated elasticities is higher.

          Panel C disaggregates the estimated elasticities based on enforcement. In this case, the results for

strong vs. weak enforcement indicate more evidence of negative employment effects with strong

enforcement, but the comparisons with no enforcement appear to be counterintuitive. In particular, the

elasticities for minimum wage laws with strong enforcement are negative and significant in 46.0% of cases

(29 estimates), compared to 29.6% (29) with weak enforcement; but the percentage is slightly higher

(46.8%) with no enforcement. Thus, there is not a clear pattern of a greater percentage of insignificant

elasticities the weaker is enforcement. These results may reflect some of the challenges we discussed

earlier with respect to measuring enforcement and assessing its "effect" on the estimated minimum wage

effect.

          Finally, Panel D turns to results disaggregated by type of worker. Estimates for vulnerable workers

point more clearly to disemployment effects ­ with 45.7% of such estimates (37) negative and significant,

compared to a lower percentage (33.1%) for estimates computed instead for all workers.20 Correspondingly,

there is a lower percentage of estimates with positive effects when looking at vulnerable workers compared

to all workers (7.4% vs. 10.1%), and the percentage with insignificant results is lower for vulnerable

workers (46.9% vs 56.8%).

          Thus, based on the univariate comparisons, for three of the four classifications of estimates we use

­ binding minimum wages, sector, and type of worker ­ we find some evidence consistent with minimum



                                                       15
wages doing more to reduce employment where there is a stronger prediction of negative employment

effects, and for the formal/informal-sector distinction, more evidence of positive effects in the informal

sector. These results are consistent with expectations from the competitive model (while not necessarily

contradicting other models), including the two-sector model. We next turn to evidence that more sharply

delineates studies and estimates by simultaneously considering multiple features of these estimates.

Differences in estimates: multi-way comparisons

           The one-way comparisons we have presented thus far could mask relationships between study

features and estimated elasticities, for four reasons. First, we may not be isolating the effect of a particular

features of an estimate, because estimates can vary along multiple dimensions at once. Second, given that

each of the features we study ­ bindingness, formality, enforcement, and vulnerability ­ can matter

independently for whether minimum wages reduce employment, it follows that estimated employment

effects may be more negative if more features of an estimate predict negative effects ­ based on the

competitive model or institutional factors (and more so if they interact). Third, we have taken no account of

the estimated magnitudes of the elasticities. And fourth, related to the last point, the signs of insignificant

estimates are also of interest.21 Hence, we now present analyses that incorporate all of this information. For

these analyses, we present evidence in sets of figures, rather than tables, because the figures make the

evidence much clearer. In the next subsection, we turn to some regression estimates that refine the analysis

further.

           We begin with two-way comparisons based on pairs of features that more strongly predict negative

employment effects based on the competitive model and institutional factors ­ for example, estimates

covering vulnerable workers with strong enforcement, or estimates for the formal sector where minimum

wages are binding. These are reported in Panel A of Figure 2A. Note that the third and fourth features are

not specified (similar to in our one-way comparisons in Table 2), so two features predicting stronger

negative effects means two or more features. Thus, for example, when we summarize the estimates for

vulnerable workers with strong enforcement, we do not specify formal vs. informal sector or whether the

minimum wage is binding. We report (as we do in the remaining panels of Figure 2A) the percentage of



                                                       16
estimates that are positive but insignificant ("insignificant positive"), negative but insignificant

("insignificant negative"), positive and significant ("positive"), and negative and significant ("negative").

        In Panel B, we report these percentages for estimated elasticities for which only one feature of the

estimates in each possible pair of features predicts negative employment effects. Thus, for example,

corresponding to the vulnerable/strong estimates in Panel A, we have two sets of estimates in Panel B ­

vulnerable/none (no enforcement) and vulnerable/weak. We thus learn how removing the strong

enforcement feature from the vulnerable/strong pair affects the estimates. And Panel C does this for pairs in

which neither feature in the pair predicts negative employment effects. Corresponding to what we said

above, in Panel B one or more features more strongly predict negative employment effects, and in Panel C

at most two features more strongly predict negative employment effects (or alternatively two or more

features do not predict more negative effects). Appendix Table A4 reports the total number of estimates for

each pair shown in the figure and reports similar information for the figures that follow.

        Figure 2A shows a few things. Looking first at Panel A, when two (or more) features of an estimate

more strongly predict negative effects, the estimated elasticity is much more likely to be negative. This is

reflected in the black bars (for negative effects) being, in all cases, much longer than the gray bars,

indicating higher percentages of estimated elasticities that are negative. In all cases but one, fewer than

20% of estimates are positive ­ summing across the solid gray bars for negative and significant elasticities,

and the patterned gray bars for negative and insignificant elasticities. This contrasts with Panels B and C ­

when only one, or neither, feature in the pair considered predicts stronger negative effects. In Panel B, the

differences between the black and gray bars ­ corresponding, respectively, to negative estimates and

positive estimates ­ are less pronounced, and in some cases there are not many fewer positive than negative

estimates (whether significant or not).22 This weaker evidence of negative effects when fewer features more

strongly predict negative employment effects is even more apparent in Panel C, for which neither feature in

the pair predicts stronger negative employment effects (meaning that at least two of the four features we

consider do not more strongly reflect negative employment effects). Indeed, while Panel B still indicates a

preponderance of negative elasticities, in Panel C there are multiple cases with a larger share of estimates



                                                       17
that are positive (e.g., weak/no data (binding) and informal/all workers).

        One might also ask, from this figure, if there is evidence about which features of estimates are

more strongly associated with finding a negative employment effect. However, because the other features

of estimates not in each pair considered can vary, this can be misleading. We come back to more explicit

evidence on this question below.

        Figure 2B presents three panels for the same pairs of features, but this time reporting the average

magnitude of the elasticity. In Panel A, for pairs in which both features of estimates more strongly predict

negative employment effects, the elasticities are negative in every case, with one in the range of -0.06

range, four in the range of about -0.12 to -0.15, and one around -0.20. In Panel B, the average elasticity is

negative in all cases but one (strong/informal). But in many cases the elasticities are closer to zero (and

some quite close), although there are some cases with larger negative elasticities. (However, the most

extreme case, for "vulnerable/non-binding," is based on only two estimates.) Finally, in Panel C, when

neither feature predicts stronger negative employment effects, there are more positive elasticities.

        Thus, the evidence from Figures 2A and 2B suggests that when more features of estimated

elasticities more strongly predict negative employment effects, the estimates are more likely to be negative.

However, when we look at only pairs of features of estimates, the information can be quite noisy because

the other two features of estimates not included in the pair are not specified. Hence, we next look at sharper

evidence ­ based on whether at least three features of estimated elasticities, or all four features, more

strongly predict negative employment effects based on the competitive model and institutional factors. This

evidence paints an even clearer picture: when many features of an estimate more strongly predict negative

employment effects, the evidence points quite unambiguously in that direction. In contrast, when many

features do not more strongly predict negative employment effects, the evidence is much more mixed.

        Figure 3A presents the evidence on the sign and significance of the estimates, for estimates for

which three or more features more strongly predict negative employment effect. In Panel A, the first set of

bars (above the horizontal dashed line) are for all four features. For these estimates, all of the estimates are

negative, with 57.1% significant and 36.7% insignificant. The remaining sets of bars are for estimates for



                                                       18
each set of three features that more strongly predict negative employment effects.23 It is clear that for these

estimates, nearly all of the estimates are negative, and more are statistically significant than not.

        Panel B goes in the opposite direction, summarizing results for sets of features ­ in threes or all

four ­ that do not more strongly predict negative employment effects. In this case, for which most (or none)

of the features more strongly predict negative effects, there is no clear pattern of more negative than

positive elasticities, and there are many sets of features for which there are more positive than negative

effects (e.g., informal/weak/all workers and informal/weak/no data (binding). Note that for the bars above

the dashed line, for estimates for which none of the four features more strongly predict negative effects,

there are very few elasticities (see Appendix Table A4); hence the percentages reported for this set of bars,

including the couple of cases of 100% negative elasticities, are not very reliable.

        Figure 3B presents similar evidence, but for the magnitudes (average elasticities). Not surprisingly,

the estimated magnitudes are all negative in Panel A, for estimates for which all or most features more

strongly predict negative employment effects. In contrast, the evidence in Panel B, for estimates for which

most features do not more strongly predict negative employment effects, is very mixed, with one-third of

the sets of estimates on average positive. Note that all of the larger positive magnitudes (and six of the

seven positive ones overall) correspond to estimates for the informal sector.

        Overall, we view the evidence in Figures 3A and 3B as providing a quite clear message: When

studies of the employment effects of minimum wages in developing countries have many (or most) features

that more strongly predict negative employment effects, based on the competitive model and institutional

factors, the evidence is a good deal more likely to point to negative employment effects.

Differences in results across features of estimates: meta-regressions

        Finally, we turn to regression analysis of the estimates ­ or meta-regressions. We estimate models

with three different dependent variables: a dummy variable for whether the estimate is negative; a dummy

variable for whether it is negative and significant; and the estimated elasticity. For the first two cases, we

use a linear probability model. We begin with simple specifications in which the regressors are mutually

exclusive variables for whether zero, one, two, three, or four features of the estimates more strongly predict



                                                       19
negative employment effects based on the competitive model or institutional factors. That is, for each of

our outcomes, we estimate regression models of the form:

         Yj = 0SFj0 + 1SFj1 + 2SFj2 + 3SFj3 + 4SFj4 + j ,                                               (1)

where there is no constant, j indexes estimates, the SF# are dummy variables for the number of estimate

features predicting stronger negative employment effects, and the Yj are the alternative dependent variables.

         SFj0 is equal to one if none of the features of the estimates is classified as a stronger predictor of

negative effects of the minimum wage on employment ­ a study that estimates the impact for the informal

sector, on total employment (instead of vulnerable workers), for a country with weak enforcement, where

the minimum wage is not binding. SFj1 is equal to one if the estimate is classified to have one feature that

predicts stronger negative employment effects, and the other three do not. SFj2 is a dummy equal to one

when two features predict negative employment effects, and so on.

         This analysis provides some advantages relative to the preceding figures in terms of summarizing

the evidence, at the cost of losing some of the richness of those figures. The regression estimates average

over the sets of features of estimates we considered in the figures, which can increase precision but mask

heterogeneous effects of study features. We are also able to do statistical inference on the results. And the

regression analysis avoids the ambiguity of the whether the unspecified features of the estimates in the sets

of two or three features of estimates considered in the figures do or do not more strongly predict negative

employment effects ­ because the dummy variables SF# are defined to be mutually exclusive. This meta-

regression differs from a regression using dummies for each category ­ one dummy for binding, one for

formal sector, etc. We prefer this more restrictive specification because there are very few observations for

some combinations of features (see Table A4 in the Appendix), although we describe richer specifications

below.

         The estimates of equation (1) are reported in Table 3.24 The sample includes all 229 preferred

estimates from the 61 studies, and we cluster the standard errors by study. In general, we see more

systematic evidence of the conclusions we drew from the figures: when more features of estimates more

strongly predict negative employment effects, the estimates are more consistent with negative employment



                                                        20
effects. The estimates in column (1) are for the dichotomous outcome of whether the estimated elasticity is

negative. There is a positive monotonic relationship between the number of features of estimates that more

strongly predict negative employment effects and the probability that the estimated elasticity is negative.

(Indeed for four such features, there is no variation, as we saw in the top set of bars in Figure 3A.)

        We see very similar evidence in column (2) ­ where the outcome is a negative and significant

elasticity. There is just one deviation from monotonicity, for the difference between zero and one feature of

estimates. The estimated coefficients are smaller than in column (1), implying that there is a stronger

relationship between the number of features of estimates that more strongly predict negative employment

effects and finding a negative employment effect without regard to significance, than finding a negative

and significant one.

        Finally, in column (3), for the actual estimated elasticities, the evidence is not quite as clean with

regard to a monotonic relationship, reflecting the variability in the estimates. (Here the signs are flipped

because the dependent variable is the elasticity, not a dummy for whether the elasticity is negative.)

Moreover, the average estimated elasticity is significant only for cases where two features of estimates

more strongly predict a negative employment effect, although the point estimate is larger when all four

features of estimates more strongly predict a negative employment effect (-0.192 vs. -0.125). As reflected

in the counts of estimates with different numbers of features more strongly predicting negative employment

effects (Appendix Table A4), this difference in statistical significance likely reflects at least in part the

small number of estimates for which all four features more strongly predict negative employment effects.

        Note that Table 3 also reports the statistical significance of the estimated differences based on the

number of features that more strongly predict negative employment effects. For example, under the "Two

estimate features" heading, the row labeled "Two = One (p-value)" is the p-value for the test of equality of

the estimated coefficients of "Two estimate features" and "One estimate feature," or 2 and 1 in equation

(2). Despite the generally quite clear relationships indicating that when there are more such features

estimated employment effects are more likely to be negative, these differences often are not significant.

They are, however, in a number of cases in columns (1) and (2), for tests of the difference in coefficients



                                                        21
when all four features of estimates more strongly predict negative employment effects, vs. fewer features.

        Next, we modify this framework to test more explicitly which features of estimates are more likely

to lead to evidence of negative employment effects, or a larger negative elasticity. For the variables

corresponding to one, two, or three features of estimates (from equation (1)) we alternatively define these

to include or to exclude each estimate feature. For example, to ask whether evidence that the minimum

wage is binding leads to stronger evidence of negative employment effects, we break each of the variables

SFj1, SFj2, and SFj3 into two separate variables, based on whether or not the estimate is for a binding

minimum wage. In this example, denoting these, for SFj1, as SFj1B and SFj1NB, equation (1) becomes:

        Yj = 0SFj0 + 1BSFj1B + 1NBSFj1NB + 2BSFj2B + 2NBSFj2NB + 3BSFj3B + 33NBSFj1NB

                 + 4SFj4 + j .                                                                         (2)

        Note that the variables corresponding to zero features or four features are unaffected by this

change, because they cannot be broken up this way. For this specification, evidence of more negative

estimates for SFj1B than for SFj1NB (or similarly for SFj2B vs. SFj2NB or SFj3B vs. SFj3NB) would indicate that

estimates for binding minimum wages ­ for the same number of estimate features more strongly predicting

negative employment effects ­ are more likely to find evidence of negative employment effects. Hence, we

also report tests of equality for these pairs of coefficients, for each study feature considered separately.

        We report these results in Table 4, for the same outcomes as in Table 3 ­ a negative elasticity, a

negative and significant elasticity, and the estimated elasticity itself. Each set of three columns considers

one of our four features of estimates, with the variables for one, two, and three study features broken into

separate dummy variables for whether or not that specific feature is included. The simplest way to interpret

this evidence is to compare the estimated coefficients between the "includes feature" row and the "excludes

feature" row, for a given number of features of estimated elasticities that more strongly predict negative

employment effects.

        Consider first the estimates in columns (1)-(3), for binding minimum wages. Column (1) reports

results for whether the estimate is negative, comparing estimates that do and do not come from binding

minimum wages. For estimates for which two features more strongly predict negative minimum wage



                                                       22
effects, the estimated coefficient is larger in the "excludes feature" rows (0.724 vs. 0.711) ­ i.e., when the

two estimate features that more strongly predict negative employment effects do not include binding

minimum wages. In contrast, for estimates for which three features more strongly predict negative

employment effects, the coefficient is larger when one of these features is binding minimum wages (0.824

vs. 0.750). In column (2) as well ­ where the outcome is a negative and significant employment effect, the

relative magnitudes of these coefficients do not exhibit a consistent pattern. However, in column (3) ­ for

the actual magnitude of the elasticity ­ the average elasticity is always larger negative for the features of

estimates that exclude binding minimum wages. The table also reports the p-values for the tests of equality

of these pairs of coefficients. There is never significant evidence of differences in columns (1)-(3); the

lowest p-value if 0.24 (for three features of estimates, in column (3)).

        Columns (4)-(6) report the same kind of evidence, but this time distinguishing estimates by

whether they are for the formal sector or not. In this case, too, the evidence for whether the estimated

coefficient is negative or negative and significant is not unambiguously in one direction. However, in

column (6) the estimated elasticity is always larger negative when formality is excluded. Again, none of

these pairwise differences in estimates are statistically significant (except in one case in column (4), for an

estimated coefficient that has no variation).

        The estimates in columns (7)-(9) consider differences depending on whether the estimate features

include or exclude strong enforcement. In this case, there is no clear difference. Finally, the estimates in

columns (10)-(12) focus on whether the estimate is for vulnerable workers. In this case, again, there is not

clear evidence that the evidence of negative employment effects, or the magnitude of the negative effect,

differs systematically based on whether one of the estimate features is a focus on vulnerable workers.25

        Note that the specification in Table 4 is different from what might be viewed as the most standard

type of meta-regression that simply includes, on the right-hand side, dummy variables for the different

study features. A regression like that would take no account of whether (for example) studies with binding

minimum wages tend to have only one study feature that more strongly predicts negative employment

effects, while studies focusing on the formal sector tend to have more features that more strongly predict



                                                       23
negative employment effects. If studies are unlikely to detect negative employment effects unless multiple

features of the study more strongly predict negative employment effects, then there are important

interactions between specific study features and the number of features that more strongly predict negative

employment effects, which the specifications in Table 4 could reveal.

        Nonetheless, we have estimated versions of the more standard meta-regression, and report the

results in Table 5. In the first three columns, we omit the weakest study feature in terms of predicting

negative employment effects (non-binding, no enforcement, informal sector, and all workers). In the next

three columns we use a more parsimonious model, retaining only the strongest such study feature (binding,

strong enforcement, formal sector, and vulnerable workers).26 In this table, the clearest evidence is that

studies focusing on vulnerable workers are most likely to provide evidence of negative employment effects,

and there is also some evidence of this (although a good deal weaker) for studies of countries with strong

enforcement. However, Table 4, which compares results based on study features for studies including the

same number of features that more strongly predict negative employment effects, suggests we have to be a

bit cautious about this interpretation. In Table 4, we find stronger evidence of negative effects for estimates

with two features that more strongly predict negative employment effects when the estimates are for

vulnerable workers, in all three columns ((10)-(12)); the p-values for equal effects are fairly small, although

only one, in column (11), is below 0.1. But for estimates with other numbers of features that more strongly

predict negative employment effects, the estimated effects are larger when the vulnerable worker feature is

excluded.27

        To summarize, Tables 3, 4, and 5 consider three different but related kinds of evidence. Table 3

focuses simply on the number of features of estimates ­ of the four we consider ­ that more strongly predict

negative employment effects based on the competitive model or institutional factors. Table 4 tries to

disaggregate this evidence, paying attention not only to the counts of estimate features, but also asking

whether particular features of estimates among these four features are more consistently associated with

evidence of negative employment effects, conditional on the number of features that more strongly predict

negative employment effects. And Table 5 presents a more standard type of meta-regression that focuses on



                                                      24
study features but without reference to how many other study features more strongly predict negative

employment effects. In general, we do not find strong evidence pointing to particular features of estimates

that generate stronger evidence of negative employment effects. There is some evidence of this for studies

focusing on vulnerable workers, in Table 5, but this is not robust in Table 4. However, the evidence (from

Table 3) is quite clear that estimated employment elasticities based on a greater number of features that

more strongly predict negative employment effects are, in fact, more likely to be negative, or negative and

significant. And such estimates, to a limited but lesser extent, are more likely to take on larger negative

values.

          One potential caveat to our interpretation of the evidence is that it is conceivable that the study

features noted or documented by a study's authors were chosen (or emphasized) to rationalize a particular

result.28 For example, a researcher failing to find a negative employment effect might be compelled to study

whether the minimum wage was in fact binding, and provide evidence that is was not, whereas a researcher

finding (and expecting) a negative employment effect might not. Or a researcher might first estimate

employment effects for all workers, but after not finding a negative employment effect decide to look at

more vulnerable workers, leading to finding a negative effect. In these examples, researchers who believe

in the competitive model could end up highlighting features of the data, country, etc., which help

rationalize the results in terms of the competitive model ­ what we might term "analysis bias" as opposed

to "publication bias." We cannot decisively rule this out, although our sense is that the problem is not likely

to be severe. First, some of our study features are beyond the researcher's control (like enforcement, or

whether the data break out formal- and informal-sector workers). Second, for the analyses that reflect

research decisions about what to explore (whether the minimum wage is binding, estimating effects for the

formal and informal sector, and isolating effects for vulnerable workers), we would argue that these issues

are very standard in the research literature on minimum wages in developing countries, suggesting most

researchers would present these analyses as long as the data are available.29

VI. Conclusions

          The goal of this paper is to see whether we can make sense of the mixed evidence on the



                                                        25
employment effects of minimum wages in developing countries. Although estimated effects tend to be

negative, there is considerable heterogeneity, with many non-negative estimates. We try to distinguish

between two explanations. One is that there simply is no clear evidence that minimum wages reduce

employment in developing countries, in which case we should see heterogeneous estimates even across

similar studies or estimates looking at workers most likely to be adversely affected by minimum wages

(because, e.g., they are low skill, or work in the formal sector), and in contexts where negative effects are

more likely (e.g., when minimum wages are more binding). Alternatively, the heterogeneity in estimated

minimum wage effects may reflect heterogeneity in estimates along dimensions more likely or less likely

to predict negative employment effects ­ e.g., estimates for binding minimum wages for low-skill

workers vs. estimates for weakly enforced minimum wages in the informal sector, and estimates for

which more features more strongly predict negative employment effects. To try to distinguish between

these explanations, we conduct different versions of meta-analyses of the estimates from a large set of

studies of minimum wage effects in developing countries.

        We conclude that the evidence is much more consistent with the second explanation. That is, we

find that the estimated employment effects of minimum wages in developing countries are more likely to

be negative, and larger negative, when estimates focus on data and sectors for which the competitive

model predicts disemployment effects and in institutional settings in which we would expect the

minimum wage to have more adverse impact. Specifically, there is more consistent evidence of negative

employment effects for estimates for which multiple features of the estimates ­ including when the

minimum wage is binding, where minimum wage enforcement is stronger, for the formal sector, and

when the data focus on vulnerable (lower-wage) workers ­ predict negative employment effects. To be

precise, the evidence is less clear on whether a particular one of these features that characterizes a study is

more strongly associated with negative employment effects (although there some evidence that

disemployment effects are more likely to emerge from studies of vulnerable ­ i.e., lower-wage ­

workers). The difficulty of pinning down exactly which study features matter the most for whether the

evidence points to negative employment effects likely arises because studies can vary on many


                                                      26
dimensions (corresponding to all of these features). But the evidence is clearer that when all or most

features of a study predict negative employment effects, the study is in fact more likely to find negative

employment effects.

        One implication of this conclusion is that the apparently mixed evidence is a result of many

studies focusing on data, sectors, or institutional settings in which negative employment effects are less

likely. As such, many of these studies may be uninformative about the effects of minimum wages when

the competitive model and institutional factors more strongly predict negative employment effects:

studies of binding minimum wages, with strong enforcement, focusing on vulnerable workers, in the

formal sector. On the other hand, the implication is that in some developing country settings negative

employment are in fact less likely ­ e.g., for informal sector employment. However, a further implication

is that precisely when minimum wages in developing countries could potentially deliver the most benefits

­ when minimum wages are binding and enforced, and when they apply to vulnerable workers in the

formal sector ­ the disemployment effects are most apparent, implying that minimum wages in

developing countries may present more of a tradeoff between higher wages and lower employment than

might be apparent from a simpler look at the evidence across studies of employment effects in developing

countries. Hence, in assessing the wisdom of minimum wage increases in developing countries, it is

important also to weigh evidence on other outcomes, such as whether higher minimum wages in

developing countries raise incomes of low-income families ­ benefits that might offset the costs of some

job losses for vulnerable workers. Gindling (2018) suggests that, overall, minimum wages tend to reduce

poverty in developing countries, but only modestly.30

        Finally, one dimension we do not explore is whether monopsony power is sometimes relevant.

There are some cases of positive estimates (although not many) with features for which the competitive

model and institutional factors predict negative employment effects. (These positive estimates are more

prevalent in studies with only one feature for which the competitive model and institutional factors

predict negative effects; see, e.g., Figures 2A and 3A). Monopsony is a potential explanation, but not the

only one; for example, the standard two-sector competitive model predicts positive employment effects in


                                                     27
the informal sector. Testing whether monopsony can sometimes explain a positive effect of the minimum

wage on employment is hard. Recent work for the United States (Azar et al., 2019; Munguía Corella,

forthcoming) tries to do this using disaggregated, sub-national variation in measures of labor market

concentration and worker mobility, and finds some evidence consistent with monopsony power in more-

rural, less-dense counties. There is no way to apply this type of analysis to the "study-level" or "estimate-

level" observations we use in the present paper, but exploring whether monopsony power sometimes

generates positive employment effects of the minimum wage in developing countries would be useful.

        Still, at this point our view is that there is no clear reason, based on the existing evidence, to

conclude that competitive models of the labor market do not do a good job of characterizing low-wage

labor markets in developing countries. Evidence of negative employment effects tends to emerge where

the competitive model predicts it should, although this conclusion does not apply to every study, and

different conclusions more consistent with monopsony could hold for some countries or more likely sub-

regions of countries.




                                                      28
                                                References

Alaniz, E., Gindling, T., & Terrell, K. (2011). The impact of minimum wages on wages, work and poverty

    in Nicaragua. IZA Discussion Paper No. 5702.

Alatas, V., & Cameron, L.A. (2008). The impact of minimum wages on employment in a low-income

    country: A quasi-natural experiment in Indonesia. ILR Review, 61(2), 201-223.

Arango, C., & Pachón, A. (2004). The minimum wage in Colombia: Holding the middle with a bite on the

    poor. Banco de la República Borradores de Economía Working Paper No. 280.

Asmal, Z., Bhorat, H., Kanbur, R., Ranzani, M., & Paci, P. (2019). Minimum wages and labor supply in

    an emerging market: The case of Mauritius. Development Policy Research Unit Working Paper

    201809. DPRU, University of Cape Town.

Azar, J., Huet-Vaughn, E., Marinescu, I., Taska, B., & von Wachter, T. (2019). Minimum wage

    employment effects and labor market concentration. NBER Working Paper No. 26101.

Baranowska-Rataj, A., & Magda, I. (2015). The impact of the minimum wage on job separations and

    working hours among young people in Poland. Institute of Statistics and Demography, Warsaw School

    of Economics Working Paper No. 45.

Bell, L. (1997). The impact of minimum wages in Mexico and Colombia. Journal of Labor Economics,

    15(3), S102-S135.

Belman, D., & Wolfson, P.J. (2019). 15 years of research on U.S. employment and the minimum wage.

    LABOUR, 33(4), 488-506.

Belman, D., & Wolfson, P.J. (2016). What does the minimum wage do in developing countries? A

    review of studies and methodologies. International Labor Office, Conditions of Work and

    Employment Series 62.

Bhorat, H., Kanbur, R., & Stanwix, B. (2014). Estimating the impact of minimum wages on employment,

    wages and non-wage benefits: The case of agriculture in South Africa. American Journal of

    Agricultural Economics, 96(5), 1402-1419.

Boeri, T., Garibaldi, P., & Ribero, M. (2011). The lighthouse effect and beyond. Review of Income and
    Wealth, 57(special issue), S54-S78.

Broecke, S., & Vandeweyer, M. (2015). Doubling the minimum wage and its effect on employment:

    Evidence from Brazil. http://conference.iza.org/conference_files/worldb2015/broecke_s8754.pdf.

Broecke, S., Forti, A., & Vandeweyer, M. (2017). The effect of minimum wages on employment in

    emerging economies: A survey and meta-analysis. Oxford Development Studies, 45(3), 366-391.

Card, D., & Krueger, A. (1995). Time-series minimum-wage studies: A meta-analysis. American Economic

    Review, 85(2), 238-243.

Carneiro, F. (2004). Are minimum wages to blame for informality in the labour market? Empirica, 31(4),

    295-306.

Carneiro, F., & Corseuil, C. (2001). Os impactos do salário mínimo sobre emprego e salários no Brasil:

    Evidências a partir de dados longitudinais e séries temporais. Instituto de Pesquisa Econômic Aplicada

    Discussion Paper No. 0849.

Castillo-Freeman, A., & Freeman, R.B. (1992). When the minimum wage really bites: The Effect of the

    US-level minimum on Puerto Rico. In G. Borjas and R. Freeman (Eds.), Immigration and the work

    force: Economic consequences for the United States and source areas (pp. 177-211). Chicago:

    University of Chicago Press,.

Chun, N., & Khor, N. (2010). Minimum wages and changing wage inequality in Indonesia. Asian

    Development Bank Economics Working Paper Series No. 196.

Clemens, J., & Strain, M.R. (2020). Understanding "wage theft": Evasion and avoidance responses to

    minimum wage increases. NBER Working Paper No. 26969.

Comola, M., & Mello, L. (2011). How does decentralized minimum wage setting affect employment and

    informality? The case of Indonesia. Review of Income and Wealth Series, 57(s1), S79-S99.

Cunningham, W. (2007). Minimum wages and social policy: Lessons from developing countries. The

    World Bank.

    http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/826061468142780021/pdf/405260Minimum0101OFFICIA

    L0USE0ONLY1.pdf.
Del Carpio, X., Nguyen, H., Pabon, L., & Wang, L.C. (2015). Do minimum wages affect employment?

    Evidence from the manufacturing sector in Indonesia. IZA Journal of Labor & Development 4:17 (on-

    line).

Del Carpio, X., Messina, J., & Sanz-de-Galdeano, A. (2014). Minimum wage: Does it improve welfare in

    Thailand? IZA Discussion Paper No. 7911.

Dinkelman, T., & Ranchhod, V. (2012). Evidence on the impact of minimum wage laws in an informal

    sector: Domestic workers in South Africa. Journal of Development Economics, 99(1), 27-45.

Doucouliagos, H., & Stanley, T.D. (2009). Publication selection bias in minimum-wage research? A meta-

    regression analysis. British Journal of Industrial Relations, 47(2), 406-428.

Dung, P.K. (2017). The effects of minimum wage hikes on employment and wages in Viet Nam's micro,

    small, and medium enterprises. United Nations University WIDER Working Paper No. 2017/95.

Fajnzylber, P. (2001). Minimum wage effects throughout the wage distribution: Evidence from Brazil's

    formal and informal sectors. CEDEPLAR Working Paper No. 151.

Fang, T., & Lin, C. (2015). Minimum wages and employment in China. IZA Journal of Labor Policy 4:22

    (on-line).

Feliciano, Z.M. (1998). Does the minimum wage affect employment in Mexico? Eastern Economic

    Journal, 24(2), 165-180.

Foguel, M. (1998). Uma avaliação dos efeitos do salário mínimo sobre o mercado de trabalho no Brasil.

    Discussion Paper No. 564.

Foguel, M., Ramos, L., & Carneiro, F. (2001). The impacts of the minimum wage on the labor market,

    poverty and fiscal budget in Brazil. IPEA Working Paper No. 839.

Franco, A., Malhotra, N., & Simonvits, G. (2014). Publication bias in the social sciences: Unlocking the

    file drawer. Science, 345(6203), 1502-1505.

Garza Cantú, V., & Cantú Bazaldúa, F. (2002). La dinámica macroeconómica de los salarios mínimos en el

    empleo de México: Un análisis empírico 1983­2000. In Comisión Nacional de los Salarios Mínimos

    (Ed.), Comisión consultiva para la modernización del sistema de los salario mínimos: Estudios y
    ponencias (pp. 299-368). Mexico: STPS.

Gindling, T.H. (2018). Does increasing the minimum wage reduce poverty in developing countries. IZA

    World of Labor 30.v2 (on-line).

Gindling, T., & Terrell, K. (2007). The effects of multiple minimum wages throughout the labor market.

    Labour Economics, 14(3), 485-511.

Gindling, T., & Terrell, K. (2009). Minimum wages, wages and employment in various sectors in

    Honduras. Labour Economics, 16(3), 291-303

Grau, N., & Landerretche, O. (2011). The labor impact of minimum wages: A method for estimating the

    effect in emerging economies using Chilean panel data. University of Chile, Department of Economics,

    Working Paper No. 329.

Ham, A. (2018). The consequences of legal minimum wages in Honduras. World Development, 102(C),

    135-157.

Harris, J.R., & Todaro, M.P. (1970). Migration, unemployment and development: A two-sector analysis.

    American Economic Review, 60(1), 126-142.

Harrison, A., & Scorse, J. (2010). Multinationals and anti-sweatshop activism. American Economic Review,

    100(1), 247-273.

Hernandez Diaz, G., & Pinzon Garcia, E. (2006). El efecto del salario mínimo sobre el empleo y los

    ingresos. Departamento Nacional de Planeación, Archivos de Economía No. 316.

Hernandez, G., & Lasso, F. (2003). Estimación de la relación entre salario mínimo y empleo en Colombia:

    1984-2000. Revista de Economía del Rosario, 6(2), 117-138.

Hertz, T. (2005). The effect of minimum wages on the employment and earnings of South Africa's

    domestic service workers. Development Policy Research Unit Working Paper No. 05(99).

Hohberg, M., & Lay, J. (2015). The impact of minimum wages on informal and formal labor market

    outcomes: Evidence from Indonesia. IZA Journal of Labor & Development 4:14 (on-line).

Huang, Y., Loungani, L., & Wang, G. (2014). Minimum wage and firm employment: Evidence from

    China. IMF Working Paper No. 14-184.
Hunt, M. 1997. How science takes stock: The story of meta-analysis. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

International Labour Organization (ILO). (2015a). Transition to the formal economy in Latin America and

    the Caribbean. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---americas/---ro-

    lima/documents/genericdocument/wcms_490793.pdf.

International Labour Organization (ILO). (2015b). Five facts about informal economy in Africa.

    https://www.ilo.org/africa/whats-new/WCMS_377286/lang--en/index.htm.

International Labour Organization (ILO). (2018). More than 68 per cent of the employed population in

    Asia-Pacific are in the informal economy. https://www.ilo.org/asia/media-

    centre/news/WCMS_627585/lang--en/index.htm.

Islam, I., & Nazara, S. (2000). Minimum wage and the welfare of Indonesian workers. International Labour

    Organization, Occasional Discussion Paper Series No. 3.

Kamiska, A., & Lewandowski, P. (2015). The effects of minimum wage on a labour market with high

    temporary employment. IBS Working Paper No. 07/2015.

Lemos, S. (2004a). Minimum wage policy and employment effects: Evidence from Brazil. Economía, 5(1),

    219-266.

Lemos, S. (2004b). A menu of minimum wage variables for evaluating wages and employment effects:

    Evidence from Brazil. IZA Discussion Paper No. 1069.

Lemos, S. (2004c). The effects of the minimum wage in the formal and informal sectors in Brazil. IZA

    Discussion Paper No. 1089.

Lemos, S. (2005a). Political variables as instruments for the minimum wage. Contributions to Economic

    Analysis & Policy 4:1 (on-line).

Lemos, S. (2005b). Minimum wage effects on wages, employment and prices: Implications for poverty

    alleviation in Brazil. Division of Economics, School of Business, University of Leicester Working

    Paper No. 05(15).

Lemos, S. (2007). Minimum wage effects across the private and public sectors in Brazil. The Journal of

    Development Studies, 43(4), 700-720.
Lemos, S. (2009a). Minimum wage effects in a developing country. Labour Economics, 16(2), 224-237.

Lemos, S. (2009b). Comparing employment estimates using different minimum wage variables: The case

    of Brazil. International Review of Applied Economics, 23(4), pp. 405-25.

Luo, R., Zhou, M., & Wu, W. (2011). Impacts of minimum wage on employment of migrant workers in

    China. In Q. Zhou (Ed.), Advances in applied economics, business and development (pp. 73-77).

    Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer.

Magruder, J. (2013). Can minimum wages cause a big push? Evidence from Indonesia. Journal of

    Development Economics, 100(1), 48-62.

Majchrowska, A., & Zólkiewski, Z. (2012). The impact of minimum wage on employment in Poland.

    Investigaciones Regionales, 24, 211-239.

Maloney, W., & Nuñez Mendez, J. (2004). Measuring the impact of minimum wages: Evidence from Latin

    America. In J. J. Heckman and C. Pagés (Eds.), Law and employment: Lessons from Latin American

    and the Caribbean (pp. 109-130). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Martinez, C., Morales, G., & Valdes, R. (2001). Cambios estructurales en la demanda por trabajo en Chile.

    Economía Chilena, 4(2), 5-25.

Mayneris, F., Poncet, S., & Zhang, T. (2014). The cleansing effect of minimum wage: Minimum wage

    rules, firm dynamics and aggregate productivity in China. CEPII Working Paper No. 16.

Menon, N., & van der Meulen Rodgers, Y. (2017). The impact of the minimum wage on male and female

    employment and earnings in India. Asian Development Review, 34(1), 28-64.

Mincer, J. (1976). Unemployment effects of minimum wages. Journal of Political Economy, 84(4, Pt. 2),

    S87-S104.

Miranda, J. (2013). Labor demand stability and the minimum wage effect on employment: The Chilean

    evidence. MPRA Paper No. 60333.

Montenegro, C., & Pagés, C. (2004). Who benefits from labor market regulations? Chile, 1960-1998. In J.

    J. Heckman and C. Pagés (Eds.), Law and employment: Lessons from Latin American and the

    Caribbean (pp. 401-434). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Munguía Corella, L.F. (2019). Minimum wages and enforcement effects on employment in developing

    countries. Unpublished paper. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3442352.

Munguía Corella, L.F. Minimum wages in monopsonistic labor markets. Forthcoming in IZA Journal of

    Labor Economics.

Neumark, D. (2019). The econometrics and economics of the employment effects of minimum wages:

    Getting from known unknowns to known knowns. German Economic Review, 20(3), 293-329.

Neumark, D. (2016). Policy levers to increase jobs and increase income from work after the Great

    Recession. IZA Journal of Labor Policy 5:6 (online).

Neumark, D., Cunningham, W., & Siga, L. (2006). The effects of the minimum wage in Brazil on the distribution

    of family incomes: 1996-2001. Journal of Development Economics, 80(1), 136-159.

Neumark, D., & Wascher, W. (2007). Minimum wages and employment. Foundations and Trends in

    Microeconomics, 3(1-2), 1-182.

Neumark, D., & Wascher, W. (2002). State-level estimates of minimum wage effects: New evidence and

    interpretations from disequilibrium models. Journal of Human Resources, 37(1), 35-62

Neumark, D., & Wascher, W. (1998). Is the time-series evidence on minimum wage effects contaminated

    by publication bias? Economic Inquiry, 36(3), 458-470.

Ni, J., Wang, G., & Yao, X. (2011). Impact of minimum wages on employment. The Chinese Economy,

    44(1), 18-38.

Papps, K. (2012). The effects of social security taxes and minimum wages on employment: Evidence from

    Turkey. ILR Review, 65(3), 686-707.

Pelek, S. (2011). The employment effect of the minimum wage on youth labour market in Turkey: A

    regional panel data analysis. Unpublished paper.

    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228466644_The_Employment_Effect_of_the_Minimum_Wa

    ge_on_Youth_Labour_Market_in_Turkey_A_Regional_Panel_Data_Analysis1.

Shi, J. (2011). Employment effect of minimum wage in China ­ Research based on construction and

    manufacturing. In Q. Zhou (ed.), Advances in applied economics, business and development (pp. 78-
   82). Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer.

Strobl, E., & Walsh, F. (2003). Minimum wages and compliance: The case of Trinidad and Tobago.

   Economic Development and Cultural Change, 51(2), 427-450.

Suryahadi, A., Widyanti, W., Perwira, D., & Sumarto, S. (2003). Minimum wage policy and its impact on

   employment in the urban formal sector. Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 39(1), 29-50.

Wang, J., & Gunderson, M. 2011. Minimum wage impacts in China: Estimates from a prespecified

   research design, 2000­2007. Contemporary Economic Policy, 29(3), 392-406.

Wang, J., & Gunderson, M. (2012). Minimum wage effects on employment and wages: Dif-in-dif estimates

   from Eastern China. International Journal of Manpower, 33(8), 860-876.

Xiao, X.-Y., Xiang, B.-L. (2009). The impact of minimum wage policy on wages and employment in

   China. Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on Information Management, Innovation

   Management and Industrial Engineering, 2, 102-105.
           Figure 1: Histogram of Estimated Elasticities in Surveyed Studies and Authors' Preferred
                                                 Elasticities

                                                     A. All estimates

                   40
                         mean -0.061
                         median -0.012


                   30
 Percent




                   20




                   10




                    0
                        -1    -.8    -.6       -.4    -.2        0       .2   .4     .6      .8       1
                                                            Elasticities

                                           B. Authors' Preferred Estimates

                   25
                        mean -0.102
                        median -0.0480

                   20



                   15
 Percent




                   10



                    5



                    0
                        -1    -.8    -.6       -.4    -.2        0       .2   .4     .6      .8       1
                                                            Elasticities

Note: We drop from the histograms (but include in the means and medians) the observations that are larger than 1 in
absolute value to eliminate outliers and because most of the observations are between -1 and 1.
Figure 2A: Results by Features of Estimates, Authors' Preferred Estimates, Sign and Significance
                              A. Both features more strongly predict negative effects


         Vulnerable/Strong



         Vulnerable/Formal



             Strong/Formal



        Vulnerable/Binding



            Strong/Binding



            Formal/Binding


                             0%         10%      20%       30%      40%         50%      60%      70%        80%     90%    100%

                              Insignificant Positive        Insignificant Negative         Positive       Negative

                             B. One feature more strongly predicts negative effects

                Vulnerable/None
                Vulnerable/Weak
                 Vulnerable/Both
            Vulnerable/Informal
    Vulnerable/No data (binding)
         Vulnerable/Non-binding
                     Strong/Both
                 Strong/Informal
        Strong/No data (binding)
             Strong/Non-binding
              Strong/All Workers
       Formal/No data (binding)
            Formal/Non-binding
                    Formal/None
                   Formal/Weak
             Binding/All Workers
                   Binding/None
                   Binding/Weak
                    Binding/Both
                Binding/Informal

                                   0%     10%      20%       30%     40%        50%     60%      70%      80%      90%   100%

                        Insignificant Positive         Insignificant Negative         Positive        Negative
                                                 Figure 2A (continued)
                         C. Neither feature more strongly predicts negative effects

          Both/No data (binding)
                      None/Both
          None/No data (binding)
    All Workers/No data (binding)
               All Workers/None
                All Workers/Both
                     Weak/Both
          Weak/No data (binding)
               Weak/All Workers
       Informal/No data (binding)
            Informal/All Workers
                  Informal/None
                  Informal/Weak
         Non-binding/All Workers
              Non-binding/None
              Non-binding/Weak
               Non-binding/Both
            Non-binding/Informal

                                    0%    10%      20%   30%     40%        50%      60%     70%   80%   90%   100%

                        Insignificant Positive     Insignificant Negative         Positive    Negative


Note: Results labeled "Positive" or "Negative" have p-values  0.05. "None" refers to no enforcement, and "Weak"
to weak enforcement. "Both" refers to covering the formal and informal sectors combined.
Figure 2B: Results by Features of Estimates, Authors' Preferred Estimates, Average Elasticities
                        A. Both features more strongly predict negative effects


                                                                                            Vulnerable/Strong




                                                                                            Vulnerable/Formal




                                                                                            Strong/Formal




                                                                                            Vulnerable/Binding




                                                                                            Strong/Binding




                                                                                            Formal/Binding


    -0.30       -0.25        -0.20       -0.15        -0.10          -0.05           0.00

                        B. One feature more strongly predicts negative effects

                                                                                Vulnerable/None
                                                                                Vulnerable/Weak
                                                                                Vulnerable/Both
                                                                                Vulnerable/Informal
                                                                                Vulnerable/No data (binding)
                                                                                Vulnerable/Non-binding
                                                                                Strong/Both
                                                                                Strong/Informal
                                                                                Strong/No data (binding)
                                                                                Strong/Non-binding
                                                                                Strong/All Workers
                                                                                Formal/No data (binding)
                                                                                Formal/Non-binding
                                                                                Formal/None
                                                                                Formal/Weak
                                                                                Binding/All Workers
                                                                                Binding/None
                                                                                Binding/Weak
                                                                                Binding/Both
                                                                                Binding/Informal

    -1.40   -1.20   -1.00    -0.80   -0.60   -0.40    -0.20   0.00       0.20
                                          Figure 2B (continued)

                         C. Neither feature more strongly predicts negative effects

                                                                               Both/No data (binding)
                                                                               None/Both
                                                                               None/No data (binding)
                                                                               All Workers/No data (binding)
                                                                               All Workers/None
                                                                               All Workers/Both
                                                                               Weak/Both
                                                                               Weak/No data (binding)
                                                                               Weak/All Workers
                                                                               Informal/No data (binding)
                                                                               Informal/All Workers
                                                                               Informal/None
                                                                               Informal/Weak
                                                                               Non-binding/All Workers
                                                                               Non-binding/None
                                                                               Non-binding/Weak
                                                                               Non-binding/Both
                                                                               Non-binding/Informal

      -0.60   -0.50    -0.40    -0.30   -0.20   -0.10   0.00    0.10    0.20

Note: See notes to Figure 2A.
Figure 3A: Results by Features of Estimates, Authors' Preferred Estimates, Sign and Significance
                        A. Three or four features more strongly predict negative effects



        Binding/Formal/Strong/Vulnerable




                Formal/Strong/Vulnerable




               Binding/Strong/Vulnerable




               Binding/Formal/Vulnerable




                   Binding/Formal/Strong


                                            0%      10%     20%    30%    40%     50%    60%   70%    80%   90% 100%

                           Insignificant Positive        Insignificant Negative     Positive     Negative

                   B. Three or four features do not more strongly predict negative effects
              Both/None/Non-binding/All Workers
        Both/Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers
    Informal/None/No data (binding)/All Workers
         Informal/None/Non-binding/All Workers
    Informal/Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers
              Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers
               None/No data (binding)/All Workers
                   None/Non-binding/All Workers
               Both/No data (binding)/All Workers
                    Both/Non-binding/All Workers
                            Both/None/All Workers
                           Both/None/Non-binding
                           Both/Weak/All Workers
                     Both/Weak/No data (binding)
           Informal/No data (binding)/All Workers
                Informal/Non-binding/All Workers
                       Informal/None/All Workers
                 Informal/None/No data (binding)
                      Informal/None/Non-binding
                       Informal/Weak/All Workers
                 Informal/Weak/No data (binding)
                                                    0%     10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%

                         Insignificant Positive     Insignificant Negative        Positive     Negative

Note: Entries with no estimates are not shown. Entries above the dashed line are for four-way classifications of
features of estimates. Results labeled "Positive" or "Negative" have p-values  0.05. See notes to Figure 2A.
 Figure 3B: Results by Features of Estimates, Authors' Preferred Estimates, Average Elasticities
                        A. Three or four features more strongly predict negative effects


                                                                                     Binding/Formal/Strong/Vulnerable




                                                                                     Formal/Strong/Vulnerable




                                                                                     Binding/Strong/Vulnerable




                                                                                     Binding/Formal/Vulnerable




                                                                                     Binding/Formal/Strong


          -0.300    -0.250     -0.200     -0.150     -0.100      -0.050      0.000


                     B. Three or four features do not predict stronger negative effects


                                                                                 Informal/None/No data (binding)/All Workers
                                                                                 Informal/None/Non-binding/All Workers
                                                                                 Both/None/Non-binding/All Workers
                                                                                 Both/Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers
                                                                                 Informal/Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers
                                                                                 Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers
                                                                                 None/No data (binding)/All Workers
                                                                                 None/Non-binding/All Workers
                                                                                 Both/No data (binding)/All Workers
                                                                                 Both/Non-binding/All Workers
                                                                                 Both/None/All Workers
                                                                                 Both/None/Non-binding
                                                                                 Both/Weak/All Workers
                                                                                 Both/Weak/No data (binding)
                                                                                 Informal/No data (binding)/All Workers
                                                                                 Informal/Non-binding/All Workers
                                                                                 Informal/None/All Workers
                                                                                 Informal/None/No data (binding)
                                                                                 Informal/None/Non-binding
                                                                                 Informal/Weak/All Workers
                                                                                 Informal/Weak/No data (binding)

-0.30      -0.20       -0.10       0.00       0.10        0.20            0.30

Note: Entries with no estimates are not shown. Entries above the dashed line are for four-way classifications of
features of estimates. See notes to Figure 2A.
Table 1. Summary of Estimated Elasticities from Surveyed Studies and Authors' Preferred Estimates
                                                               Standard
                                                                                  Skewness Kurtosis
                     Mean Median Minimum Maximum                  dev.    Obs.
 All estimates       -0.061   -0.012      -4.73      4.51        0.451    1,250     -1.77     39.35
 Authors' preferred -0.102    -0.048      -2.53      2.19        0.497     229      -0.04     13.37
 estimates




Table 2. One-Way Classification of Estimation Results by Features of Estimates, Authors' Preferred
Estimates
                 Negative and significant    Insignificant   Positive and significant         Total
 A. Binding
 Binding                63 (38.2%)            91 (55.2%)            11 (6.7%)            165 (100.0%)
 Not binding             3 (27.3%)             8 (72.7%)            0 (0.0%)              11 (100.0%)
 No data                20 (37.7%)            23 (43.4%)           10 (18.9%)             53 (100.0%)
 B. Sector
 Formal                 53 (38.4%)            75 (54.3%)            10 (7.2%)            138 (100.0%)
 Informal               16 (33.3%)            23 (47.9%)            9 (18.8%)             48 (100.0%)
 Both                   17 (39.5%)            24 (55.8%)            2 (4.7%)              43 (100.0%)
 C. Enforcement
 Strong                 29 (46.0%)            29 (46.0%)            5 (7.9%)              63 (100.0%)
 Weak                   28 (26.9%)            71 (68.3%)            5 (4.8%)             104 (100.0%)
 No enforcement         29 (46.8%)            22 (35.5%)           11 (17.7%)             62 (100.0%)
 D. Workers
 Vulnerable             37 (45.7%)            38 (46.9%)            6 (7.4%)              81 (100.0%)
 All workers            49 (33.1%)            84 (56.8%)           15 (10.1%)            148 (100.0%)
Notes: Each cell reports the number of results and the row percent (in parentheses). Each category adds to the total of 229
preferred estimates. We classify results as significant if the p-value  0.05.
Table 3. Meta-Analysis Regressions, Based on Counts of Features of Estimates More Strongly Predicting
Negative Employment Effects
                                                        (1)                 (2)                (3)
 Variables: number of features of estimates that                        Negative and
 more strongly predict negative employment       Negative estimate significant estimate     Estimated
 effects                                             (LPM)                (LPM)             elasticity

 No estimate features                                           0.538***                 0.308***                  -0.074
                                                                 (0.190)                  (0.110)                  (0.112)
 One estimate feature                                           0.636***                 0.273***                  -0.072
                                                                 (0.081)                  (0.070)                  (0.055)
  One = No (p-value)                                              0.645                    0.785                    0.991
 Two estimate features                                          0.714***                 0.400***                -0.125***
                                                                 (0.051)                  (0.077)                  (0.041)
  Two = One (p-value)                                             0.441                    0.197                    0.393
  Two = No (p-value)                                              0.377                    0.500                    0.675
 Three study features                                           0.810***                 0.405***                  -0.060
                                                                 (0.091)                  (0.110)                  (0.118)
  Three = Two (p-value)                                           0.292                    0.967                    0.629
  Three = One (p-value)                                           0.118                    0.299                    0.937
  Three = No (p-value)                                            0.185                    0.527                    0.927
 Four estimate features                                           1.000                  0.571***                  -0.192
                                                                 (0.000)                  (0.039)                  (0.127)
      Four = Three (p-value)                                      0.040                    0.188                    0.433
      Four = Two (p-value)                                        0.000                    0.046                    0.618
      Four = One (p-value)                                        0.000                    0.000                    0.391
      Four = No (p-value)                                         0.018                    0.027                    0.490
      Joint test: Four = Three = Two = One (p-value)              0.000                    0.004                    0.782
      Observations                                                 229                      229                      229
***
   p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. There are 229 observations.
Note: The table reports estimates of equation (1). LPM = linear probability model. The variables are defined to be mutually
exclusive. For the LPMs, standard errors are clustered by study. There are 61 clusters. Note that for the estimates in column (1),
there is no variation in the dependent variable for the "Four estimate features" variables, which is why there is no variatio n in
the estimated coefficient.
Table 4. Meta-Analysis Regressions, Testing Specific Features of Estimates More Strongly Predicting Negative Employment Effect, Conditional on
Number of Such Features
                                                 (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
                                              Negative   Neg. and                  Negative    Neg. and                  Negative    Neg. and                Negative Neg. and
                                              estimate   sign. est.   Estimated    estimate    sign. est.   Estimated    estimate    sign. est. Estimated    estimate   sign. est.  Estimated
                                               (LPM)      (LPM)       elasticity    (LPM)       (LPM)       elasticity    (LPM)       (LPM)     elasticity    (LPM)      (LPM)      elasticity
                                   Feature:               Binding                             Formal sector                     Strong enforcement                  Vulnerable workers
 Variables: number of estimate features
 that more strongly predict negative
 employment effects
 No estimate features                         0.538***   0.308***      -0.074      0.538***    0.308***       -0.074     0.538***   0.308***       -0.074    0.538***   0.308***      -0.074
                                               (0.191)    (0.111)      (0.113)      (0.191)     (0.111)      (0.113)      (0.190)    (0.111)      (0.113)     (0.191)    (0.111)     (0.113)
 One estimate feature (includes feature)      0.634***   0.293***      -0.038      0.800***     0.300*      -0.062**         -          -             -        0.250      0.000       -0.452
                                               (0.102)    (0.088)      (0.059)      (0.156)     (0.153)      (0.025)                                          (0.239)    (0.000)     (0.496)
 One estimate feature (excludes feature)      0.643***   0.214**       -0.174      0.600***    0.267***       -0.075     0.636***   0.273***       -0.072    0.667***   0.294***      -0.043
                                               (0.133)    (0.107)      (0.147)      (0.095)     (0.081)      (0.067)      (0.082)    (0.071)      (0.055)     (0.088)    (0.077)     (0.048)
 Equal coefficients for one estimate            0.960      0.575        0.405        0.286       0.849        0.859          0          0          0.193       0.132        0         0.416
 feature (p-value)
 Two estimate features (includes feature)     0.711***   0.368***     -0.101***    0.675***    0.351***      -0.105*     0.714***   0.429***     -0.097**    0.828***   0.586***     -0.269**
                                               (0.063)    (0.089)       (0.036)     (0.061)     (0.082)      (0.054)      (0.077)    (0.118)      (0.042)     (0.088)    (0.139)      (0.117)
 Two estimate features (excludes feature)     0.724***   0.483***      -0.188*     0.821***    0.536***     -0.181**     0.714***   0.390***     -0.135**    0.671***   0.329***     -0.070**
                                               (0.085)    (0.148)       (0.107)     (0.088)     (0.128)      (0.085)      (0.064)    (0.096)      (0.055)     (0.059)    (0.071)      (0.033)
 Equal coefficients for two estimate            0.898      0.511         0.445       0.182       0.184        0.482          1        0.799        0.578       0.151      0.078        0.121
 features (p-value)
 Three estimate features (includes feature)   0.824***   0.441***       -0.018     0.784***    0.405***       -0.045     0.857***   0.429***     -0.158**    0.794***   0.353***      -0.058
                                               (0.100)    (0.130)      (0.142)      (0.102)     (0.117)      (0.134)      (0.099)    (0.143)      (0.065)     (0.109)    (0.120)     (0.146)
 Three estimate features (excludes feature)   0.750***    0.250*       -0.239*     1.000***      0.400      -0.172**     0.762***    0.381**       0.038     0.875***   0.625**       -0.069
                                               (0.222)    (0.128)      (0.122)      (0.000)     (0.307)      (0.077)      (0.150)    (0.169)      (0.225)     (0.111)    (0.239)     (0.070)
 Equal coefficients for three estimate          0.764      0.300         0.243       0.038       0.989        0.417        0.598      0.830        0.407       0.603      0.308       0.949
 features (p-value)
 Four estimate features                        1.000     0.571***      -0.192       1.000      0.571***       -0.192      1.000     0.571***       -0.192     1.000     0.571***      -0.192
                                              (0.000)     (0.039)      (0.127)     (0.000)      (0.039)      (0.127)     (0.000)     (0.039)      (0.127)    (0.000)     (0.039)     (0.127)
 Observations                                   229         229          229         229          229          229         229         229          229        229         229         229
***
   p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors are clustered by study. There are 61 clusters and 229 observations.
Note: The table reports estimates of equation (2). LPM = linear probability model. The variables are defined to be mutually exclusive. For columns (7)-(9), "-" indicates that there
are no estimates in the corresponding cell. Note that for the estimates in columns (1), (4), (7), and (10), there is no variation in the dependent variable for the "Four estimate
features" variables, which is why there is no variation in the estimated coefficient.
Table 5. Standard Meta-Analysis Regressions, Testing Specific Features of Estimates More
Strongly Predicting Negative Employment Effect
                                       (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)
                                    Negative   Neg. and                  Negative   Neg. and
                                    estimate   sign. est.   Estimated    estimate   sign. est.   Estimated
                                     (LPM)       (LPM)      elasticity    (LPM)      (LPM)       elasticity
 Binding                             -0.017       0.252       0.294        0.105      0.045        0.103
                                     (0.126)    (0.165)      (0.225)     (0.073)     (0.091)      (0.086)
 No data on binding                  -0.186       0.164       0.243
                                     (0.133)    (0.166)      (0.198)
 Strong enforcement                   0.092      -0.031      -0.023      0.148**     0.119         -0.023
                                     (0.105)    (0.117)      (0.128)     (0.068)    (0.097)       (0.066)
 Weak enforcement                    -0.083     -0.252*       0.028
                                     (0.117)    (0.140)      (0.102)
 Formal sector                        0.135       0.021       0.065       0.041      -0.005        0.043
                                     (0.127)    (0.094)      (0.176)     (0.087)    (0.067)       (0.101)
 All sectors                          0.159       0.069       0.079
                                     (0.152)    (0.153)      (0.190)
 Vulnerable workers                   0.117       0.099     -0.130**      0.124*      0.112      -0.122**
                                     (0.071)    (0.115)      (0.058)      (0.068)    (0.106)      (0.057)
 Minimum wage (baseline)            0.636***      0.218      -0.384      0.536***   0.274***       -0.153
                                     (0.151)    (0.172)      (0.254)      (0.086)    (0.078)      (0.102)
 Observations                          229                     229          229        229          229
***
   p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors are clustered by study. There are 61 clusters and 229
observations.
Note: LPM = linear probability model.
                                     Percent




                         0
                             2
                                 4
                                     6
                                         8
                                               10
                                                    12
                                                         14



                      1992
                      1993
                      1994
                      1995
                      1996
                      1997
                      1998
                      1999
                      2000
                      2001
                      2002
                      2003
                      2004
                      2005
                      2006
                      2007


Year of Publication
                      2008
                      2009
                      2010
                      2011
                      2012
                      2013
                      2014
                                                              Appendix Figure A1: Histogram of Surveyed Studies by Year




                      2015
                      2016
                      2017
                      2018
Appendix Table A1. Calculated Elasticities for Studies Not Estimating Elasticities
                              Minimum wage            Avg. empl.        Avg.
 Study            Country        variable    Period      rate           MW        Comments
 Alaniz et al.    Nicaragua      ln(MW)      1998-     Varies by         --       The paper provides the total number of workers, the proportion of each
 (2011)                                       2006      group                     group in the total, and the sample size including the non-employed. We
                                                                                  use this information to calculate the employment rate by group.
 Arango and       Colombia        MW         1984-        0.74        202,778.4   The minimum wage variable is the ratio (minimum wage)/(median
 Pachón                                      2001                                 income), so the elasticity calculation requires the mean of this variable.
 (2004)                                                                           We do not have that, but we have median income from the paper, and
                                                                                  obtain the average minimum wage from ILO, for the period 1991-2001.
                                                                                  The paper estimates the effects on paid and self-employed workers. We
                                                                                  calculate the employment rate from Table 2, which reports the number
                                                                                  of paid and self-employed workers and the total sample including non-
                                                                                  workers.
 Baranowska-       Poland        ln(MW)      2003-       0.78 for        --       We estimate the average employment rate by group to retrieve the
 Rataj and                                   2011     total, varies               elasticity. The paper reports total employment, the shares in each
 Magda (2015)                                          for the rest               category (gender, type of worker, etc.), and the sample size.
                                                          of the
                                                         groups
 Bhorat et al.     South         ln(MW)      2000-         0.40          --       This paper studies the share of workers by industry. We calculate the
 (2014)            Africa                    2007                                 average number of workers in the treatment (Table 1) and in the control
                                                                                  (Table 2) per year and calculate the average employment rate
                                                                                  (Treatment/Control+Treatment).
 Carneiro and      Brazil        ln(MW)      1995-     Varies by         --       We use ILOSTAT data to calculate average the formal employment rate
 Corseuil                                    1999        year                     by year. We do not have data on informal employment in the same
 (2001)                                                                           range of years, but we have the ratio of formal to informal employment
                                                                                  and use this ratio to estimate employment by sector. The formal to
                                                                                  informal ratio is estimated with 2009 data (the first year reported in ILO
                                                                                  for Brazil), so we are assuming that this ratio was the same in the
                                                                                  sample period.
 Del Carpio et    Thailand       ln(MW)      1998-     Varies by         --       We use information from ILOSTAT to calculate the employment rate by
 al. (2014)                                  2010     group. For                  group. The average employment rate in this period for all workers is
                                                      the total is                0.71, and the rate varies across groups. We estimate employment rates
                                                         0.71.                    by gender and age. However, we could not determine the rates by
                                                                                  education level; thus, we applied the total employment rate (0.71) to
                                                                                  retrieve the elasticity for education groups.
 Dinkelman         South         ln(MW)      2001-        0.13           --       The paper reports the sample size and the number employed (Table 1).
 and Ranchhod      Africa                    2004                                 We the information to calculate the average employment rate.
 (2012)
 Gindling and      Costa         ln(MW)      1988­       0.625           --       We use data from Table 2 in the paper to estimate the average
 Terrell (2007)    Rica                       2000                                employment rate for total workers.
 Grau and          Chile         ln(MW)      1996-        0.91           --       We do not have enough information from the paper, so we use data from
 Landerretche                                 2005                                ILOSTAT for the corresponding period. We estimate the employment
 (2011)                                                                           rate by dividing the number of employed workers by the working-age
                                                                                  population.
 Ham (2018)       Colombia       ln(MW)      1996-     0.97 total        --       The paper provides the employment rates by sector in Table 2.
                                             2000     employment
                                                      0.95 formal
                                                          0.99
                                                       informal
 Hohberg and      Indonesia      ln(MW)      1997-       0.664           --       The paper reports the employment rates in Table 1.
 Lay (2015)                                  2007
 Maloney and      Colombia       ln(MW)      1997-         --            --       The authors use dummies for brackets of the initial individual wage
 Nuñez                                       1999                                 relative to the minimum wage, to estimate the impact of a change in the
 Mendez                                                                           minimum wage throughout the wage distribution. Hence, the non-
 (2004)                                                                           employed are not included, and they estimate the effect of the minimum
                                                                                  wage on the share in each bracket. We use the shares in the brackets to
                                                                                  retrieve the elasticity (Table 2). Also, the authors estimate and report an
                                                                                  average employment elasticity of -0.15. (This is not stated in any table;
                                                                                  it is a calculation reported by the authors in the results section.) We use
                                                                                  the average elasticity calculated by the authors and our estimations of
                                                                                  the elasticities by brackets.
 Menon and          India        ln(MW)      1983-     Varies by         --       We use data from ILOSTAT to estimate the employment rate of female
 Meulen                                      2008       group                     and male workers in India with information by region (urban and rural).
 Rodgers                                                                          We only have data from the period 1994-2010.
 (2017)
 Montenegro         Chile        ln(MW)      1960-     Varies by         --       The paper gives the number of workers, but does not provide
 and Pagés                                   1998       group                     information on workers by age, skill level, and gender. We estimate the
 (2004)                                                                           employment rate by group using information from ILOSTAT. The data
                                                                                  are from 1998 only (we could not find data before this year).
                             Minimum wage                    Avg. empl.      Avg.
Study           Country         variable         Period         rate         MW        Comments
Strobl and      Trinidad          MW             1996-       294.3 males      7        The authors study the effect of the implementation of the minimum
Walsh (2003)      and                             1998       167 females               wage on bound vs. not bound workers, based on wages prior to the
                Tobago                                                                 minimum wage, by sex, for small and large firms. For each category,
                                                                                       they report the percent change in the wage bill if all workers are topped
                                                                                       up to the minimum wage, which we use to compute the percent change
                                                                                       in the wage for bound workers. And they report the raw baseline rate of
                                                                                       job loss for low-wage (bound) workers, by sex. We use these for both
                                                                                       small and large firms. Thus, the elasticity is calculated as the marginal
                                                                                       effect on job loss, multiplied by the ratio of the proportional change in
                                                                                       the wage bill divided by the rate of job loss.
Note: We are estimating the employment rate elasticities. For example, in Alaniz et al. (2011), the estimated effect of the log minimum wage on the
probability of being employed is -0.31 for all workers. The paper reports an employment rate in the sample of 0.58, so the elasticity of -0.53 results
from dividing -0.31 by 0.58. (See Appendix Table A2.)
Appendix Table A2. Surveyed Studies, Estimated and Calculated Elasticities, and Classifications of Estimates (Authors' Preferred
Estimates)
             Study           Country     Elasticity   Binding    Sector    Enforcement   Vulnerable                 Comments
 Alaniz et al. (2011)        Nicaragua   -0.898***      Yes      Formal       Strong     Vulnerable    Coefficients are unique for the
                                           -0.834       Yes      Formal       Strong     Vulnerable    categories.
                                         -0.533***      Yes      Formal       Strong     All Workers
 Alatas and Cameron (2008)   Indonesia      -0.20       Yes     Informal      None       All Workers   Different time periods.
                                         -0.459***      Yes     Informal      None       All Workers
                                           -0.016       Yes     Informal      None       All Workers
                                           -0.16*       Yes     Informal      None       All Workers
                                           0.037        Yes      Formal       None       All Workers
                                           0.032        Yes      Formal       None       All Workers
                                           -0.41*       Yes     Informal      None       All Workers
 Arango and Pachón (2004)    Colombia     -0.407**      Yes       Both        Weak       All Workers   Heads and non-heads of households.
                                         -1.205***      Yes       Both        Weak       All Workers
 Baranowska-Rataj and         Poland     -0.186***      N.d.     Formal       Strong     All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
 Magda (2015)                            -0.365***      N.d.     Formal       Strong     Vulnerable    categories.
 Bell (1997)                  Mexico       -0.027       Yes      Formal       Weak       Vulnerable    Different econometric models: with
                             Colombia      -0.182       No       Formal       None       All Workers   and without time fixed effects.
                                         -0.337***      Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                          -0.033*       Yes      Formal       Weak       Vulnerable
 Bhorat et al. (2014)         South      -0.130***      Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers   Different econometric models: with
                              Africa       -0.082       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers   and without covariates.
 Broecke and Vandeweyer       Brazil     -0.022***      Yes       Both        Weak       All Workers   Different units: regions and
 (2015)                                    -0.014       Yes       Both        Weak       Vulnerable    individuals. Different econometric
                                           -0.047       Yes       Both        Weak       Vulnerable    models: with and without lags;
                                           -0.026       Yes       Both        Weak       Vulnerable    different fixed effects.
 Carneiro (2004)              Brazil      0.018**       N.d.    Informal      Weak       All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                           -0.005       N.d.     Formal       Weak       All Workers   categories
 Carneiro and Corseuil        Brazil       2.097        Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers   Different time periods..
 (2001)                                    -0.551       Yes     Informal      Weak       All Workers                       .
                                              0         Yes     Informal      Weak       All Workers
                                           -2.530       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                           1.185        Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                           0.718        Yes     Informal      Weak       All Workers
                                              0         Yes     Informal      Weak       All Workers
                                           -0.055       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                           -0.178       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                           0.754        Yes     Informal      Weak       All Workers
 Castillo-Freeman and          Puerto     -0.54***      Yes      Formal       None       All Workers   Different time periods. .
 Freeman (1992)                 Rico      -0.91***      Yes      Formal       None       All Workers
 Chun and Khor (2010)        Indonesia    -0.112**      Yes      Formal       None       All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                           -0.027       Yes      Formal       None       Vulnerable    categories.
 Comola and Mello (2011)     Indonesia    0.087***      N.d.    Informal      None       All Workers   Different econometric methods of
                                           -0.053       N.d.     Formal       None       All Workers   estimation: OLS and SUR.
                                          0.082***      N.d.    Informal      None       All Workers
                                         -0.052***      N.d.     Formal       None       All Workers
                                         -0.028***      N.d.     Formal       None       Vulnerable
                                          0.027***      N.d.    Informal      None       Vulnerable
 Del Carpio et al. (2015)    Indonesia   -0.069***      Yes     Informal      None       Vulnerable    Different vulnerable groups: low-
                                         -0.196***      Yes     Informal      None       Vulnerable    education and female workers.
                                          -0.034**      Yes      Formal       None       All Workers
                                          -0.026*       Yes     Informal      None       All Workers
                                           -0.043       Yes     Informal      None       Vulnerable
 Del Carpio et al. (2014)    Thailand    -0.171***      Yes      Formal       Strong     Vulnerable    Coefficients are unique for the
                                          -0.078**      Yes       Both        Strong     All Workers   categories.
                                           -0.041       Yes       Both        Strong     Vulnerable
                                           -0.011       Yes      Formal       Strong     All Workers
 Dinkelman and Ranchhod       South        -0.138       Yes      Formal       Weak       Vulnerable    Different econometric models: with
 (2012)                       Africa       -0.192       Yes      Formal       Weak       Vulnerable    and without covariates.
 Dung (2017)                 Vietnam      -0.527**      No        Both        None       All Workers   Different sectors. Type of workers:
                                           -0.157       No        Both        None       All Workers   part-time and full-time.
                                         -0.614***      No        Both        None       All Workers
                                          -0.216*       No        Both        None       All Workers
 Fajnzylber (2001)            Brazil      -0.05***      Yes     Informal      Weak       Vulnerable    Different econometric models: with
                                          -0.08***      Yes      Formal       Weak       Vulnerable    and without lags (formal): long-run
                                          -0.05***      Yes      Formal       Weak       Vulnerable    and short-run (informal).
                                          -0.15***      Yes     Informal      Weak       Vulnerable
                                          -0.10***      Yes      Formal       Weak       Vulnerable
                                          -0.25***      Yes     Informal      Weak       Vulnerable
                                          -0.35***      Yes     Informal      Weak       Vulnerable
          Study               Country     Elasticity   Binding    Sector    Enforcement   Vulnerable                 Comments
Fang and Lin (2015)            China      -0.148***      Yes      Formal       Strong     Vulnerable    Different vulnerable groups:
                                           -0.213*       Yes      Formal       Strong     Vulnerable    females, young adults, and low-wage
                                           -0.088**      Yes      Formal       Strong     Vulnerable    workers.
                                          -0.055***      Yes      Formal       Strong     All Workers
                                            -0.062       Yes      Formal       Strong     Vulnerable
Feliciano (1998)              Mexico       -0.406**      N.d.     Formal       None       Vulnerable    Different econometric models: with
                                          -0.522***      N.d.     Formal       None       Vulnerable    and without covariates, and OLS or
                                          -1.107***      N.d.     Formal       None       Vulnerable    IV.
                                            -0.074       N.d.     Formal       None       All Workers
                                             0.005       N.d.     Formal       None       All Workers
                                             0.014       N.d.     Formal       None       All Workers
                                          -0.426***      N.d.     Formal       None       Vulnerable
                                            -1.13**      N.d.     Formal       None       Vulnerable
Foguel (1998)                  Brazil     -0.135***      N.d.      Both        Weak       All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                            0.60***      N.d.    Informal      Weak       All Workers   categories.
Foguel et al. (2001)           Brazil        0.018       N.d.    Informal      Weak       All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                           -0.011*       N.d.     Formal       Weak       All Workers   categories.
Garza Cantú and Bazaldúa      Mexico       0.754***      N.d.     Formal       None       Vulnerable    Coefficients are unique for the
(2002)                                     -0.204**      N.d.     Formal       None       All Workers   categories.
Gindling and Terrell (2007)    Costa       -0.109*       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                Rica                                                                    categories.
Gindling and Terrell (2008)   Honduras     -0.458***    Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   Large and small firms.
                                             0.392*     Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers
Grau and Landerretche           Chile      -0.312***    Yes        Both       Strong      Vulnerable    Different interactions.
(2011)                                     -0.339***    Yes        Both       Strong      Vulnerable
Ham (2018)                    Honduras    -0.471***     Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   Different econometric models: probit
                                          0.276***      Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers   and multinomial logit
                                           0.34***      Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers
                                          -0.088***     Yes        Both       Weak        All Workers
                                          -0.111***     Yes        Both       Weak        All Workers
                                          -0.383***     Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers
Harrison and Scorse (2010)    Indonesia    -0.125***    Yes        Both       None        All Workers   Different sectors: one excludes
                                           -0.116***    Yes       Formal      None        All Workers   textiles.
                                           -0.123***    Yes        Both       None        All Workers
Hernandez Diaz and Pinzon     Colombia       -0.245     Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable    Coefficients are unique for the
Garcia (2006)                                -0.207     Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   categories.
Hernandez and Lasso (2003)    Colombia       0.154      N.d.       Both       Weak        Vulnerable    Different vulnerable groups: young
                                             -0.219     N.d.       Both       Weak        All Workers   and low-skilled workers.
                                             0.005      N.d.       Both       Weak        Vulnerable
Hertz (2005)                    South         -0.33     Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                Africa        -0.46     Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable    categories.
Hohberg and Lay (2015)        Indonesia    -0.074***    No       Informal     None        All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                            0.090***    Yes       Formal      None        All Workers   categories.
Huang et al. (2014)            China       -0.033***    Yes       Formal      Strong      All Workers   Different regions.
                                           -0.017***    Yes       Formal      Strong      All Workers
                                            0.058***    Yes      Informal     Strong      All Workers
                                           -0.017***    Yes       Formal      Strong      All Workers
Islam and Nazara (2000)       Indonesia    -0.059***    N.d.      Formal      None        All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                                                                                        categories.
Kamiska and                    Poland       -0.027      Yes      Formal       Strong      Vulnerable    Different vulnerable groups: young
Lewandowski (2015)                          -0.005      Yes      Formal       Strong      Vulnerable    and low-wage workers divided in:
                                          -0.016***     Yes      Formal       Strong      Vulnerable    full-time and part-time, and
                                            -0.010      Yes      Formal       Strong      Vulnerable    temporary and permanent workers.
                                           -0.06***     Yes      Formal       Strong      Vulnerable
                                          -0.101***     Yes      Formal       Strong      Vulnerable
                                          -0.049***     Yes      Formal       Strong      Vulnerable
Lemos (2004a)                  Brazil       0.004       Yes      Formal       Weak        All Workers   Different econometric models:
                                            0.003       Yes      Formal       Weak        All Workers   dynamic and with covariates.
                                            -0.038      Yes      Formal       Weak        All Workers
Lemos (2004b)                  Brazil       -0.001      Yes       Both        Weak        All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                                                                                        categories.
Lemos (2004c)                  Brazil       -0.001      Yes       Formal       Weak       All Workers   Different econometric models: with
                                            0.010       Yes      Informal      Weak       All Workers   and without lags of employment.
                                          -0.017***     Yes      Informal      Weak       All Workers
                                           -0.004**     Yes       Formal       Weak       All Workers
Lemos (2005a)                  Brazil       0.012       Yes        Both        Weak       Vulnerable    Different econometric models and
                                            -0.009      Yes      Informal      Weak       All Workers   different estimation methods: with
                                            0.002       Yes       Formal       Weak       All Workers   and without lags; OLS and IV.
                                            -0.003      Yes       Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                            -0.005      Yes        Both        Weak       Vulnerable
                                            -0.003      Yes       Formal       Weak       All Workers
           Study           Country     Elasticity   Binding    Sector    Enforcement   Vulnerable                 Comments
                                         -0.029       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                         -0.004       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                         -0.002       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
                                         -0.021       Yes     Informal      Weak       All Workers
                                         -0.003       Yes      Formal       Weak       All Workers
Lemos (2005b)               Brazil      -0.005*       Yes       Both        Weak       All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                                                                                     categories
Lemos (2007)                Brazil       0.002       Yes        Both       Weak        Vulnerable    Different econometric models all
                                         -0.001      Yes        Both       Weak        All Workers   workers: lags and no lags. Different
                                         0.002       Yes        Both       Weak        Vulnerable    vulnerable groups: young adults and
                                         0.003       Yes        Both       Weak        All Workers   female workers.
Lemos (2009a)               Brazil       -0.062      Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   Different models: lags and no lags;
                                         0.026       Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers   with covariates and without
                                         0.177*      Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers   covariates.
                                        -0.126*      Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers
                                         0.147       Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers
Lemos (2009b)               Brazil     -0.045***     Yes        Both       Weak        Vulnerable    Different vulnerable groups: young
                                         -0.096      Yes        Both       Weak        Vulnerable    adults and the affected fraction of
                                         -0.073      Yes        Both       Weak        All Workers   workers (based on low wages).
Luo et al. (2011)           China       0.109***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   Different sectors: manufacturing,
                                       -0.236***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   construction, and wholesale.
                                        0.134***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers
Magruder (2013)            Indonesia   -0.218***     Yes      Informal     None        All Workers   Different type of workers: full-time
                                       -0.090***     Yes      Informal     None        All Workers   and self-employed. Different
                                        0.104**      Yes       Formal      None        All Workers   distance in difference-in-differences
                                        0.127***     Yes       Formal      None        All Workers   estimates: 15 and 30 miles.
Majchrowska and            Polonia      -0.08***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   Different econometric models:
Zólkiewski (2012)                       -0.10***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   Arellano-Bond and Blundell-Bond.
                                         -0.27*      N.d.      Formal      Strong      Vulnerable    Different time periods.
                                        -0.50***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      Vulnerable
                                          -0.47      N.d.      Formal      Strong      Vulnerable
Maloney and Nuñez          Colombia    -0.524***     Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable    Workers with different levels of
Mendez (2004)                          -0.345***     Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable    income: Workers earning between 0
                                       -0.432***     Yes      Informal     Weak        Vulnerable    and 0.5 MW, 0 and 0.7 MW and 0.7,
                                        -0.15***     Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   and 0.9 MW.
                                       -0.367***     Yes      Informal     Weak        Vulnerable
                                       -0.205***     Yes      Informal     Weak        Vulnerable
                                       -0.683***     Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable
Martinez et al. (2001)       Chile        -0.01      N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   Different econometric methods: OLS
                                          0.04       N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   and Stock-Watson. Different
                                                                                                     periods.
Mayneris et al. (2014)      China        -0.045      Yes       Formal      Strong      All Workers   Different regions: with and without
                                         0.162       Yes       Formal      Strong      All Workers   the periphery.
Menon and Meulen Rodgers     India       -1.996      No         Both       None        Vulnerable    Different regions: rural and urban.
(2017)                                  0.792***     Yes       Formal      None        All Workers   Different sectors: all industries and
                                        0.767***     Yes        Both       None        All Workers   other industries.
                                         0.175       No         Both       None        All Workers
                                       -2.231***     Yes      Informal     None        Vulnerable
                                         0.051       Yes      Informal     None        All Workers
                                        1.793***     Yes        Both       None        Vulnerable
                                        2.073***     Yes       Formal      None        Vulnerable
                                         -0.067      Yes       Formal      None        All Workers
                                       -0.787***     Yes      Informal     None        All Workers
                                         2.194       Yes       Formal      None        Vulnerable
                                         -2.183      Yes      Informal     None        Vulnerable
Miranda (2013)               Chile      -0.36***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   Different sectors: all goods and only
                                        -0.28***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   "tradable" goods.
Montenegro and Pagés         Chile      0.140***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      Vulnerable    Different vulnerable groups: female
(2004)                                  0.095***     N.d.      Formal      Strong      Vulnerable    and young workers.
Neumark et al. (2006)       Brazil       0.068       Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                         -0.012      Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable    categories.
Ni et al (2011)             China        -0.032      N.d.      Formal      Strong      Vulnerable    Coefficients are unique for the
                                         0.098       N.d.      Formal      Strong      All Workers   categories.
Papps (2012)                Turkey       0.004       Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   Coefficients are unique for the
                                         0.001       Yes       Formal      Weak        All Workers   categories.
                                         -0.002      Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers
Pelek (2011)                Turkey       0.182       Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers   Different measurements of the
                                         0.008       Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable    minimum wage: Kaitz index, real,
                                        0.149***     Yes      Informal     Weak        All Workers   and fraction between 0.95 and 1.05
                                         0.022       Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable    times the minimum wage.
                                         0.024       Yes       Formal      Weak        Vulnerable
              Study            Country       Elasticity   Binding         Sector         Enforcement       Vulnerable                    Comments
                                               -0.029       Yes          Informal           Weak           All Workers
                                                0.008       Yes           Formal            Weak           All Workers
                                                0.024       Yes           Formal            Weak           All Workers
 Shi (2011)                      China       -0.587***      N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers      Different sectors: construction and
                                               -0.128       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers      manufacturing.
 Strobl and Walsh (2003)        Trinidad      -0.048**      Yes            Both             Strong         All Workers      Different firm sizes.
                                              -0.151*       Yes            Both             Strong         Vulnerable
                                               -0.016       Yes            Both             Strong         Vulnerable
                                              -0.036*       Yes            Both             Strong         All Workers
 Suryahadi et al. (2003)       Indonesia     -0.112***      Yes           Formal            None           All Workers      Different vulnerable groups: female
                                             -0.307***      Yes           Formal            None           Vulnerable       and young workers.
                                             -0.307***      Yes           Formal            None           Vulnerable
 Wang and Gunderson              China       -1.042**       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers      Different regions. Different types of
 (2011)                                        -0.202       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers      firms: state-owned and private.
                                               -0.156       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers
                                               0.356*       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers
                                               -0.178       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers
                                               -0.225       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers
                                                0.166       N.d.          Formal            Strong         All Workers
 Wang and Gunderson              China         -0.510       No            Formal            Strong         Vulnerable       Effects for different sectors of the
 (2012)                                         0.430       No            Formal            Strong         All Workers      economy like construction, retail,
                                               -0.150       No            Formal            Strong         All Workers      etc.
 Xiao and Xiang (2009)           China        -0.022**      Yes            Both             Strong         All Workers      Different estimation methods:
                                             -0.001***      Yes            Both             Strong         All Workers      difference-in-differences and levels.
***
    p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Vulnerable workers are young adults, less-skilled workers, female workers, or workers earning very close to the minimum wage. Informal sector
includes small firms for the case of Indonesia (as suggested in some papers). Binding is defined based on evidence of positive wage effects. Most analyses
are for the formal section, while some papers report results for the informal sector or the two sectors combined. Enforcement is defined by penalties in the
law, following Munguía Corella (2019). For studies for which we had to compute elasticities, we use the statistical significance of the reported
employment effect. For Neumark et al. (2006), the estimate for household heads is classified as for all workers, and the estimate excluding the household
head is classified as for vulnerable workers. For Strobl and Walsh (2003), the estimated elasticity for small firms, for men, is statistically significant. They
also report a significant coefficient estimate for the interaction of the minimum wage variable with an indicator for large firms, for women. However, this
estimate is not statistically significant, and we have no way of assessing the significance of the overall effect of the minimum wage for women working at
large firms (which is this interaction plus the estimated minimum wage effect), so we do not code this estimate as statistically significant.
Appendix Table A3. Classification of Studies by Country and Bindingness
                         Number of
       Country              studies        Binding      Not binding   No data
Brazil                        15              12             0          3
Chile                          4               1             0          3
China                          9               4             1          4
Colombia                       5               4             0          1
Costa Rica                     1               1             0          0
Honduras                       2               2             0          0
India                          1              0.8           0.2         0
Indonesia                      9              6.5           0.5         2
Mexico                         3               0             1          2
Nicaragua                      1               1             0          0
Poland                         3               1             0          2
Puerto Rico                    1               1             0          0
South Africa                   3               3             0          0
Thailand                       1               1             0          0
Trinidad                       1               1             0          0
Turkey                         2               2             0          0
Vietnam                        1               0             1          0
Notes: In the second through fourth columns, we average the number of results by study, and then we sum
by country. The non-integers result when there is variation in bindingness across estimates in a study. For
India (Menon and Meulen Rodgers, 2017), the minimum wage is non-binding in the urban areas, but it is
binding in the rural areas. For Indonesia (Hohberg and Lay, 2015), the minimum wage is non-binding for
the informal sector and binding for the formal sector.
Appendix Table A4. Numbers of Estimates for Sets of Estimate Covered in Figures 2A-3B
                                              Number                                                Number                                                    Number
                                                  of                                                    of                                                        of
           Two estimate features              estimates             Three estimate features         estimates                Four estimate features           estimates
  Both predict stronger negative effects                    All predict stronger negative effects                     All predict stronger negative effects
              Formal/Binding                     91                 Binding/Formal/Strong              22             Binding/Formal/Strong/Vulnerable           14
               Strong/Binding                    33               Binding/Formal/Vulnerable            35           None predict stronger negative effects
            Vulnerable/Binding                   62               Binding/Strong/Vulnerable            19          Informal/Weak/Non-binding/All Workers         0
               Strong/Formal                     52               Formal/Strong/Vulnerable             22       Informal/Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers      3
             Vulnerable/Formal                   50        None predict stronger negative effects                  Informal/None/Non-binding/All Workers         1
             Vulnerable/Strong                   27              Informal/Weak/Non-binding             0        Informal/None/No data (binding)/All Workers      2
  One predicts stronger negative effects                      Informal/Weak/No data (binding)          3             Both/Weak/Non-binding/All Workers           0
              Binding/Informal                  41               Informal/Weak/All Workers             21         Both/Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers        2
                Binding/Both                    33               Informal/None/Non-binding             1             Both/None/Non-binding/All Workers           5
               Binding/Weak                     95            Informal/None/No data (binding)          3          Both/None/No data (binding)/All Workers        0
                Binding/None                    37               Informal/None/All Workers             13
           Binding/All Workers                  103          Informal/Non-binding/All Workers          1
                Formal/Weak                     53        Informal/No data (binding)/All Workers       5
                Formal/None                     37                 Both/Weak/Non-binding               0
            Formal/Non-binding                   4              Both/Weak/No data (binding)            4
         Formal/No data (binding)               43                 Both/Weak/All Workers               12
            Strong/All Workers                  36                 Both/None/Non-binding               6
            Strong/Non-binding                   3              Both/None/No data (binding)            0
         Strong/No data (binding)               27                 Both/None/All Workers               8
              Strong/Informal                    1             Both/Non-binding/All Workers            5
                 Strong/Both                     8          Both/No data (binding)/All Workers         2
         Vulnerable/Non-binding                  2             None/Non-binding/All Workers            7
       Vulnerable/No data (binding)             17          None/No data (binding)/All Workers         9
            Vulnerable/Informal                 13             Weak/Non-binding/All Workers            0
              Vulnerable/Both                    7          Weak/No data (binding)/All Workers         7
             Vulnerable/Weak                    34               Informal/Weak/Non-binding             0
              Vulnerable/None                   34            Informal/Weak/No data (binding)          3
 Neither predicts stronger negative effects                      Informal/Weak/All Workers             21
           Non-binding/Informal                   1              Informal/None/Non-binding             1
             Non-binding/Both                     6           Informal/None/No data (binding)          3
             Non-binding/Weak                     0              Informal/None/All Workers             13
             Non-binding/None                     8          Informal/Non-binding/All Workers          1
         Non-binding/All Workers                  9       Informal/No data (binding)/All Workers       5
               Informal/Weak                     28                Both/Weak/Non-binding               0
               Informal/None                     19             Both/Weak/No data (binding)            4
           Informal/All Workers                   6                Both/Weak/All Workers               12
        Informal/No data (binding)               35                Both/None/Non-binding               6
             Weak/All Workers                    70
          Weak/No data (binding)                  9
                 Weak/Both                       12
             All Workers/Both                    22
             All Workers/None                    74
      All Workers/No data (binding)               0
          None/No data (binding)                 17
                 None/Both                        4
          Both/No data (binding)                 35
Note: As explained in the text, the classifications here pertain to the listed features of estimates. Thus, for example, under "two estimate features, both
predict stronger negative effects," the two listed features more strongly predict negative effects and the other features are unspecified, so in actual fact in
some cases three or four features of estimates may more strongly predict negative effects.
Appendix Table A5. Meta-Analysis Regressions, Based on Counts of Features of Estimates More Strongly
Predicting Negative Employment Effects (Excluding Brazil)
                                                        (1)                 (2)               (3)
 Variables: number of features of estimates that                      Negative and
 more strongly predict negative employment       Negative estimate significant estimate   Estimated
 effects                                             (LPM)                (LPM)           elasticity

 No estimate features                                            0.667***                   0.333**                  -0.163
                                                                  (0.234)                   (0.142)                  (0.120)
 One estimate feature                                            0.686***                  0.371***                 -0.146**
                                                                  (0.090)                   (0.094)                  (0.072)
  One = No (p-value)                                               0.939                     0.813                    0.910
 Two estimate features                                           0.708***                  0.500***                -0.173***
                                                                  (0.064)                   (0.083)                  (0.052)
  Two = One (p-value)                                              0.854                     0.320                    0.761
  Two = No (p-value)                                               0.865                     0.321                    0.939
 Three study features                                            0.789***                  0.368***                  -0.060
                                                                  (0.099)                   (0.112)                  (0.131)
  Three = Two (p-value)                                            0.416                     0.288                    0.463
  Three = One (p-value)                                            0.345                     0.982                    0.633
  Three = No (p-value)                                             0.613                      0.84                    0.500
 Four estimate features                                            1.000                   0.571***                  -0.192
                                                                  (0.000)                   (0.039)                  (0.127)
      Four = Three (p-value)                                       0.039                     0.120                    0.459
      Four = Two (p-value)                                           0                       0.430                    0.892
      Four = One (p-value)                                         0.001                     0.055                    0.755
      Four = No (p-value)                                          0.161                     0.113                    0.869
      Joint test: Four = Three = Two = One (p-value)                 0                       0.205                    0.912
      Observations                                                  168                       168                      168
***
   p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Note: LPM = linear probability model. The variables are defined to be mutually exclusive. There are 168 observations and 46
clusters. For the LPMs, standard errors are clustered by study. Note that for the estimates in column (1), there is no variation in
the dependent variable for the "Four estimate features" variables, which is why there is no variation in the estimated coeffi cient.
The only difference relative to Table 3 is the exclusion of studies for Brazil.
                                                   Endnotes


1
    For a recent review of the U.S. evidence, including discussion of the conflicting evidence and which

methods point to disemployment effects, see Neumark (2019).
2
    For evidence on this question from over a decade ago, see Neumark et al. (2006) and Cunningham

(2007).
3
    Still, the monopsony model makes more direct predictions than simply that employment effects are

heterogeneous, and it would be important to test these predictions. For related work for the United States,

see Azar et al. (2009) and Munguía Corella (forthcoming).
4
    See Wolfson and Belman (2019) for more discussion about different types and uses of meta-analysis in

general, and in the minimum wage literature.
5
    See Neumark (2016) for discussion of some of these meta-analyses of estimated minimum wage effects

in the United States, especially with reference to testing for publication bias. In a nutshell, it is hard to

distinguish between publication bias and other sources of patterns in the published evidence consistent

with publication bias. For example, meta-analyses like Doucouliagos and Stanley (2009) argue that if

published negative estimates of minimum wage effects have larger standard errors, this is evidence of

publication bias. However, the same phenomenon can arise if studies using better research designs lead to

"truer" (i.e., less biased) estimates, which happen to be negative, and which have larger standard errors

because they demand more of the data.
6
    We define developing countries as those that the World Bank does not classify as a high-income

country. Poland became a high-income country in 2009, but the data in the papers on Poland cover

predominantly earlier data (1999 to 2011 in all papers except one that extends to 2013).
7
    We also added one paper published in this journal (Ham, 2018) that did not appear in our search but was

identified by a reviewer.
8
    The only exceptions were four earlier, often-cited papers that appear in more than one meta-analysis:

Bell (1997) for Mexico; Castillo-Freeman and Freeman (1992) for Puerto Rico; and Feliciano (1998) and
Foguel (1998) for Brazil. Appendix Figure A1 shows the distribution of these studies by year (publication

date). The figure shows that the plurality of these studies were published in this decade and most in the

last two decades. Of course papers studying minimum wages in developing countries continue to be

produced and published (e.g., Asmal et al. (2019), but we had to cut off the sample period for analysis for

this version of our paper.
9
    Below, we discuss the studies we include and the elasticity calculations in more detail, and Appendix

Table A2 lists all the studies and the elasticities.
10
     We are not arguing that this is necessarily the preferred approach for interpreting a broad literature.

Indeed, in the U.S. context, Neumark and Wascher (2007) offer reasons why a narrative review (with

some emphasis on what appear to be more credible estimates) may be preferred. On the other hand, they

also argue that a narrative review may be more effective at highlighting some of the reasons for

differences across studies attributable to the groups studied or other theoretical predictions. The present

paper adopts the latter perspective to some extent ­ focusing on explaining differences in results across

studies, albeit without discarding estimates.
11
     An example of the latter is Mayneris et al. (2014), who report both OLS and IV estimates, but take a

clear stance that there may be endogeneity bias in their approach that requires instrumenting for the

minimum wage variable.
12
     For studies for which we had to compute elasticities, we use the statistical significance of the reported

employment effect.
13
     We do not do this trimming in any of the figures or estimates that follow, where we use all the

elasticities preferred by the authors, even if the elasticity appears to be an extreme value.
14
     There are no studies that report the fraction affected but not the evidence on bindingness that we use,

and all of the studies that do report a positive fraction affected also show a positive effect on wages. Thus,

we would not classify additional studies by using the fraction affected.
15
     It is possible that there is a "file-drawer" problem (e.g., Franco et al., 2014), such that studies that do

not detect, in initial analyses, an effect of the minimum wage on wages of low-wage workers are not
pursued further, because of the strong expectation that ­ whatever the effects on employment ­ minimum

wages should push up wages at the bottom of the wage distribution. This may constrain our ability to

garner evidence on how the employment effects of minimum wages estimated in different studies vary

with whether or not the minimum wage is binding.
16
     Alternatively, lighthouse effects could reflect a reference price, a signal for bargaining, or the impact of

fairness concerns ­ all influences on wages outside of the usual competitive model. See the discussion

and related references in Boeri et al. (2011).
17
     See http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.home?p_lang=en.
18
     Clemens and Strain (2020) find evidence of this in the U.S. context, reporting that subminimum wage

payments when minimum wages increase rise the most in states with relatively strong minimum wage

enforcement. Because minimum wage violations in the United States are driven by worker complaints,

they interpret this as workers "enforcing less" when the higher minimum wage is more likely to cost jobs.
19
     The conclusions were very similar using a 10% significance level, because very few estimates are

significant at the 10% level but not the 5% level.
20
     This same pattern of variation is often observed within studies. In Appendix Table A2 see, for example,

Baranowska-Rataj and Magda (2015), Feliciano (1998), and Maloney and Nuñez (2004).
21
     However, we created a version of Table 2 in which we broke out the insignificant negative and the

insignificant positive estimates. There was not much systematic difference across the different types of

estimates; in other words, the differences associated with whether the estimate is negative and significant

are more pronounced. (Results available upon request.) However, in the more-refined analyses that

follow, we look at estimates distinguished in this way.
22
     There is one case ­ "Strong/Informal" ­ where "all" the estimates are positive and significant. But

Appendix Table A4 shows that there is only one elasticity in this category.
23
     Following what we did before, we report results for each combination of three features of estimates that

more strongly predict negative employment effects, without specifying the fourth feature ­ which hence

may or may not more strongly predict negative effects.
24
     One might be concerned that the evidence for Brazil drives the results because we have 15 studies for

this country (see Appendix Table A3). However, the estimates are very similar excluding the studies of

Brazil (Appendix Table A5).
25
     The estimates in column (12) provide a nice illustration of why the evidence from the columns for

whether there is a negative estimated effect or a negative and significant estimated effect can be more

reliable than the evidence for the estimated elasticity, as the latter can be sensitive to outliers. For the

estimates for studies with one feature that more strongly predicts negative employment effects, the

coefficients in columns (10) and (11) are larger for the studies that do not focus on vulnerable workers

(0.667 and 0.294). But the estimated elasticity (column (12)) is larger (negative) for the studies that do

focus on vulnerable workers (-0.452). There are only four studies in this category (focus on vulnerable

workers, and no other features that more strongly predict negative employment effects), and one of these

has an extreme estimated elasticity (-1.99).
26
     To be clear, standard regressions in meta-analyses usually include other types of regressors, such as for

the data used, the sample size, perhaps the precision, etc.
27
     We also estimated meta-regressions with all the possible two-, three-, and four-way interactions of

study features. Not surprisingly, given the large number of highly collinear variables, and the small

number of observations in some of the cells (see Appendix Table A4), the estimates of these regressions

were quite imprecise. Results are available from the authors upon request. The models in Tables 3, 4, and

5 are restricted versions of this model.
28
     This possibility was suggested by a reviewer.
29
     In addition, for the particular example of whether a study indicates that minimum wages are binding,

there are plenty of estimates showing negative employment effects that do not present evidence on

whether minimum wages are binding.
30
     He also suggests effects will vary across countries depending on a variety of factors including the share

of informal workers not covered, coverage of secondary workers in families, and whether minimum wage

workers tend to be heads of low-income households.
