                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              CONSUMPTION INSURANCE AGAINST WAGE RISK:
     FAMILY LABOR SUPPLY AND OPTIMAL PROGRESSIVE INCOME TAXATION

                                         Chunzan Wu
                                         Dirk Krueger

                                      Working Paper 26466
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26466


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We thank Greg Kaplan and Luigi Pistaferri for useful conversations at an early stage of this
project, as well as Itay Saporta-Eksten for providing important details about the implementation
of the BPS method. Krueger gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF under grant
SES-0820494. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Chunzan Wu and Dirk Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumption Insurance Against Wage Risk: Family Labor Supply and Optimal Progressive
Income Taxation
Chunzan Wu and Dirk Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 26466
November 2019
JEL No. E21,H21,H31

                                        ABSTRACT

We show that a calibrated life-cycle two-earner household model with endogenous labor supply
can rationalize the extent of consumption insurance against shocks to male and female wages, as
estimated empirically by Blundell, Pistaferri and Saporta-Eksten (2016) in U.S. data. In the
model, 35% of male and 18% of female permanent wage shocks pass through to consumption,
compared to the empirical estimates of 32% and 19%. Most of the consumption insurance against
permanent male wage shocks is provided through the presence and labor supply response of the
female earner. Abstracting from this private intra-household income insurance mechanism
strongly biases upward the welfare losses from idiosyncratic wage risk as well as the desired
extent of public insurance through progressive income taxation. Relative to the standard one-
earner life cycle model, the optimal degree of tax progressivity is significantly lower and the
welfare gains from implementing the optimal system are cut roughly in half.


Chunzan Wu
Department of Economics
University of Miami
Jenkins Building 521
5250 University Drive
Coral Gables, FL 33146
chunzan@sas.upenn.edu

Dirk Krueger
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
The Ronald O. Perelman Center
 for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
    How does household consumption respond to shocks to wages of the primary
earner? The baseline version of the permanent income hypothesis in which a house-
hold has only one bread winner with exogenous labor supply provides a sharp an-
swer: household consumption responds to permanent wage shocks one for one,
and essentially not at all to purely transitory shocks. In a sequence of influential
papers, Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) and Kaplan and Violante (2010)
measure the magnitude of the household consumption response to earnings shocks
with given persistence by consumption insurance coefficients, defined as the frac-
tion of the variance of the shock that does not translate into a corresponding change
in log-consumption.1 That is, if the consumption insurance coefficient for a given
earnings shock is one, household consumption growth is completely insulated from
the earnings shock, and if it is zero, the earnings shock translates one for one into
consumption growth. Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) empirically estimate
these consumption responses to transitory and permanent earnings shocks on U.S.
data and find close to perfect insurance against purely transitory shocks (except for
poor households), as well as substantial insurance against permanent shocks, with
a consumption insurance coefficient of 35%.2 Kaplan and Violante (2010) evaluate
whether a calibrated single-earner incomplete-markets life cycle model with tran-
sitory and permanent earnings shocks is consistent with the empirical estimates of
Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008). They find that in the model households are
close to fully insured against transitory earnings shocks, but that there is too little
consumption insurance against permanent shocks: the model-implied consumption
insurance coefficient ranges between 7% and 22%, depending on the tightness of the
borrowing constraints.
    1
    Formally, denote by cit the log of consumption of household i at time or age t, and define the
consumption insurance coefficient for earnings shock xn
                                                      it of type n as

                                             Covi (cit , xn it )
                                   n
                                   t =1-                         ,
                                               V ari (xn
                                                       it )

where Covi , V ari are the cross-sectional (co-)variances across households i at time (age) t.
   2
     Also see Santaeul`alia-Llopis and Zheng (2018) for a recent application of the same method to
Chinese data.


                                                1
    In Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) and Kaplan and Violante (2010),
household earnings are treated as exogenous, and the key mechanism through which
consumption insurance is achieved is asset accumulation. This literature is there-
fore silent about the underlying shocks behind earnings fluctuations, as well as
the alternative mechanisms through which households respond to these underlying
shocks. The current paper instead models the fundamental sources of consump-
tion risk as idiosyncratic shocks (of various persistence) to wages of the male and
female earners in an otherwise standard incomplete-markets economy with two-
member households. In this paper we seek to make three contributions. Our first
contribution is to quantify the extent to which wage shocks translate into consump-
tion movements, and to evaluate the relative importance of alternative mechanisms
(adjustment of labor hours of both household members, and participation of the fe-
male earner, as well as precautionary savings and progressive income taxation and
social security) by which consumption insurance occurs in the model.
    Second, we assess whether the standard Bewley model with endogenous labor
supply of two-earner households can match well the empirically estimated labor
supply and consumption responses to transitory and permanent wage shocks, as
derived in the important recent paper by Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten
(2016), henceforth BPS.3 In this work, which is the natural extension of Blundell,
Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) to endogenous household labor supply choices, the
authors empirically estimate the transmission coefficients from transitory and per-
manent wage shocks to labor earnings and consumption in two-earner (male and
female) households.4 Our findings suggest that a standard Bewley model with two-
earner households and endogenous labor supply can explain virtually all of the in-
surance of household consumption and labor income to wage shocks estimated by
BPS. This is in contrast to Kaplan and Violante (2010) who concluded that, treating
income as exogenous, the standard Bewley model predicts significantly too little
consumption insurance against permanent income shocks. In our calibrated model
   3
      In Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2018), the authors extend their analysis to a model
with children; we discuss this paper in greater detail below.
    4
      For consumption, their transmission coefficients have exactly the same interpretation as the con-
sumption insurance coefficients discussed above, but are now understood as measuring the degree
of consumption insurance against wage rather than earnings shocks. With single-earner households
and exogenous labor supply the two coincide exactly.


                                                  2
with additively separable preferences between consumption and labor supply, about
35% of male permanent wage shocks and 18% of female permanent wage shocks
pass through to household consumption. The corresponding empirical estimates of
BPS are 32% and 19%, respectively. The insurance against transitory wage shocks is
almost perfect in the model with close-to-zero pass-through rates for both male and
female shocks, while the BPS data counterparts are slightly negative, but econom-
ically and statistically close to zero. In addition, both the model and the empirical
BPS results indicate that consumption insurance against permanent wage shocks
improves over the life cycle, in the model caused by an improved asset position as
households age.5 A decomposition of consumption insurance against male perma-
nent wage shocks in the model shows that the presence and labor supply response
of the female member of the household account for most of this insurance, with a
contribution that is almost constant over the life cycle. In contrast, the contribution
of male labor supply is negative (that is, male hours fall in response to a permanent
negative male wage shock), increasingly so over the life cycle.
    Motivated by this last result concerning the importance for consumption in-
surance of the secondary earner, as our third contribution we demonstrate that the
welfare losses from idiosyncratic wage risk, and the desired social insurance via
progressive income taxes, are significantly overstated when this private household
insurance mechanism is not accounted for. Relative to the standard one-earner life
cycle model, the overall welfare cost from idiosyncratic wage risk is reduced by
35% (15.0% instead of 23.2%, measured as consumption equivalent variation). Fi-
nally, the optimal6 degree of tax progressivity is significantly lower and the welfare
   5
      In the paper we also evaluate the empirical approach of BPS using model-simulated data. The
estimation equations BPS employ are derived from a theoretical model with endogenous labor sup-
ply and incomplete asset markets and require interior solutions of the household maximization prob-
lem, which is not assured in a model with potentially binding borrowing constraints or an operative
extensive margin of female labor supply. However, we show that the performance of the BPS estima-
tor is not affected strongly by the violation of these assumptions as long as one restricts attention to
households aged 30 to 57, as they (and we) do. Most households in this age are no longer impacted
by even a tight borrowing constraint (as they have accumulated away from it). The extensive labor
supply margin induces relatively larger biases in the estimates related to female labor supply, but the
impact of this model feature is limited, because the female non-participation rate is only moderate,
both in our simulated data as well as in the original BPS data set.
    6
      Optimality is defined as maximizing expected lifetime utility of a given cohort of households,
with all policy reforms required to be revenue-neutral.


                                                   3
gains from implementing the optimal system are cut in half in the two-earner model
with endogenous family labor supply adjustments, suggesting that modeling this
margin of adjustment explicitly is of first-order importance for the evaluation of
social insurance polices.
    Abstracting from the papers by Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), Ka-
plan and Violante (2010), and Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016) that
directly motivate this study, our work is related to the broader literature that has
studied heterogeneous household models with idiosyncratic risks, as pioneered in
Bewley (1986), Imrohoro     glu (1989), Huggett (1993), and Aiyagari (1994). The
structural life cycle model we employ is most closely related to the models analyzed
by Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2010), Holter, Krueger, and Stepanchuk
(2019), and Park and Shin (2019). However, their applications mainly focus on
inequality and fiscal policy rather than the private consumption insurance question
we address here. As we do, Karahan and Ozkan (2013) measure the welfare cost
of idiosyncratic earnings risk, but do not endogenize labor supply of the household.
Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) study consumption insurance against
wage shocks in an economy populated by single households making endogenous la-
bor supply decisions and having access to within-group risk-sharing arrangements,
but they abstract from the insurance provided by a second earner in the house-
hold. Finally, perhaps closest to this paper is the study by Blundell, Pistaferri, and
Saporta-Eksten (2018). In their structural model, households also choose family la-
bor supply (along the intensive and extensive margin) and time spent with children.
Their main focus is on how consumption insurance is impacted by the presence of
children in the household, and how public income transfers to families with chil-
dren change this impact. They do not consider the analysis of (optimal) progressive
income taxation in the presence of private consumption insurance through spousal
labor supply, one main focus of our work.
    The paper is also related to the literature on within-household risk-sharing and
the role female labor supply plays in this context. For example, Attanasio, Low,
and S´anchez-Marcos (2005) study the importance of female labor supply as an in-
surance mechanism against idiosyncratic income risk within the family, but in their
model the labor supply decision is discrete and the intensive margin of labor supply


                                          4
is absent. Ortigueira and Siassi (2013) investigate the impact of within-household
risk-sharing on household labor supply and savings. However, only idiosyncratic
unemployment risk is considered and there is no life cycle in their model.
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 sets up the model, and
Section 3 discusses its calibration. Section 4 reports our main positive results, with
main focus on the consumption insurance against wage risk in the model and the
relevant mechanisms to achieve that insurance. It also provides an assessment of
the potential bias of the BPS estimates. In Section 5, we turn to the normative
evaluation of wage risk and the optimal degree of progressive taxation against that
risk. Section 6 provides a sensitivity analysis with respect to the tightness of bor-
rowing constraints and the separability of household utility between consumption
and labor supply of both spouses, and Section 7 concludes. The appendix contains
supplementary results as well as the implementation of the BPS methodology.

2     The Model
   In this section, we first describe the physical environment of our model, and
then state the household maximization in recursive formulation.
2.1    Environment
    We study a partial equilibrium life cycle model with idiosyncratic wage risk
and endogenous household labor supply. We follow a cohort of a continuum of
measure one households over their life cycle. These households live for T periods,
from age t = 1 to T , work in the first R periods of life, and then are retired from
age R + 1 onward. Each household has two members of equal age: a male and a
female. Generically, we denote by Xj,t the variable X of earner j  {1, 2} at age t,
with j = 1 (j = 2) indicating the male (female) member of the household.
    In each period, households receive utility from joint household consumption, Ct .
A working household's utility is also affected by the levels of their labor supply,
H1,t and H2,t . Hence the period utility function is assumed to be u(Ct , H1,t , H2,t )
for a working household and uR (Ct ) for a retired household. Given the fact that a
significant proportion of females do not participate in the labor market, an operative
extensive margin of female labor supply is included in the model by introducing a
fixed per-period utility cost f whenever female hours worked is strictly positive.

                                          5
Households discount the future utility at the constant rate , so that 1/(1 +  ) is the
household time discount factor.
    The two members of each household are assumed to make joint decisions on
consumption and labor supply. Members of a household can work at wages Wj,t
determined by their labor productivity. Log-wages of both household members
are stochastic and represent the sum of a deterministic life cycle component gj,t , a
transitory component uj,t , and a permanent component Fj,t :
                              ln Wj,t = gj,t + Fj,t + uj,t ,
                                   Fj,t = Fj,t-1 + vj,t ,
                                                                  2
                                 v1,t                             v         v1 ,v2
                                            iid N       0,          1
                                                                                        ,
                                                                              2
                                 v2,t                           v1 ,v2        v 2

                                                                  2
                                 u1,t                             u          u1 ,u2
                                            iid N       0,          1
                                                                                         .
                                                                              2
                                 u2,t                           u1 ,u2        u 2


Hence vj,t , is the permanent shock to earner j 's wage, and uj,t is the transitory shock.
Both vj,t and uj,t can be correlated across the two members of each household, but
are assumed to be independent between each other and over time. After retirement,
labor productivity falls to zero, and hence households optimally do not work in
retirement. A retired household receives a fixed amount of social security benefits,
b, in each period in which she is alive.
     As is common in standard incomplete-markets models, households cannot trade
fully state-contingent Arrow securities, but they can save, and potentially borrow,
at the risk-free interest rate r. They are, however, subject to age-dependent and
potentially binding borrowing constraints At .
2.2     Household Optimization Problem
    A working household's problem can be written in recursive form as:
V (A, F1 , F2 , u1 , u2 , t) =      max        u(C, H1 , H2 ) - I(H2 > 0)f
                                 C,A ,H1 ,H2
                      1
                 +                       (F1 , F2 |F1 , F2 )                (u1 , u2 )V (A , F1 , F2 , u1 , u2 , t + 1)
                     1+
                            (F1 ,F2 )                          (u1 ,u2 )

                     s.t.   C + A = Y - T (Y ) - ss Y + (1 + r)A,
                            Y = W1,t H1 + W2,t H2 ,


                                                         6
                       C, H1 , H2  0, A  At+1 ,

where  (·|·) governs the transition probabilities of the wage shocks,7 and I(H2 > 0)
equals 1 if female hours H2 is positive. Female hours of H2 = 0 corresponds to
non-participation. The term T (Y ) is the income tax function that determines the
tax liability of a household with before-tax income Y , and ss is a flat payroll tax
representing the Social Security and Medicare taxes. The dynamic programming
problem of a retired household is given by:
                                                    1
                      V R (A, t) = max uR (C ) +      V R (A , t + 1)
                                   C,A             1+
                         s.t. C + A = b + (1 + r)A,
                               C  0, A  At+1 .

    When in working age, the household has an additively separable utility function
of the form:                                    -1           -1
                                                    1+             1+
                                      C 1-    H 1      H 2
                   u(C, H1 , H2 ) =        - 1 1 -1 - 2 2 -1 ,
                                      1-      1 + 1    1 + 2
where the parameter  governs the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for con-
sumption, and its reciprocal is the Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect
to its own price. The parameters 1 and 2 are the Frisch elasticities of male and
female labor supply with respect to their own wages. The key advantage of using
this preference structure is that the intertemporal and Frisch labor supply elasticities
are exclusively determined by exogenous parameters which are therefore directly
interpretable. In Section 6.2, we explore the robustness of our results to using a
non-separable utility specification that is more flexible in terms of substitution pat-
terns between consumption and hours worked of both spouses. The period utility
function for a retired household is given by
                                                        C 1-
                               uR (C ) = u(C, 0, 0) =        .
                                                        1-
   7
     Since we will discretize the support of the wage shocks when computing the model, we rep-
resent the conditional expectation in the dynamic programming problem as a sum, rather than an
integral.




                                              7
3       Calibration
    In this section, we describe how we parameterize the model, using empirical
targets derived from U.S. household data, as measured in the PSID.
3.1     Data
    In BPS, the data used are from the 1999 to 2009 waves of the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID collects data from two groups of households:
one group representative of the U.S. population, the other from low-income house-
holds in the Survey of Economic Opportunity (SEO). BPS' estimation uses only
data from non-SEO households with male household heads aged between 30 and 57
that are married and participate in the labor market. Because one goal of our study
is to compare the degree of consumption insurance implied by our model to the
empirical BPS estimates, the model is calibrated to match the statistics from pre-
cisely this group of households, whenever possible. This calibration strategy gives
the best chance to the model of fitting the BPS estimates. Consequently, if we still
find significant differences between our model and the BPS empirical results, they
are likely caused by model mis-specification rather than inappropriate parameter
values.
3.2     Demographic and Initial Conditions
   Households are born at age 21, retire at age 65, and die at age 80. Therefore,
age 1 in the model corresponds to age 21 in the data, and consequently R = 45 and
T = 60. Households start their life with zero assets and a permanent and transitory
components of log-wages equal to zero.8
    8
     The median age at first marriage in the U.S. between 2000 and 2010 is 27.5 for males and
26 for females, according to U.S. Census data. The starting age of 21 of married households in
the model is therefore younger than in the data. There are mainly two reasons why we made this
choice. First, the initial age at which a couple starts cohabitating and thus sharing wage risk is likely
much younger than that of eventual marriage. Second, at the time of official marriage couples have
already accumulated some assets, and have permanent wage components determined by previously
realized sequences of shocks. It is difficult to empirically identify the permanent components of
wages at individual level, and thus problematic to measure an exact empirical joint distribution of
the permanent wage components and asset level (the initial states of simulated households). Thus, as
an imperfect compromise, we assume that the life cycle of a household begins at an earlier age with
zero assets. When calculating the relevant model statistics, only simulated data from households of
ages 30 to 57 are used (the same age group employed by BPS), and therefore the exact choice of


                                                   8
3.3     Wage Process
    The deterministic life cycle profile of wages is taken directly from the paper
by Rupert and Zanella (2015). They estimate this wage profile on PSID data from
1967-2008. The original wage profile starts from age 23 and has only biennial
values after age 52. Therefore, we interpolate their profiles to annual observations
and extend the age range to 21-65. Because Rupert and Zanella (2015) report only
a pooled wage profile for males and females, and the estimation of female wage
profile often suffers from the selection bias from females' participation decisions, in
the model we assume that deterministic life cycle wage profiles of male and female
earners have the same shape over the life cycle, but different levels.9 The life cycle
average of the male wage trend is normalized to be 1. In the BPS data, average
annual earnings of working females is 0.491 times that of males; we calibrate the
level of female wages to match this earnings ratio.10
    Turning to the stochastic component of wages, the covariance matrices of tran-
sitory and permanent wage shocks are taken directly from the BPS estimates. As
in their work, both the permanent and transitory wage shocks are assumed to be
iid across time but potentially positively correlated between the two earners of a
household:
                              2
                              u 1
                                       u1 ,u2       0.0275 0.0058
                                                =                      ,
                                        2
                             u1 ,u2     u 2
                                                    0.0058 0.0125
                               2
                               v 1
                                       v1 ,v2       0.0303 0.0027
                                                =                      .
                                        2
                              v1 ,v2    v 2
                                                    0.0027 0.0382

3.4     Borrowing Limit
   Since the tightness of the borrowing limit is an important determinant of con-
sumption smoothing opportunities, especially early in life, we calibrate it such that
initial conditions for the model is not critical for our results.
    9
      Since the deterministic wage trends are perfectly predictable by households in the model, the
behavioral response of households with respect to wage shocks, the main focus of this paper, is not
significantly affected by the precise life cycle profile of the deterministic wage component.
   10
      One unit of income in the model represents $61597 in 2000 dollars, which is the average male
labor income for age 30-57 households in the BPS data set. This number is slightly different from
the one reported in Table 1 of BPS because BPS report the average of nominal income without
adjusting for inflation.


                                                9
the model matches the debt-to-income ratio of young households in the data. In
particular, we set the borrowing limit as A1 = A, At+1 = (1 + r)At if 1  t  T - 1,
and AT +1 = 0 such that households can borrow up to a limit A at age 21 and can
roll over that debt (at the fixed interest rate r) until the end of life T. The value
for A is calibrated such that the median debt-to-income ratio of households aged
21-30, conditional on having any debt, in the model matches its counterpart in the
extended BPS data set, which is 16.3%.11
3.5    Discount Factor and Interest Rate
    We adopt BPS' choice of the real risk-free interest rate of r = 2% per year.
The discount rate  , a key determinant of household precautionary (and life cycle)
saving is calibrated such that the average net worth for households aged 30 to 57 in
the model equals 4.188 times average male labor income, as measured in the BPS
data set. This delivers a time discount rate of 0.5% per annum.
3.6    Income Tax Function
    We permit the labor income tax function T (Y ) to be progressive, and following
B´enabou (2002), use a two-parameter tax function (also employed by BPS) of the
form:
                                T (Y ) = Y - (1 - )Y 1-µ ,
where µ and  are two parameters governing the progressivity and the level of
the income tax, respectively. It implies that after-tax labor income Y - T (Y ) =
(1 - )Y 1-µ is a concave function of pre-tax labor income. We estimate the income
tax function parameters by running the following OLS regression on the BPS data
set:
                       ln(Y - T (Y )) = ln(1 - ) + (1 - µ) ln(Y ).
Tax liabilities T (Y ) are defined as federal income taxes minus eligible amounts of
EITC and Food Stamp benefits, all computed by BPS. The estimated tax parameters
are µ = 0.1327 and  = 0.1575.
  11
     The extended BPS data set is generated by the same code provided by BPS, except that it
expands the age range to include age 21-30 households. In the data, we only consider non-
collateralized debt and abstract from mortgage debt, car loans, and other collateralized debt.




                                             10
3.7    Payroll Tax and Retirement Benefit
     The flat payroll tax in the model ss is set to 7.65%, based on the actual Social
Security and Medicare tax rates on pre-tax income of employees. In the U.S., social
security benefits are piecewise linear functions of average monthly past earnings
over the working life. Additional rules govern benefits for spouses. A full represen-
tation of the U.S. social security system is costly in terms of computation, since it
adds a continuous state variable to the recursive formulation of the problem. Hence
we model the progressivity of the U.S. social security benefit formula starkly, by
assuming that benefits b per household are independent of past contributions. We
calibrate b to the average social security benefits for married retired households
aged 62 and older between 1999 and 2009 in the Current Population Survey (CPS),
given by $18484 in 2000 dollars. Since the benefits from Medicare are difficult to
measure directly, we assume that they are proportional to the social security bene-
fits, based on the ratio of Medicare tax rate to Social Security tax rate. Therefore,
the retirement benefit b in the model is calibrated to $18484 × 7.65%/6.2% = $22807
in 2000 dollars. This implies a retirement benefit relative to average earnings of age
30-57 households of 27%, somewhat lower than the typical replacement rate in life
cycle models since average earnings of married, working households aged 30-57
are significantly higher, and replacement rates lower, than in the overall population.
3.8    Fixed Utility Cost of Female Participation
    In the data, both male and female workers have significant labor market non-
participation rates. However, since the BPS results are based on a sample of house-
holds with working male members, we do not include an extensive margin of male
labor supply decisions in the model. To generate empirically plausible female la-
bor supply decisions along the extensive margin in the model, the fixed utility cost
of female labor market participation f is chosen such that the average female non-
participation rate of households aged 30 to 57 is 20%, as in the BPS data set.
3.9    Preference Parameters
   With our preference specification, the parameters 1/ , 1 , and 2 are the con-
sumption, male and female labor supply Frisch elasticities with respect to their own



                                         11
prices, i.e., c,p , h1 ,w1 and h2 ,w2 .12 Therefore, we directly adopt the values BPS esti-
mate under the assumption of separability:  = 1/0.578, 1 = 0.528, and 2 = 0.850.
The value of parameter 1 scaling the disutility of male labor is calibrated such
that the average male labor income of age 30-57 households in the model equals 1
(normalization). The value of 2 for female labor is calibrated to match the ratio of
average female labor supply to average male labor supply conditional on working,
which is 0.733 in the BPS data set.
                             Table 1: Calibrated Model Parameters
               Parameter     Governing                                      Value
               A. Preferences
                            discount rate of utility                     4.69 × 10-3
                   1        disutility of male labor supply                 2.538
                   2        disutility of female labor supply               1.953
                            inverse of consumption Frisch elasticity       1/0.578
                   1        male labor supply Frish elasticity              0.528
                   2        female labor supply Frisch elasticity           0.850
                   f        fixed utility cost of female participation      0.0306
               B. Wage Process
               eg2,t -g1,t female-male wage trend ratio                     0.485
                     2
                  v   1
                           variance of male permanent shocks                0.0303
                     2
                   v2      variance of female permanent shocks              0.0382
                 v1 ,v2    covariance of permanent shocks                   0.0027
                    2
                  u    1
                           variance of male transitory shocks               0.0275
                    2
                  u    2
                           variance of female transitory shocks             0.0125
                u1 ,u2     covariance of transitory shocks                  0.0058
               C. Redistribution System
                   µ        income tax progressivity                        0.1327
                            income tax level                                0.1575
                  ss        payroll tax                                     0.0765
                   b        retirement benefits                             0.3703
               D. Financial Market
                   r        risk-free interest rate                         0.02
                   A        borrowing constraints                          -0.126
              Notes: This table reports the values of parameters in the model with ad-
              ditively separable preferences.
  12
     Following the original BPS paper, Frisch elasticities are denoted by . The meaning of sub-
scripts are c for consumption, hj for earner j 's labor supply, p for the price of consumption and wj
for earner j 's wage. For example, c,p is the Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect to its own
price.




                                                 12
    Table 1 summarizes the calibration of the model, and Table 2 reports the em-
pirical calibration targets as well as the (near-perfect) fit of the model along these
dimensions.
                             Table 2: Empirical Targets Matched
                Empirical Targets                                   Data    Model
                average male labor income                            1      1.000
                average female labor income | work                 0.491    0.491
                female-male ratio of average labor supply | work   0.733    0.733
                average female non-participation rate              0.20     0.200
                average net worth                                  4.188    4.189
                median debt-to-income ratio | debt (age 21-30)     0.163    0.163
              Notes: This table reports the empirical moments matched by the model
              with additively separable preferences. Moments are for age 30-57
              households unless specified otherwise.



4        Quantitative Results
    We now report, in Section 4.2, how well households are insured against indi-
vidual wage shocks of both earners in the model, how this extent of insurance com-
pares to the empirically estimated BPS transmission coefficients, and then evaluate
the relative importance of various insurance mechanisms (labor supply adjustments,
savings, progressive income tax, etc.). Prior to do so, we briefly document, in the
next section, the model-implied mean and variance profiles over the life cycle of
consumption, asset and labor supply, and compare them to the data.13
4.1      Life Cycle Profiles in the Benchmark Economy
    Figure 1 displays average consumption, asset, and labor supply profiles from
age 30 to 57, both for the model (solid blue lines) as well as the PSID data used
by BPS (dotted lines with shaded 95% confidence intervals). As is common in life
cycle models, assets rise over the life cycle as households accumulate wealth to fund
retirement consumption (and because r >  ), but also for precautionary reasons, to
    13
     To generate these profiles, optimal household policy functions are solved numerically using a
policy function iteration algorithm combined with the endogenous grid method proposed by Carroll
(2006). The policy functions are then used to simulate a panel of 50000 households from age 21 to
age 80, although we only use observations from age 30 to 57 when comparing model implications
to the BPS estimates, consistent with the data set they use. Details about the numerical method are
provided in Appendix G.


                                                13
hedge against stochastic wage fluctuations. Assets in the model peak at retirement
(age 65 in the model) and are then drawn down to fund retirement consumption
(we do not display the latter part of the life cycle in the figure because there are no
corresponding BPS data to compare to). Note that by age 30 households on average
have accumulated significant assets, in the model and in the data (see the upper
right panel of Figure 1).




                       Figure 1: Life Cycles of Cross-sectional Means
Notes: This figure shows the life cycles of cross-sectional means in the benchmark model with
additively separable preferences (solid lines) and in the data (dotted lines) together with the 95%
confidence interval (grey bands). The data are from the BPS data set including age 30-57 households.
The consumption life cycle from the data is scaled up to match the life-cycle average of consumption
in the model.

    Figure 2 plots the share of households that are borrowing constrained by age,
and demonstrates that by age 30 essentially nobody in the economy is directly at
the constraint, rendering the constraint fairly unimportant for the consumption and
labor supply responses to wage shocks during the prime working years (30-57) of
households. This is an important observation to keep in mind for the assessment
of the potential bias of the BPS estimates (which rely on the assumption of interior


                                                14
allocations) in Section 4.2.4.




                           Share of Borrowing Constrained Households
                                                                       0.30


                                                                       0.25


                                                                       0.20


                                                                       0.15


                                                                       0.10


                                                                       0.05


                                                                       0.00

                                                                          22   23   24   25        26   27   28   29   30
                                                                                               Age

                    Figure 2: Share of Borrowing Constrained Households
Notes: This figure plots the share of young households on the borrowing constraints in the bench-
mark model with additively separable preferences.

    Consumption in the model rises over the life cycle since wage and earnings risk,
and the associated precautionary saving, as well as a fairly high degree of patience
(r -   1.5%) lead to low consumption early in life, and subsequent positive con-
sumption growth. Overall, the model captures well the growth of consumption and
assets over the life cycle in the data.14
    The bottom two panels of Figure 1 show average hours worked, separately for
males and females, over the life cycle. For ease of comparison, we place average
hours of males and females on the same scale. As will be clear from Figure 3, lower
average female hours originate both from lower hours conditional on working, but
also from a very significant non-participation rate (on average 20% of the popula-
tion across all ages), both in the model as well as in the data (see the upper-right
panel of the figure).
    Figure 3 displays how consumption and hours dispersion, as measured by the
variance of logs, evolve over the life cycle, and also shows female non-participation
rates.15 In the model, consumption inequality is increasing over the life cycle as per-
  14
      Since the consumption data do not include all types of consumption expenditures, in Figure 1,
the life cycle consumption profile from the data is scaled up by a constant factor such that average
consumption in the data is identical to that implied by the model.
   15
      Since in the model households are ex-ante identical, the variances of all variables are zero at


                                                                                              15
     Figure 3: Life Cycles of Cross-sectional Variances and Female Non-participation
Notes: This figure shows the life cycles of cross-sectional variances and female non-participation
rate in the benchmark model with additively separable preferences (solid lines) and in the data
(dotted lines) together with the 95% confidence interval (grey bands). The data are from the BPS
data set including age 30-57 households. The life cycles of variances in the model are shifted to
match the life-cycle averages of variances in the data.

manent wage inequality rises strongly with age, on account of the very substantial
exogenous permanent annual wage shocks (with variances of 0.030 and 0.038, re-
spectively) hitting both males and females. The model captures well not only the
average consumption profile in the data, but also the evolution of consumption in-
equality over the life cycle. The model also matches the fairly flat life cycle variance
profiles of the (model-endogenous) hours choices quite well (see the bottom panels
of Figure 3)
    Overall, even though our model does not give a perfect picture of averages and
the start of the life cycle at age 21. And since the model abstracts from other sources of household
heterogeneity that might contribute to the variance of consumption and hours worked in the data, it
is impossible for the model to match the level of the variances in the data. In Figure 3, the life-cycle
variance profiles from the model are shifted by (variable-specific) constants such that, on average,
the model variances match their counterparts in the data. The key question therefore is whether the
model implies empirically plausible changes in the variances over the life cycle.


                                                  16
inequality in the key endogenous economic choices over the life cycle, it especially
captures very well both mean consumption and consumption inequality by age,
crucial for a paper that focuses on the degree of, and mechanisms for, consump-
tion insurance against wage shocks. In the next section we first describe how we
measure this degree of consumption insurance, before documenting how well con-
sumption is insulated from wage shocks in our model, and what roles the different
mechanisms for providing that insurance play.
4.2     The Transmission of Wage Shocks: Model vs Data
4.2.1   Measuring the Transmission of Wage Shocks
     The main applied purpose of our paper is to quantify how household labor sup-
ply, income, and consumption respond to wage shocks of its two members in our
model, and how public insurance through the tax system shapes these responses.
To measure these responses, Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) and BPS intro-
duce the concept of transmission coefficients and estimate them from the PSID data.
Let lower case letters denote the logarithms of variables, so that ct and yj,t are
the growth rates of household consumption and labor income of household member
j .16 The responses of these household variables to permanent and transitory wage
shocks are captured by the transmission coefficients  in the following equation:
                                                                              
                                                                       u1,t
                    ct       c,u1 c,u2 c,v1 c,v2                
                                                           u2,t 
                                                                
                    y1,t  =  y ,u y ,u y ,v y ,v                .                            (4.1)
                                                         
                           1 1 1 2 1 1 1 2 
                                                          v1,t 
                   
                    y2,t     y2 ,u1 y2 ,u2 y2 ,v1 y2 ,v2        
                                                          v2,t
The transmission coefficients therefore measure how consumption and labor in-
come of household member j  {1, 2} respond to transitory and permanent wage
shocks. For example, c,vj is the household consumption response to earner j 's
permanent wage shock. A value of c,vj = 0.4 means that 40% of the shock passes
through to household consumption, and hence 60% of it is insured. In the next sec-
tion, we compute the transmission coefficients of shocks  from Equation (4.1) in
the model and contrast them to the empirical estimates by BPS, thereby assessing
  16
     Empirically, ct and yj,t are the residuals of log consumption and log labor income of earner j
at age t after controlling for the effects of household observable characteristics.



                                                17
how much insurance against wage risk households obtain in the model, and whether
the model captures well the empirically observed transmission of these shocks.
4.2.2 Transmission of Shocks in the Model and in the Data
    In model simulations, realizations of transitory and permanent wage shocks are
known separately, in addition to household consumption and labor income. Thus,
the transmission coefficients can be obtained directly from OLS regressions of
Equation (4.1). BPS must estimate these transmission coefficients from the data
without separate knowledge of the different wage shocks; their method was devel-
oped precisely to tackle this problem. From now on, results from model-simulated
data are labeled as "Model True",17 whereas results estimated from the PSID data
by BPS are labeled as "Data BPS".
    Table 3 reports the "Model True" transmission coefficients, together with the
"Data BPS" results. Since BPS only use data of households aged 30 to 57, the
"Model True" transmission coefficients are based on model-simulated data for this
age group as well.
                Table 3: Transmission Coefficients in the Data and the Model
                                          Data BPS      Model True
                               c,u1     -0.14(0.07)         0.01
                               c,u2     -0.04(0.07)         0.01
                               c,v1     0.32(0.05)          0.35
                               c,v2     0.19(0.03)          0.18
                               y1 ,u1   1.58(0.16)          1.44
                               y1 ,u2   0.11(0.06)         -0.05
                               y1 ,v1   0.92(0.08)          1.16
                               y1 ,v2   -0.22(0.04)        -0.19
                               y2 ,u1   0.17(0.11)         -0.12
                               y2 ,u2   1.88(0.23)          1.76
                               y2 ,v1   -0.75(0.14)        -0.51
                               y2 ,v2   1.42(0.08)          1.46
                              Notes: The numbers inside parenthe-
                             ses are standard errors from BPS. Only
                             households aged 30-57 are included.

       Comparing the consumption transmission coefficients in the model economy
  17
   Due to the large sample size of the simulated data we use, statistic errors are essentially zero.
Hence the results from simulated data can be seen as the true values implied by the model.



                                                18
with the BPS estimates, we observe that the model implies almost perfect con-
sumption insurance against transitory wage shocks. Only 1% of male and female
temporary wage shocks pass through to household consumption. This result is
common in life cycle models with self-insurance through saving and additively
separable preferences, and is in line with BPS' estimates of statistically insignif-
icant or marginally significant but economically small consumption responses to
temporary wage shocks of both household members. More importantly, our model
predicts that only about 35% of male and 18% of female permanent wage shocks
pass through to household consumption. The corresponding estimates from BPS
are 32% for shocks to the male and 19% for shocks to the female wage. Thus the
model-implied consumption insurance against permanent wage shocks is quantita-
tively very close to the empirical estimates. Taking BPS' point estimates, the model
can explain about 96% and 101% of the consumption insurance against permanent
wage shocks.18
    The table also shows that the model not only fits well the consumption insurance
patterns in the data, but also gives an accurate account of the empirical transmis-
sions of wage shocks to labor income (and thus labor supply). The responses of
male and female labor income to their own transitory wage shocks, yj ,uj , are larger
than one, indicating that labor supply increases when wages are temporarily high.19
In the model, transitory wage shocks have only a small wealth effect, and thus the
substitution effect dominates the labor supply response. The small wealth effect
also explains the slightly negative transmission coefficient yj ,u-j to labor income
of one spouse from a wage shock of the other spouse.20
    The labor income transmission coefficients of one's own permanent wage shock,
yj ,vj , are smaller than their transitory counterparts since labor supply responds less
to own permanent wage shocks, on account of the stronger wealth effects that per-
manent shocks induce. In contrast, when one spouse receives a permanent wage
shock, labor supply of the other spouse responds more strongly, compared to a
  18
       Recall that one key finding of Kaplan and Violante (2010) was that there is substantially too
little consumption insurance against permanent income shocks in Bewley-type models.
    19
       The labor supply response to wage shocks can be deduced by subtracting the percentage change
of wages due to a specific shock from the associated transmission coefficient to labor income.
    20
       Since male wages are on average larger than female wages, so is the wealth effect and induced
transmission coefficient on female earnings.


                                                19
transitory shock, again on account of the larger wealth effect on labor supply. The
value of y1 ,v2 = -0.19 indicates that male labor supply increases by 0.19% in re-
sponse to a permanent 1% decline in the female wage, and y2 ,v1 = -0.51 implies a
strong positive response of female hours of 0.51% to a 1% permanent reduction in
the male wage. These results suggest that the labor supply adjustment of spouses,
and especially that of females, is a crucial adjustment mechanism for a household
dealing with reductions of male wages, especially permanent ones. Crucially, com-
paring the transmission coefficients in the model economy (column 2) with their
empirical counterparts, "Data BPS" (column 1 of Table 3), the model overall repro-
duces the main patterns in the data well, with qualitative or significant quantitative
deviations mainly observed only in the magnitude of the cross income response of
one household member to temporary wage shocks of the other member (which are
negative but small in the model, and positive but statistically insignificant in the
data).
4.2.3 Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance
    The transmission coefficients in Table 3 are sample averages for all households
aged 30 to 57. Figure 4 documents that there is very substantial age heterogeneity
in the response of consumption to wage shocks by household age. Perhaps not sur-
prisingly, consumption is very well insured against transitory wage shocks of both
earners, with insurance close to 100% (transmission c,uj close to zero) after age
25. At very young ages (21-25) borrowing constraints are binding for a subset of
households, and thus household consumption responds more strongly even to tran-
sitory shocks, especially those to male wages, see the lower panel of Figure 4. The
transmission c,vj of permanent wage shocks to consumption displays much more
significant variation over the life cycle, with the amount of consumption insurance
against permanent shocks strongly rising over the life cycle, as the top panel of
Figure 4 indicates. Better consumption insurance is the result of increased asset
accumulation and declining human wealth with household age, so that permanent
wage shocks become less important for consumption the older the household turns.
In their data, BPS also find increasing consumption insurance with age against per-
manent male wage shocks, another dimension along which the model is consistent
with the empirical BPS estimates.


                                         20
                                   Male Permanent Shocks                                 Female Permanent Shocks

                          0.90                                                    0.95




              Insurance




                                                                      Insurance
                          0.80                                                    0.90


                          0.70
                                                                                  0.85

                          0.60
                                                                                  0.80

                                  30     40         50      60                           30     40         50       60
                                              Age                                                    Age

                                   Male Transitory Shocks                                Female Transitory Shocks
                          1.00                                                    1.00

                          0.95                                                    0.98
              Insurance




                                                                      Insurance
                          0.90
                                                                                  0.96

                          0.85
                                                                                  0.94
                          0.80
                                                                                  0.92
                          0.75
                                  30     40         50      60                           30     40         50       60
                                              Age                                                    Age

                                 Figure 4: Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance
Notes: This figure plots consumption insurance over the life cycle against male (left) and female
(right) permanent (top) and transitory (bottom) wage shocks in the benchmark model with additively
separable preferences.

    As Figure 10 in Appendix C shows, the transmission coefficient to male labor
income from his own permanent wage shocks, y1 ,v1 , increases with age since the
substitution effect on labor from higher wages is offset less by a declining wealth
effect over the life cycle. That is, young households increase their male labor supply
less than old households in response to a positive male permanent wage shock.21
Most notably, whereas in young ages female labor supply and thus female earnings
respond quite strongly to an adverse permanent male wage shock (y2 ,v1  -75%),
with age this adjustment mechanism becomes less potent (y2 ,v1 declines in absolute
value) as older households primarily rely on assets to smooth consumption when
confronted with a negative, permanent decline in male wages.
4.2.4 Does the BPS Method Recover Well the Transmission of Wage Shocks
        in the Data?
    Thus far we have treated the BPS estimates of the transmission coefficients 
as accurate representation of the true data. The purpose of this section is to evalu-
  21
     Note that permanent wage shocks are only permanent until retirement, after which social secu-
rity benefits set in. Consequently, permanent shocks later in life induce less of a wealth effect.


                                                                 21
ate whether this interpretation is justified, by assessing whether their methodology
produces unbiased estimates of the true amount of insurance. We of course do not
observe the true empirical data generating process, and therefore we conduct this
analysis using simulated data from our model, for which we do in fact perfectly
know the true transmission coefficients.
     To briefly recap BPS' method,22 they show that if one log-linearizes the first-
order conditions and the intertemporal budget constraint of a two-earner household
life cycle model very similar to the one described in Section 2, and assumes interior
solutions (thus abstracting from binding borrowing constraints and extensive mar-
gin labor supply decisions), then the transmission coefficients  are given in closed
form as functions (, t , sj,t ,  ) of Frisch elasticities  , wealth shares (t , sj,t ), and
an "outside insurance" coefficient  .23 The Frisch elasticities themselves are func-
tions exclusively of the deep preference parameters in the household utility function
if the latter is separable, but also depend on endogenous choices if it is not. The
wealth share t measures the share of financial wealth in total (human and finan-
cial) wealth, and the sj,t captures the share of household human wealth (present
discounted value of future earnings) accruing to each earner j  {1, 2}.
     BPS' method for estimating the transmission coefficients then encompasses four
steps: (1) Estimate the variance-covariance matrices of the permanent and transitory
wage shocks directly from wage data (with results that were documented in Section
3). (2) Measure the wealth shares t and sj,t directly from the asset and labor income
data. (3) Conditional on the results obtained from the first two steps, and using the
empirical second-order moments of ct , yj,t , and wj,t , employ a generalized
method of moments (GMM) strategy to jointly estimate the Frisch elasticities  and
the "outside insurance" coefficient  (unless the latter is restricted to zero).24 (4)
  22
      Appendix D describes their method as implemented in this paper in detail.
  23
      BPS introduce this parameter to capture sources of household insurance that are not explicitly
present in their (and our) model, such as insurance provided by networks of relatives and friends.
Their baseline results are estimated under the restriction of  = 0.
   24
      For the baseline BPS estimates, no prior restrictions are imposed in estimation on the Frisch
elasticities. The assumption of separability in the utility function translates into restrictions for the
cross Frisch elasticities to be zero in the GMM estimation, and turns the Frisch elasticities into
deep preference parameters in the utility function. In column 1 of Table 11 in Appendix C, we
report the BPS estimates of these Frisch elasticities under the separability assumption, which we
use as parameter values in our model, and thus labeled as "Model True"; they of course coincide


                                                  22
Calculate the estimates of the transmission coefficients based on the closed form
formulas (, t , sj,t ,  ) stated explicitly in Appendix D. Since we control the data
generating process, we know the true Frisch elasticities and implied transmission
coefficients in the model, which we label as "Model True" in the tables below. The
estimates based on model-simulated data to which the BPS methodology is then
applied are denoted as "Model BPS".25
    To clarify the potential sources of the bias in the BPS estimates, recall that
the BPS method imposes several assumptions to obtain a transparent and empiri-
cally operational methodology, and violations of these assumptions may result in
biased estimates of the transmission coefficients. Their method is based on the log-
linearization of the household optimality conditions, and thus it requires interiority
of saving and labor supply decisions, and relies on a log-linear approximation of the
true non-linear policy functions being accurate. These assumptions are systemati-
cally violated if borrowing constraints are frequently binding or if non-participation
of one household member is ubiquitous, and the question is whether these violations
are severe enough to spill over into significantly biased estimates of the wage shock
transmission coefficients.
    Table 4 reports the results for the transmission coefficients. The BPS method
captures the degree of income and consumption insurance against transitory wage
shocks almost perfectly. For permanent shocks, it captures the transmission of
with the values from the calibration Table 1. We also report the estimates of the Frisch elasticities
if one applies the BPS methodology to model-simulated data. It confirms that, at least for model-
generated data, the BPS method recovers the true elasticities well, especially if the outside insurance
coefficient is permitted to be positive. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption
and in male labor supply are very close to their true values. There is a slight downward bias in the
female labor supply elasticity (0.81 v.s. the true 0.85), likely because the maintained assumption of
interior female hours is violated in our model for a non-trivial share of observations.
   25
      As an important aside, the description of the BPS method also allows us to clarify why the
"Model True" transmission estimates might well deviate from the empirical estimates of BPS even
though we employ their estimates of the Frisch elasticities (and thus preference parameters) and the
stochastic wage process. Their estimates of the insurance coefficients depend on the joint distribu-
tion of the wealth shares t and sj,t which they derive directly from the data, whereas they are the
outcome of household saving and labor supply decisions in our model. Nothing guarantees that our
model fits the data along these dimensions, and only if it does, will the transmission coefficients
estimated by BPS and from our model line up closely. Our results above that the model fits the
empirical BPS estimates well are therefore informative about whether our model is a good approx-
imation of the true data generating process, at least for the aspects related to the consumption and
labor income dynamics of prime-age households.


                                                 23
                      Table 4: Estimation of Transmission Coefficients
                                        Model True     Model BPS
                               c,u1         0.01          -0.02
                               c,u2         0.01          0.02
                               c,v1         0.35          0.42
                               c,v2         0.18          0.22
                               y1 ,u1       1.44          1.47
                               y1 ,u2      -0.05          -0.03
                               y1 ,v1       1.16          1.10
                               y1 ,v2      -0.19          -0.20
                               y2 ,u1      -0.12          -0.10
                               y2 ,u2       1.76          1.76
                               y2 ,v1      -0.51          -0.62
                               y2 ,v2       1.46          1.53
                              Notes: Based on households aged 30-
                              57.
female wage shocks to earnings and consumption well. It does, however, some-
what underestimates the consumption insurance against male wage shocks (overes-
timates the consumption transmission coefficient), and understates the transmission
of male wage shocks into male and female earnings, with the latter bias likely due
to the selection problem caused by the extensive margin of female labor supply.26
However, the main message of the table is that the magnitude of the bias in all cases
is fairly small, and thus based on simulated model data we would conclude that the
BPS estimates are likely good approximation to true insurance in the data, at least
if the data are generated by a process close to our model.27
  26
      The BPS "Baseline" method does not take into account consumption insurance through the
social security system, which taxes labor income proportionally and pays benefits linked only im-
perfectly to past earnings. Ignoring social security underestimates consumption insurance. Column
"SS" in Table 10 in Appendix C shows that including social security benefits when calculating the
smoothing parameters (t , sj,t ) cuts the bias in consumption insurance by more than half. Permit-
ting outside insurance through the parameter  (column "Outside") has the same effect.
   27
      In the model we can base the estimation of transmission coefficients on an arbitrarily large
sample, and therefore the model-based estimates we report have standard errors virtually equal to
zero. Table 12 in Appendix C demonstrates that even if we estimate the transmission coefficients on
a model sample size comparable to the BPS data, the resulting standard errors are very small (and
an order of magnitude smaller than those in the data), suggesting that a) the actual data are much
noisier than those generated from the model, and b) the results comparing model estimates to the
data, and assessing the performance of the BPS method, are equally valid when using the smaller
sample of simulated data.



                                                24
4.2.5   Inspecting the Mechanisms: How Do Households Insure Against Wage
        Shocks?
    After having documented that households obtain substantial consumption insur-
ance even against permanent wage shocks in the model, and showing that the extent
of insurance accords well with the data (and demonstrating in the previous section
that this is likely not an artefact of the BPS method), in this section we seek to bet-
ter understand what mechanisms, quantitatively, are important for this finding. In
our economy, households can smooth wage shocks through four basic mechanisms,
two of which are exogenous to the household, and two involve active decisions.
First, taking labor supply as given, the fact that wage shocks are imperfectly cor-
related among the two household members provides income and thus consumption
insurance against individual wage fluctuations. Second, the social security system
guarantees some income after retirement, which is independent of past wages and
thus mitigates the impact of wage shocks on household lifetime income. Similarly,
the progressive income tax code partially insulates after-tax income from pre-tax
wage and thus earnings shocks. The two key margins along which households can
adjust behavior in response to wage shocks are the labor supply of both members,
both along the intensive and along the extensive margin, as well as the accumulation
(and de-cumulation) of assets. Figure 8 in Appendix A shows how wage shocks of
the male earner are mitigated through the various mechanisms before they end up
in household consumption. Male wage shocks map male wages into male earnings,
and the addition of female earnings (including female labor supply reactions) turns
this into household pre-tax earnings. The progressive tax system maps pre-tax into
after-tax earnings, and precautionary savings as well as the social security system
shape the mapping between household after-tax earnings and consumption. Table
5 breaks down the extent of insurance achieved in each step of this mapping from
male wages to consumption.
    The table displays the transmission coefficient to consumption of permanent
(upper panel) and transitory (lower panel) male wage shocks in a sequence of
economies that differ in their availability of insurance mechanisms. Our discussion
will focus mostly on the permanent wage shocks, since these are more important
determinants of household welfare, are harder to insure, and it is with respect to

                                          25
                     Table 5: Consumption Insurance Decomposition (Male Shocks)
                                                                         Insurance Provided by
                                         Male                      Female Earner                       Income          Savings+             Total
 Economy                                Earner        Composition Extensive Intensive                     Tax      Social Security       Insurance

 A. Permanent Shock
 1-Earner, exogenous income                ­                 ­                ­             ­           13.3%              33.7%           47.0%
    + male intensive margin             -1.8%                ­                ­             ­           13.5%              41.2%           52.9%
    + female exogenous income -10.9%                       31.4%              ­             ­           10.5%              29.8%           60.9%
    + female extensive margin           -11.5%             27.4%           5.1%             ­           10.5%              30.1%           61.6%
    + female intensive margin           -17.2%             34.5%           0.5%          15.5%           8.9%              24.6%           66.7%

 B. Transitory Shock
 1-Earner, exogenous income                ­                 ­                ­             ­           13.3%              84.6%           97.9%
    + male intensive margin             -40.0%               ­                ­             ­           18.6%          119.4%              98.0%
    + female exogenous income -42.8%                       38.6%              ­             ­           13.8%              88.4%           98.0%
    + female extensive margin           -42.8%             35.0%           1.8%             ­           14.1%              90.0%           98.1%
    + female intensive margin           -43.2%             42.1%           0.3%          4.2%           12.8%              81.4%           97.7%

Notes: This table reports the decomposition results of consumption insurance against male permanent and transitory wage shocks in a sequence of
economies with different sets of insurance channels available. Households aged 21-65 are included. Total Insurance =   m   Insurance(m). Details about
the decomposition method are in Appendix A


these shocks that Kaplan and Violante (2010) found the most significant deviations
between theory (i.e. a standard Bewley model with exogenous earnings) and data
(i.e. the estimates of Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008)).28 The table also
breaks down, for each economy, how much of the consumption insurance is pro-
vided by labor supply and thus income adjustments of the male earner, the female
earner, household income insurance through the progressive income tax system, as
well as through asset accumulation and the progressive social security system (com-
bined).29 For example, the first line shows that in an economy with exogenous labor
supply where the female household member does not work and the male member
works full-time, of a 1% permanent male wage shock 53% are transmitted to con-
sumption, and 47% are insured. Since with exogenous labor supply and only one
earner a male wage shock translates into an equally large household income shock,
the only sources of insurance are the progressive income tax system (which insures
   28
      We focus on the male wage shocks since they are quantitatively by far the most important one
for household consumption, and because female wage shocks display the same qualitative results.
All households aged 21-65 are included in the calculations of consumption insurance. In order to
maximize comparability across economies we retain the same calibration across all models.
   29
      Since the mapping between after-tax income and consumption is influenced both by private
precautionary saving and the social security system, we cannot measure their insurance contribution
in the model separately, short of solving a counterfactual model with one of the two elements absent.


                                                                        26
13% of the pre-tax income decline) and consumption insurance through precau-
tionary asset accumulation and redistributive public social security, which provide
a further 34% consumption insurance.30 Fixing a row, the different columns decom-
pose consumption insurance for a given economy, and moving across rows, the last
column displays how much extra consumption insurance is achieved by activating
an additional adjustment mechanism.
     Comparing total consumption insurance (last column) across rows, we see that
whereas in the one-earner model with exogenous labor supply, more than 50% of a
permanent wage shock transmits to consumption, the presence of a second earner
and endogenous labor supply adjustments of both spouses drive up that insurance
to about 2/3 of the shock (66.7%). Thus consumption insurance increases by about
20 percentage points due to these mechanisms. The column also demonstrates that
it is the presence and labor supply adjustment of the second earner, rather than
the labor supply response of the primary earner, that is responsible for the better
insurance. The latter improves insurance by 5.9 percentage points, whereas the
female earner contributes 13.8 percentage points of extra insurance, due to the fact
that a) holding labor supply constant, she provides an independent source of income
(the composition effect, supplying 8 percentage points of extra insurance), and b)
she increases labor supply along the intensive and extensive margin (generating
5.8 percentage points of extra insurance). The intensive margin is relatively more
important than the extensive margin, since in the benchmark model 80% of female
individuals already participate (by calibration of the fixed cost of participation),
therefore limiting the quantitative scope for adjustment along this margin.
     The point that labor earnings responses of the second earner are crucial for con-
sumption insurance against permanent wage shocks of the male earner is reinforced
by decomposing the sources of insurance in the benchmark model, in the last row
of Panel A of Table 5. With all insurance mechanisms present, male labor sup-
  30
      This extent of consumption insurance through asset accumulation and social security is slightly
higher than that documented in Kaplan and Violante (2010) (34% vs their 23%). Kaplan and Vi-
olante (2010) measure consumption insurance against shocks to after-tax income, whereas we quan-
tify insurance against shocks to pre-tax income. Since we do not recalibrate, the one-earner, exoge-
nous income economy has a higher asset-to-income ratio than the one in Kaplan and Violante (2010)
(and a higher one than our benchmark economy as well as the data), implying better consumption
insurance against permanent income shocks.


                                                27
ply actually falls in response to a negative permanent male wage shock, and thus
a 1% decline in male wages leads to a 1.17% decline in male earnings. The fact
that household consumption only falls by 0.33% again stems mainly from the pres-
ence of female earnings and labor supply adjustments of the female worker (over-
all insuring approximately 50% of the male earnings decline), and to a significant
but secondary part from savings adjustment (24.6%) and public income insurance
through the progressive income tax system (8.9%). This last observation also sug-
gests that the presence of a secondary earner and the active adjustment of labor
supply in response to male shocks will alter very significantly the welfare cost of
these shocks and the demand for public insurance against them. We will return to
this point in the next section of the paper. Of course, for transitory wage shocks,
the lower panel of Table 5 shows that savings responses are the primary vehicle
for providing consumption insurance (with female earners being an important sec-
ondary contributor), and that these shocks are almost perfectly insured, as standard
permanent income logic suggests.
                              Male Permanent Shocks                                      Female Permanent Shocks

                      0.8
                                                                                1.5

                      0.6
                                                                                1.0
                      0.4
          Insurance




                                                                    Insurance




                      0.2                                                       0.5

                      0.0                                                       0.0

                      -0.2
                                                                                -0.5
                      -0.4

                      -0.6                                                      -1.0
                             30     40          50    60                                 30     40         50       60
                                         Age                                                         Age
                                         Male         Female                      Income Tax          Savings+ SS

                        Figure 5: Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance Decomposition
Notes: This figure plots consumption insurance by source over the life cycle against male (left panel)
and female (right panel) permanent wage shocks in the benchmark model with additively separable
preferences. The sources are the male earner (solid line), the female earner (dash line), progressive
income tax (dash-dot line), and savings plus social security (dotted line).

    To briefly investigate whether the contributions of the insurance mechanisms
we have highlighted in the previous table vary over the life cycle, in Figure 5 we
plot the consumption insurance contributions for a permanent wage shock against


                                                               28
household age. The left panel pertains to a permanent shock to male wages, whereas
the right panel displays the results for a permanent female wage shock. We observe
that, for all ages, the labor supply response of the person whose wage is hit by a
permanent shock exacerbates the shock (i.e. the insurance contribution is negative,
increasingly so as the household ages and the substitution effect increasingly domi-
nates the wealth effect). Consistent with the main theme of Table 5, the labor supply
of the other spouse is the most potent insurance mechanism, and is roughly constant
over time, whereas the insurance provided by savings and social security keeps ris-
ing in importance over the life cycle, indicating that older households rely more on
self-insurance through savings. This is also the main reason for the increasing age
profile of total consumption insurance.
    It is important to keep in mind that the degree of consumption insurance docu-
mented empirically by BPS pertains to a very specific (but large) subset of the over-
all population, the group of married two-earner households in prime working ages,
and only to shocks to wages (as opposed to unemployment shocks, health shocks,
shocks to family composition). In light of the importance of labor income of the
secondary earner documented thus far, it is plausible to conjecture that households
with other characteristics, especially single-earner households, could be subject to
significantly less consumption insurance to the same type of wage shocks. Figure 6
verifies this conjecture, from the perspective of the model. It shows the total extent
of consumption insurance (against permanent male wage shocks) for single-earner
households over the life cycle, and contrasts it to that of the benchmark model. We
observe that although both types of households display very similar consumption
insurance in older ages, the consumption response to male wage shocks is signif-
icantly larger for single-earner households than for two-earner households in the
model, especially if these single earners work in jobs where adjusting hours is dif-
ficult (the exogenous earnings model). Whereas even young (30-year old) house-
holds in the benchmark model can insure 60% of a male permanent wage shock,
a single-earner 30-year old with flexible hours attains only 40% of consumption
insurance, and only 30% if working in professions with fixed hours. This point
reinforces that there might be very significant heterogeneity in the population with
respect to the consumption response to idiosyncratic wage shocks, and that the pres-


                                         29
ence and response of a second active earner in the household is a crucial dimension
of heterogeneity to consider.
                                                Benchmark
                                     0.9        1-Earner Endogenous Labor
                                                1-Earner Exogenous Labor
                                     0.8


                                     0.7

                         Insurance   0.6


                                     0.5


                                     0.4


                                     0.3


                                           25   30   35    40     45   50   55   60   65
                                                                Age

            Figure 6: Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance in Three Models
Notes: This figure plots consumption insurance over the life cycle against male permanent wage
shocks in three models with additively separable preferences.


5     The Welfare Cost of Idiosyncratic Risk and Its Op-
      timal Insurance Revisited
    In this section we present our main economic application of the model, by revis-
iting the welfare cost of wage risk, as well as the optimal social insurance against
this risk. In our model the household can self-insure against this risk not only by
engaging in precautionary saving and changing labor supply of the primary earner
(as is common in the literature), but also by adjusting labor supply along the exten-
sive and intensive margin of the second earner of the family. We expect that this
new margin reduces both the welfare cost of wage risk and the desirable degree of
public insurance in the form of labor income tax progressivity. We now measure
the extent to which this is true.
5.1    Welfare Cost of Idiosyncratic Wage Risk
    We first quantify how much households are willing to pay to be completely insu-
lated from idiosyncratic wage risk, in our benchmark model and in two comparison
economies in which labor supply either cannot respond to the risk at all (column 3


                                                            30
of Table 6), or the labor supply response is limited to the primary earner (column
2 of Table 6). In both these comparison economies female labor income is absent
(and so is the composition effect, which, as we demonstrated above, is an important
source of consumption insurance), and so is the opportunity of the household to
adjust female labor supply in response to adverse male wage realizations.
    Since all households are ex ante identical, we measure the welfare cost of wage
risk as the percentage reduction in consumption (at each age, in each contingency)
such that expected lifetime utility is identical in the absence and in the presence of
wage risk.31 When changing the amount of idiosyncratic wage risk, we keep the
life cycle profile of average wages constant across all economies. Since we study
partial equilibrium models, there is no interaction across different age cohorts on
labor or capital markets, and no impact of changing wage risk on aggregate factor
prices.
    Table 6 presents the results. It shows that, as well known from the literature,
that even in the presence of self-insurance through saving the welfare losses from
idiosyncratic income risk are large, in the order of 25% of lifetime consumption
(see the first row of column 3 in the table).32 These losses stem primarily from the
substantial permanent wage shocks that are difficult to insure against through pre-
cautionary saving. As the decomposition in the next rows shows,33 essentially all
  31
     Specifically, let (c0 , h0    0         1   1    2
                              1 , h2 ) and (c , h1 , h2 ) denote the allocation of consumption and labor
supply before and after a change in wage risk, and W (c, h1 , h2 ) be the welfare function that gives
the lifetime utility under a particular consumption and labor supply allocation. The welfare cost of
this change, in consumption-equivalent variation, CEV , is defined by

                            W ((1 + CEV )c0 , h0    0         1   1    1
                                               1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ).


  32
      The absolute magnitude of these losses is at the high end of the numbers reported in the liter-
ature. For example, including initial risk at age 24, Karahan and Ozkan (2013) report a somewhat
smaller welfare cost of 16.8% The main reason is that they estimate a smaller variance of permanent
wage shocks than BPS (0.0113 vs 0.0303 in BPS). Another reason is that Karahan and Ozkan (2013)
consider a shorter working life (24-60 vs 21-65 in our model), and hence idiosyncratic wage risk is
less important.
   33
      Details about the decomposition of welfare changes are in Appendix B. As an example, the
welfare change due to consumption change, CEVC , is defined by

                           W ((1 + CEVC )c0 , h0    0         1   0    0
                                               1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ).

CEVC can be further decomposed into level and distribution effects, CEVCL and CEVCD , defined


                                                  31
the welfare losses are due to the fact that the higher income risk feeds into larger
consumption risk. These conclusions are largely unchanged if labor supply of the
primary earner is permitted to adjust in response to wage risk (compare columns 2
and 3 of the table), although household (i.e. male) average labor supply does in-
crease in response to larger male wage risk, providing some consumption insurance
against that risk. Overall, although the welfare loss from consumption risk falls by
about 5 percentage points (compare the 4th row in columns 2 and 3), this is achieved
by on average larger, more dispersed, and therefore welfare-reducing labor supply,
as rows 5-7 in column 2 display. Therefore, the overall welfare cost of wage risk is
only modestly mitigated by the labor supply margin of the primary earner.
                     Table 6: Welfare Cost of Idiosyncratic Wage Risks
                                  Benchmark               1-Earner Household
                                    Model       Endogenous Labor      Exogenous Labor
         A. Male Wage Risks
         Total Welfare Change      -15.02%           -23.16%               -24.54%
            Consumption            -12.40%           -20.60%               -24.54%
              Level                 1.22%            -0.76%                 0.58%
              Distribution         -13.45%           -19.99%               -24.97%
            Male Labor              1.19%            -3.23%                    ­
              Level                 2.95%            -1.30%                    ­
              Distribution         -1.71%            -1.96%                    ­
            Female Labor           -4.13%               ­                      ­
              Level                -4.23%               ­                      ­
              Distribution          0.10%               ­                      ­
         B. Female Wage Risks
         Total Welfare Change       0.55%                ­                     ­
         C. All Wage Risks
         Total Welfare Change     -14.63%%               ­                     ­
        Notes: This table reports the welfare changes due to the introduction of idiosyn-
        cratic wage risks (permanent and transitory) to different model economies. For the
        benchmark model, female wage risks are introduced first before male wage risks.
        Welfare changes are reported in consumption-equivalent variations (CEV), and de-
        tails about the decomposition of welfare changes are in Appendix B.

by
                                                       c1 0 0 0
                                                       ¯
                       W ((1 + CEVCL )c0 , h0    0
                                            1 , h2 ) = W ( c , h1 , h2 ),
                                                       c0
                                                       ¯
                 W ((1 + CEVCD )(1 + CEVCL )c0 , h0    0            1   0 0
                                                  1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ),

      c0 and ¯
where ¯      c1 are the average consumption before and after the change.


                                               32
    The comparison with our benchmark model with endogenous labor supply re-
sponse opportunities of the secondary earner (column 1) demonstrates that this is a
very effective mechanism for dealing with wage risk of the primary earner, with the
overall welfare cost from that risk being reduced by 39% (15.0% instead of 24.5%,
see row 1, columns 1 and 3). Most of this reduction stems from better consumption
insurance afforded by the labor supply response of the secondary earner (comparing
rows 2 and 4 across the three columns of Table 6). Importantly, as the remaining
rows of column 1 show, now male labor supply can fall when male wage realiza-
tions are low as the female member of the household can start to work, or work
longer hours, to compensate the male income loss.34 The implied welfare losses
from extended female hours are partially offset by the welfare gains of shorter male
hours. Overall, however, uninsured consumption risk remains the largest cost of
idiosyncratic wage risk of the primary earner, but with the secondary labor supply
margin acting as a quantitatively very important mitigating factor.
    This improved private insurance against wage risk can also plausibly be ex-
pected to reduce the demand for public income insurance. In the next subsection
we now demonstrate this point by revisiting the optimal degree of labor income tax
progressivity in the presence of joint household labor supply decisions.
5.2     Optimal Public Insurance through Progressive Income Tax-
        ation
    To determine the optimal degree of tax progressivity we maximize expected
lifetime utility of a newborn household with respect to the tax progressivity param-
eter µ, and adjusting the tax level parameter  such that the present discounted value
(at the fixed interest rate r) of taxes paid by the cohort over its life cycle remains
constant, and thus all potential policy reforms are revenue neutral. We conduct this
thought experiment both for the benchmark economy with endogenous female la-
bor supply, and for the one-earner economy with endogenous labor supply from the
  34
    As Panel B of the table shows, introducing female wage risk is actually welfare improving,
since it increases the option value of female labor supply: at high female wage realizations the
female worker participates whereas at low wage realizations it is not worth incurring the fixed cost
of participation.




                                                33
previous section.35 Our objective is to quantify how the optimal degree of public
insurance changes in response to the better private household insurance afforded by
family labor supply.
    We summarize our main results in Figure 7 and Table 7. To interpret these
results, recall that the benchmark tax system is given by progressivity parameter
µ = 0.13 and level parameter  = 0.16. The table displays the optimal tax system
(for each economy), as well as changes in aggregate variables as well as in welfare,
relative to the initial status quo tax system (including a decomposition of the welfare
gains). The figure plots, against the degree of tax progressivity, the change in wel-
fare (measured as % consumption equivalent variation) and consumption insurance
against male permanent wage shocks, relative to the benchmark system (µ = 0.13).

                                                                                0.30
                    5%
                                                                                0.25

                                                                                0.20

                    0%
                                                                    Insurance




                                                                                0.15
         Welfare




                                                                                0.10

                   -5%                                                          0.05

                                                                                0.00

                                                                                -0.05
                   -10%
                       0      0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4     0.5   0.6                   0     0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6
                                     Progressivity                                                 Progressivity
                                                      Benchmark                    1-Earner Endogenous Labor


                           Figure 7: Welfare and Insurance Effects of Tax Progressivity
Notes: This figure shows how household welfare (left panel) and consumption insurance (right
panel) change with income tax progressivity in two economies with additively separable prefer-
ences. Progressivity is measured by parameter µ in the tax function. Welfare changes are reported
in consumption-equivalent variations. Consumption insurance is measured as one minus the trans-
mission coefficient to consumption of male permanent wage shocks. The plots display the changes,
relative to the benchmark tax system (i.e. µ = 0.1327).

    The left panel of Figure 7 summarizes the two key results of this section. First,
relative to the benchmark tax system a very significant increase in tax progressiv-
  35
     If labor supply and thus earnings are exogenous as e.g. in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston
(2008), then the optimal tax problem is trivial, since the government can provide full consumption
insurance by taxing earnings at a confiscatory rate and redistributing the receipts in a lump-sum
fashion.


                                                                  34
                             Table 7: Optimal Income Tax
                                           Benchmark     1-Earner Household
                                             Model       Endogenous Labor
              A. Optimal Income Tax
              Progressivity (µ)              0.3197            0.3825
              Level ()                       0.1417            0.1807
              B. Changes in Aggregate Variables
              Consumption                  -11.13%            -14.13%
              Asset                        -17.88%            -26.48%
              Male Labor Supply            -7.31%             -10.76%
              Female Labor Supply          -12.78%               ­
              Male Labor Income            -6.76%             -10.03%
              Female Labor Income          -10.58%               ­
              Female Non-participationa     2.87%                ­
              C. Welfare Gains
              Total Welfare Gain            2.75%              5.45%
                 Consumption               -3.73%             -2.75%
                   Level                   -11.13%            -14.13%
                   Distribution             8.33%             13.25%
                 Male Labor                 4.03%              8.43%
                   Level                    3.77%              7.73%
                   Distribution             0.24%              0.65%
                 Female Labor               2.60%                 ­
                   Level                    2.75%                 ­
                   Distribution            -0.14%                 ­
              Notes: This table reports the optimal income tax policy and the
             effects of moving from the actual income tax to the optimal one.
             Welfare changes are reported in consumption-equivalent variations
             (CEV), and details about the decomposition of welfare changes are
             in Appendix B. a The number reported is the actual change in fe-
             male non-participation rate.

ity strongly improves welfare. More importantly, however, both the magnitude of
the welfare gains as well as the optimal degree of tax progressivity fall very sig-
nificantly in the presence of better private insurance against male wage risk due to
family labor supply. Concretely, the optimal tax progressivity parameter falls from
0.38 to 0.32, and the welfare gains from implementing the optimal (within the class
of tax functions considered here) are cut in half, from 5.45% of lifetime consump-
tion to 2.75% of lifetime consumption. The sources of the welfare gains of a more
progressive tax system are, as Table 7 clarifies, better consumption insurance and a
reduction of utility-reducing male (and if endogenous, female) labor supply, which


                                            35
have to be traded off against lower average consumption associated with larger tax
progressivity.
    In the previous section we showed that private consumption insurance improves
in the presence of female labor supply. The right panel of Figure 7 provides the
corollary: while expanding public insurance through tax progressivity improves
overall consumption insurance, it does less so in the benchmark economy with flex-
ible labor supply of the secondary earner. Consequently, abstracting from the joint
decision of family labor supply has the potential of very significantly biasing the
optimal degree of tax progressivity and the welfare benefits associated with it.

6     Robustness
    In this section we briefly revisit two important assumptions made in the bench-
mark model that might affect the results in a quantitatively important way. First, we
vary the tightness of borrowing constraints, and second, we relax the assumption of
preferences that are additively separable between consumption and labor.
6.1    Importance of the Tightness of Borrowing Constraints
    In the benchmark model we calibrated the tightness of borrowing constraints in
such a way that the model matches the debt-to-income ratio of young (aged 21-30)
households in the data. Table 8 displays results for the degree of consumption insur-
ance against transitory and permanent male wage shocks (and its decomposition) in
the benchmark economy, and in two economies in which borrowing is either ruled
out altogether (Zero BC) and in which the constraints are set so large as to never be
binding (Non-Binding BC). As in Table 5, households aged 21-65 are included in
the calculation of consumption insurance in Table 8.
    As the table demonstrates, the degree of consumption insurance against perma-
nent wage shocks, as well as its sources, are virtually unaffected by the tightness of
the constraints. The impact on insurance against transitory shocks is more notice-
able, and as expected: consumption insurance declines as the borrowing constraints
tighten. The magnitude of this change is moderate, however, with 98.7% of the
shock insured if borrowing constraints are not binding, and 97.4% if households
cannot borrow at all. Interestingly, there is some substitution in the sources of insur-
ance: as borrowing constraints tighten, the importance of savings for consumption

                                          36
                      Table 8: Borrowing Constraints and Consumption Insurance
                                                         Insurance Provided by
                          Male                     Female Earner                     Income         Savings+            Total
 Economy                 Earner        Composition      Intensive    Extensive          Tax      Social Security     Insurance

 A. Permanent Shock
 Zero BC                -17.1%             34.5%          15.5%         0.4%           8.9%           24.5%            66.7%
 Benchmark              -17.2%             34.5%          15.5%         0.5%           8.9%           24.6%            66.7%
 Non-Binding BC -17.3%                     34.5%          15.5%         0.4%           8.9%           25.0%            66.9%

 B. Transitory Shock
 Zero BC                -42.9%             42.0%          4.4%          0.2%          12.8%           80.8%            97.4%
 Benchmark              -43.2%             42.1%          4.2%          0.3%          12.8%           81.4%            97.7%
 Non-Binding BC -44.0%                     42.3%          3.8%          0.4%          12.9%           83.3%            98.7%

Notes: This table reports the decomposition results of consumption insurance against male permanent and transitory wage shocks in
three model economies: a model with zero borrowing constraints (BC), the benchmark model, and a model with non-binding borrow-
ing constraints (20 times the borrowing constraints in the benchmark model). Households aged 21-65 are included. Total Insurance =
  m   Insurance(m). Details about the decomposition method are in Appendix A

insurance declines, and female labor supply adjustments play a larger role in deal-
ing with the shock. We conclude that our benchmark results are qualitatively and to
a large degree quantitatively robust to the specification of borrowing constraints.
6.2        Non-separable Preferences
    The key advantage of using the preference structure thus far is that the intertem-
poral and Frisch labor supply elasticities are exclusively determined by exogenous
parameters which are therefore directly interpretable. However, it is restrictive in
that it does not permit hours worked to affect the marginal utility of consumption
(and vice versa). When BPS relax the assumption of separability in their estimation,
they find important Frisch complementarity between consumption and leisure. In
addition, introducing non-separable preferences into the model could, in principle,
help it better capture aspects of the empirically estimated transmission coefficients
the benchmark model had difficulty with, for example, the negative consumption
response to positive transitory wage shocks (c,uj < 0). In this section we therefore
modify the utility function to a non-separable (between consumption and labor of
the two spouses) form:
                                                                                                     1-
                                                             -
                                  {C  + (1 - )[H1
                                                
                                                  + (1 -  )H2 ] }                                         -1
                 u(C, H1 , H2 ) =                                                                               .
                                                 1-



                                                               37
Here  governs the substitution pattern between consumption and labor supply, and
 governs the substitution pattern between male and female labor supply. The
main advantage of this utility function is that it is flexible enough to accommo-
date different substitution patterns between consumption and labor supply of both
spouses. However, now the simple mapping between the preference parameters
and the Frisch elasticities BPS estimate is lost, in that the Frisch elasticities are no
longer deep parameters, but rather depend on the endogenous choices by house-
holds as well as the parameters (, , , ,  ).
    The purpose of this section is to document how the degree of consumption in-
surance in the model is impacted by the non-separable utility specification, and to
investigate the extent to which it helps the model match the empirically estimated
transmission coefficients. Table 9 (transmission coefficients, equivalent of Table 3)
summarize the most relevant results. The complete set of findings, including the
calibration of the model, the model-implied life cycle profiles, estimates of model-
implied Frisch elasticities, decomposition of insurance into various mechanisms
and an evaluation of the biases of the BPS method with the non-separable utility
are available in Appendix E.
           Table 9: Transmission Coefficients with Non-separable Preferences
                                Data                     Model True
                                BPS            Separable     Non-separable
                   c,u1     -0.14(0.07)           0.01          -0.15
                   c,u2     -0.04(0.07)           0.01          -0.07
                   c,v1     0.32(0.05)            0.35          0.24
                   c,v2     0.19(0.03)            0.18          0.13
                   y1 ,u1    1.58(0.16)            1.44         1.70
                   y1 ,u2    0.11(0.06)           -0.05         0.09
                   y1 ,v1    0.92(0.08)            1.16         0.98
                   y1 ,v2   -0.22(0.04)           -0.19         -0.27
                   y2 ,u1    0.17(0.11)           -0.12         0.18
                   y2 ,u2    1.88(0.23)            1.76         1.62
                   y2 ,v1   -0.75(0.14)           -0.51         -0.47
                   y2 ,v2    1.42(0.08)            1.46         1.16
                   Notes: The numbers inside parentheses are standard errors
                  from BPS. Only households aged 30-57 are included.

   Relative to the benchmark (second column of Table 9), in the model with non-


                                             38
separable preferences (third column) consumption and leisure are Frisch comple-
ments, and thus higher labor supply (lower leisure) reduces the marginal utility
of consumption, and higher consumption increases the marginal disutility of labor
supply. This change mainly impacts the labor supply and consumption response
to transitory wage shocks. These shocks have only a small wealth effect, and thus
their impact is largely determined by the substitution effect. But now a higher
wage, inducing larger labor supply (lower leisure), drives down consumption due
to the complementarity between consumption and leisure. As a result, household
consumption responds mildly negatively to transitory wage shocks by both spouses
(c,u1 < 0, c,u2 < 0), as in the BPS estimates of the data. The same basic mech-
anism applies to permanent wage shocks (which have a much stronger wealth ef-
fect, though), which explains why now permanent wage shocks transmit to con-
sumption even less strongly than in the separable case. Furthermore, since labor
(leisure) of both spouses now are complements, positive transitory wage shocks of
one spouse now induce a positive hours and thus earnings response of the other
spouse (y1 ,u2 > 0, y2 ,u1 > 0), again something found in the BPS estimates and
hard to rationalize in the benchmark model.
     Broadly speaking, the model with non-separable preferences matches the BPS
estimates of the transmission coefficients of transitory shocks better, both quantita-
tively, but also qualitatively (in terms of their signs). Note, however, that most of
these estimates are at most marginally statistically significant. On the other hand,
it significantly overstates the degree of consumption insurance against permanent
wage shocks, especially those of the primary earner (24% transmission), relative to
the empirical estimates, (32% transmission) and relative to the benchmark model
(35% transmission). Since permanent wage shocks are the main sources of welfare
losses from incomplete private insurance, and the main argument for the provision
of public insurance, and the separable model fares better relative to the BPS es-
timates in this regard, we decided to conduct our analyses in Section 5 with the
benchmark model, rather than the model with non-separable preferences.36 Over-
  36
     Table 16 and 17 in Appendix E document the biases in the estimates of the Frisch elasticities
and transmission coefficients, again based on simulated data. Overall, as in the separable case these
biases are small, indicating that even with non-separable preferences the BPS method recovers the
true Frisch elasticities and transmission coefficients well.


                                                39
all, however, our main conclusion from the previous section remains intact: the
Bewley model with endogenous dual earner labor supply implies roughly as much
insurance (if not more) against wage shocks, especially permanent wage shocks, as
the empirical BPS estimates appear to exhibit.37

7        Conclusions
    In this paper we have argued that a Bewley type model with two-earner house-
holds facing idiosyncratic wage shocks and making endogenous labor supply de-
cisions replicates well quantitatively the extent of consumption insurance against
permanent wage shocks estimated from U.S. micro household consumption data by
Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016). These results suggest that life cy-
cle models of the form employed in this work can be used in applications where the
extent of consumption insurance, and the mechanisms through which it is achieved,
are important. This includes the evaluation of social insurance and tax policies for
which the adjustment of labor supply of both household members as well as sav-
ings responses can be expected to be important. We have demonstrated this for the
case of progressive income taxation. Explicitly modeling spousal adjustments of
earnings strongly reduces the welfare losses from wage risk of the primary earner
as well as the desired extent of tax progressivity.
    Given the importance of this mechanism, a next plausible step in this research
agenda would be to investigate, in the context of this class of models, the optimal
design of progressive taxation among both earners of the family, including the ques-
tion whether to tax both partners jointly or separately, and whether to subject the
primary and the secondary earner to systems with different degrees of progressivity.

References
Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving". The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (3): 659­684.
    37
     Table 19 in Appendix E (counterpart of Table 5) again decomposes consumption insurance into
the various mechanisms. The main difference to the separable case is that now reducing male labor
supply and increasing female labor supply at the same time is very costly (due to the complementar-
ity of leisure), and thus male labor supply and consequently earnings do not fall much as in response
to a negative male wage shock. The extent to which female labor income and savings are used to
insure the lower male earnings is fairly similar across the two versions of the model, however.


                                                40
Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low, and Virginia S´
                                             anchez-Marcos. 2005. "Female La-
   bor Supply as Insurance Against Idiosyncratic Risk". Journal of the European
   Economic Association 3 (2/3): 755­764.
B´
 enabou, Roland. 2002. "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Econ-
   omy: What Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?" Econo-
   metrica 70 (2): pp. 481­517.
Bewley, Truman. 1986. "Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of
   Independently Fluctuating Consumers". Contributions to Mathematical Eco-
   nomics in Honor of Gerard Debreu: 79­102.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. "Consumption Inequality
   and Partial Insurance". American Economic Review 98 (5): 1887­1921.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. "Consumption
   Inequality and Family Labor Supply". American Economic Review 106 (2):
   387­435.
-- . 2018. "Children, Time Allocation, and Consumption Insurance". Journal of
   Political Economy 126 (S1): S73­S115.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2006. "The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving
   Dynamic Stochastic Optimization Problems". Economics Letters 91 (3): 312­
   320.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. "The
   Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States".
   Journal of Political Economy 118 (4): 681­722.
-- . 2014. "Consumption and Labor Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical
   Framework". American Economic Review 104 (7): 2075­2126.
Holter, Hans A., Dirk Krueger, and Serhiy Stepanchuk. 2019. "How Does Tax Pro-
   gressivity and Household Heterogeneity Affect Laffer Curves?" Quantitative
   Economics, forthcoming.
Huggett, Mark. 1993. "The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-
  Insurance Economies". Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17 (5-6):
  953­969.

                                        41
Imrohoro glu, Ays
                ¸e. 1989. "Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liq-
   uidity Constraints". Journal of Political Economy 97 (6): 1364­1383.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. "How Much Consumption Insurance
   beyond Self-Insurance?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4):
   53­87.
Karahan, Fatih, and Serdar Ozkan. 2013. "On the Persistence of Income Shocks
   over the Life Cycle: Evidence, Theory, and Implications". Review of Economic
   Dynamics 16 (3): 452­476.
Ortigueira, Salvador, and Nawid Siassi. 2013. "How Important is Intra-Household
   Risk Sharing for Savings and Labor Supply?" Journal of Monetary Economics
   60 (6): 650­666.
Park, Seonyoung, and Donggyun Shin. 2019. "Welfare Consequences of Rising
   Wage Risk in the United States: Self-Selection into Risky Jobs and Family La-
   bor Supply Adjustments". Working Paper.
Rupert, Peter, and Giulio Zanella. 2015. "Revisiting Wage, Earnings, and Hours
   Profiles". Journal of Monetary Economics 72:114­130.
Santaeul`
        alia-Llopis, Ra¨
                       ul, and Yu Zheng. 2018. "The Price of Growth: Consump-
   tion Insurance in China 1989­2009". American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
   nomics 10 (4): 1­35.




                                       42
       On-line Appendix: For Review Only
A       Consumption Insurance Decomposition
    In this section, we provide details on how consumption insurance decomposi-
tion is conducted based on model-simulated data within each row of Table 5 and in
Figure 5.38 The idea of the decomposition is illustrated in Figure 8, which shows
the transmission of a male wage shock to consumption in the model.




                        Figure 8: Transmission of Male Wage Shocks

    For an age t household, the percentage change of household income in response
to a wage shock x (i.e., x = vj,t or x = uj,t ) is approximately
                          Yt         Y1,t + Y2,t
                    yt =          =
                          Yt-1             Yt-1
                             Y                  Y2,t-1
                          
                               1,t-1
                                     y1 ,x x +         y ,x x, if Y2,t-1 > 0;
                          Y
                                t-1              Yt-1 2
                       
                             Y                  Y2,t
                           1,t-1 y1 ,x x +             ,       if Y2,t-1 = 0,
                          
                              Yt-1              Yt-1
where y1 ,x   and y2 ,x are transmission coefficients from shock x to male and female
labor income as defined in the main text, and by definition, they do not capture the
  38
    For the decomposition in each row, the model is only solved once, and hence changes in house-
hold behaviors in response to changes in the set of available insurance channels are not taken into
account. Such information is presented across different rows of Table 5 because the model is solved
again whenever a new insurance channel is added.



                                                43
responses through extensive margin. Here we are assuming that the shock may only
move the female earner into the labor market, which is innocuous because we can
always switch the sign of the shock to make it true. Taking the expectation of yt
over the distribution of households, we have the formula for the average response
of household income with respect to shock x:
                     Y1,t-1                             Y2,t-1
     E[yt ]  E[             ]y1 ,x x + Pr(Y2,t-1 > 0)E[        | Y2,t-1 > 0] y2 ,x x
                      Yt-1                               Yt-1
                                                          =E[
                                                                Y2,t-1
                                                                 Yt-1    ]                            (A.1)
                             Y2,t
     + Pr(Y2,t-1 = 0)E[           | Y2,t-1 = 0].
                             Yt-1
   By rewriting Equation (A.1), we can decompose the average response of house-
hold income E[yt ] with respect to male wage shock x into effects through different
channels in the following way:
                                                                     
                                                                     
                       Pr(Y2,t-1 = 0)E[  Y2,t
                                                                                  E[ YY
                                                                     
                                              | Y2,t-1          = 0]                  2,t-1
                                                                                             ]y2 ,x
                                                                     
                                        Yt-1                                            t- 1
   E[yt ]         1+                                                         1+
                                                                                  E[ YY
                                Y2,t-1                                                1,t-1
                              E[         ]y2 ,x                                              ]y1 ,x
                                                  E[ YY
                                 Yt-1                 1,t-1
                                                                     
               
                         1+     Y1,t-1
                                                        t-1
                                                            ]y1 ,x x                    t- 1
                              E[ Y       ]y1 ,x
                                  t-1
                                                                                      K3              (A.2)
                                          K4
               Y1,t-1
        × E[          ] y1 ,x x.
                Yt-1
                        K1
                K2

where K1 represents the effect of male intensive margin (K1 = 1 if male labor
supply does not respond to the shock), K2 represents the composition effect of
female income (K2 = 1 if female labor income is zero), K3 represents the effect
of female intensive margin (K3 = 1 if female labor supply does not respond to the
shock through intensive margin), and K4 represents the effect of female extensive
margin (K4 = 1 if females do not respond to the shock by entering the labor market).
    We can calculate K1 to K3 easily because we can estimate yj ,x and E[ YY   j,t-1
                                                                                t-1
                                                                                     ]
                                    Y2,t
from the model-simulated data. E[ Yt-1 | Y2,t-1 = 0] is more difficult to calculate
directly because Y2,t here is supposed to be the change of income in response to
only the shock x. Therefore, to calculate K4 , we first regress yt on all shocks
using model-simulated data to estimate the transmission coefficients from shock x
to household labor income directly, i.e., y,x . By definition, we have
                                            E[yt ] = y,x x.                                           (A.3)

                                                    44
Combining Equation (A.1) and Equation (A.3), we have
                      Y2,t                              Y1,t-1             Y2,t-1
   Pr(Y2,t-1 = 0)E[        | Y2,t-1 = 0]x-1 = ky,x - E[        ]y1 ,x - E[        ]y2 ,x .
                      Yt-1                               Yt-1               Yt-1
                                                                                       (A.4)
And now we can calculate K4 as well.39
    By regressing ct on shocks using model-simulated data, we can also estimate
the transmission coefficients from shock x to consumption directly, i.e., c,x , and
hence
                                     E[ct ] = c,x x.
Given the functional form of the income tax function, we know
                                  AT
                                 yt  = (1 - µ)yt
                                  AT
                               E[yt  ] = (1 - µ) y,x x,
                                                  K5
        AT
where  yt    is the change of after-tax household income with respect to shock x,
and K5 represents the effect of progressive income tax (K5 = 1 if income tax is flat).
                      AT
Let E[ct ] = K6 E[yt     ], we have

                              c,x = K6 K5 y,x = 6
                                                m=1 Km .                               (A.5)
And K6 represents the effect of other insurance channels including household sav-
ings and social security in the model (K6 = 1 if consumption responds one for one
to changes in after-tax income).
    Based on Equation (A.5), we can decompose total consumption insurance based
on the additional insurance generated through each insurance channel such that
Total Insurance = m Insurance(m).

   1. Insurance provided by male labor supply: 1 - K1 .

   2. Insurance provided by the female earner: (1 - 4
                                                    m=1 Km ) - (1 - K1 ).


        (a) Composition effect: (1 - 2
                                     m=1 ) - (1 - K1 );

        (b) Intensive margin: (1 - 3            2
                                   m=1 ) - (1 - m=1 );

        (c) Extensive margin: (1 - 4           3
                                   m= ) - (1 - m=1 ).
  39
    Since y,x = 4                                                   3
                    m=1 Km , we can simply calculate K4 as y,x /(m=1 Km ). But we will still
need Equation (A.4) for the decomposition of consumption insurance against female shocks.


                                             45
    3. Insurance from progressive tax: (1 - 5               4
                                            m=1 Km ) - (1 - m=1 Km ).


    4. Insurance from other channels (savings and social security): (1 - 6
                                                                         m=1 Km ) -
             5
       (1 - m=1 Km ).

    For a female wage shock, we can decompose the effects of different channels in
a similar way:
                                                                                           
                                               E[ YY
                                                   1,t-1
                                                     t-1
                                                         ]y1 ,x                            
           E[yt ]  1 +
                                                                                           
                                                             Y                             
                                             Pr(Y2,t-1 =0)E[ Y 2,t |Y2,t-1 =0]
                           E[ YY
                               2,t-1
                                                               t- 1
                                                                                           
                                 t-1
                                     ] 1+              Y2,t-1                      y2 ,x
                                                     E[ Y     ]y2 ,x x
                                                         t-1


                                                    K4

                  Y2,t-1        Pr(Y2,t-1 = 0)E[    Y2,t
                                                   Yt-1
                                                         | Y2,t-1    = 0]
           × E[          ] 1+               Y2,t-1
                                                                                 y2 ,x x,
                   Yt-1                   E[ Yt-1 ]y2 ,x x
                                                                                  K1
                  K3
                                               K2

where K1 represents the effect of female intensive margin, K2 represents the effect
of female extensive margin, K3 represents the composition effect of male labor
income, and K4 represents the effect of male intensive margin. We can define the
effect of progressive income tax K5 and the effect of other channels K6 in the same
way as for male shocks.

B     Decomposition of Welfare Changes
    In this section, we explain how welfare changes in consumption-equivalent vari-
ations (CEV) and the decomposition of welfare changes into level and distribution
effects of consumption and labor supply are calculated in the main text, for which
we follow the method in Conesa, Kitao, and Krueger (2009).
    Consider, for example, an income tax change in the model economy. Let c0
and {h0    2
        j }j =1 denote the state-contingent plan of household consumption and labor

supply for a new-born household before the tax change, and let W (c0 , h0    0
                                                                        1 , h2 ) denote

the expected lifetime utility of this new-born household under this state-contingent
plan. After the tax change, the corresponding state-contingent plan is denoted by c1
and {h1    2                                      1   1    1
        j }j =1 , and the lifetime utility is W (c , h1 , h2 ).

    The welfare effect of this tax change in consumption-equivalent variation, CEV ,



                                             46
is defined by the following equation:
                     W ((1 + CEV )c0 , h0    0         1   1    1
                                        1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ).

Hence, CEV is the percentage change of lifetime consumption that is required to
generate a change of lifetime utility equal to that induced by the tax change. If CEV
is positive (negative), the tax change is welfare-improving (welfare-reducing).
    We can decompose CEV into components stemming from the change in con-
sumption and the change in labor supply. The welfare change due to consumption
change, CEVC , is defined by the following equation:
                     W ((1 + CEVC )c0 , h0    0         1   0    0
                                         1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ).

And the welfare change due to changes in male and female labor supply, CEVH1
and CEVH2 , are defined by:
              W ((1 + CEVH1 )(1 + CEVC )c0 , h0    0         1   1    0
                                              1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ),

       W ((1 + CEVH2 )(1 + CEVH1 )(1 + CEVC )c0 , h0    0         1   1    1
                                                   1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ).

Therefore,
               (1 + CEV ) = (1 + CEVC )(1 + CEVH1 )(1 + CEVH2 ).

    Furthermore, the consumption impact on welfare can itself be divided into a part
that captures the change in average consumption, and a part that reflects the change
                                                                                   c0
in the distribution of consumption across the life cycle and different states. Let ¯
and ¯c1 denote the average household consumption before and after the tax change,
then the welfare change due to the change in consumption level, CEVCL , is define
by
                                                         c1 0 0 0
                                                         ¯
                   W ((1 + CEVCL )c0 , h0    0
                                        1 , h2 ) = W (      c , h1 , h2 ),
                                                         c0
                                                         ¯
i.e., CEVCL = ¯  c1 /¯
                     c0 - 1, which is the percentage change of average household
consumption due to the tax change. The welfare change due to the change in the
distribution of consumption, CEVCD , is defined by
             W ((1 + CEVCD )(1 + CEVCL )c0 , h0    0         1   0    0
                                              1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ).

And hence we have,
                     (1 + CEVC ) = (1 + CEVCD )(1 + CEVCL ).

   Similarly, for male and female labor supply changes, we can define CEVH1 L ,


                                           47
CEVH1 D , CEVH2 L , and CEVH2 D by
                                                                   ¯1
                                                                1 h1 0
             W ((1 + CEVH1 L )(1 + CEVC )c0 , h0
                                               1 , h 0
                                                     2 ) = W ( c , ¯0  h1 , h0
                                                                             2 ),
                                                                   h 1

      W ((1 + CEVH1 D )(1 + CEVH1 L )(1 + CEVC )c0 , h0       0           1    1  0
                                                        1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ),
                                                                               ¯1
                                                                            1 h2 0
      W ((1 + CEVH2 L )(1 + CEVH1 )(1 + CEVC )c0 , h0
                                                    1 , h 0
                                                          2 ) =  W ( c1
                                                                        , h  ,
                                                                            1 ¯ 0 h2 ) ,
                                                                               h2
W ((1 + CEVH2 D )(1 + CEVH2 L )(1 + CEVH1 )(1 + CEVC )c0 , h0    0         1   1    1
                                                            1 , h2 ) = W (c , h1 , h2 ),

where h¯0    ¯1 ¯0         ¯1
         1 , h1 , h2 , and h2 are average male and female labor supply before and after

the tax change, and we have
                     (1 + CEVH1 ) = (1 + CEVH1 D )(1 + CEVH1 L ),
                     (1 + CEVH2 ) = (1 + CEVH2 D )(1 + CEVH2 L ).

C     Supplementary Results for the Benchmark Model
C.1     Wage Profiles
   The life-cycle male wage trend is interpolated and extrapolated from Rupert and
Zanella (2015) and plotted in Figure 9. The scale of it is normalized such that the
average male trend wage is 1. The female wage trend is rescaled from the male
wage trend to match the ratio of the average earnings between working males and
females in the BPS data set.
                                               0.1


                                                 0
                         Male Log-Wage Trend




                                               -0.1


                                               -0.2


                                               -0.3


                                               -0.4


                                               -0.5


                                               -0.6
                                                      25   30   35   40     45   50   55   60   65
                                                                          Age

                                                  Figure 9: Male Log-Wage Trend
Notes: This figure shows the male log-wage trend used in the model. The female log-wage trend
has the same shape but a different level that is calibrated to match the data.


                                                                     48
C.2     Age Profiles of Transmission Coefficients

               1.40

                                                       -0.10
               1.30


               1.20                                    -0.15



               1.10                                    -0.20


                      30     40         50   60                30   40         50   60
                                  Age                                    Age




              -0.20                                    1.70

              -0.30                                    1.65

              -0.40                                    1.60

              -0.50                                    1.55

              -0.60                                    1.50
              -0.70
                                                       1.45
              -0.80
                      30     40         50   60                30   40         50   60
                                  Age                                    Age

           Figure 10: Age Profiles of Transmission Coefficients to Labor Income
Notes: This figure plots transmission coefficients to labor income from permanent wage shocks over
the life cycle in the benchmark model with additively separable preferences.

C.3     Performance of the BPS Method




                                                  49
Table 10: Estimation of Transmission Coefficients (Extended)
                Model                  Model BPS
                 True        Baselinea     SSb     Outsidec
       c,u1      0.01         -0.02       -0.01     0.00
       c,u2      0.01          0.02        0.02     0.02
       c,v1      0.35          0.42        0.38     0.38
       c,v2      0.18          0.22        0.20     0.20
       y1 ,u1   1.44           1.47        1.46     1.46
       y1 ,u2   -0.05         -0.03       -0.04    -0.04
       y1 ,v1   1.16           1.10        1.13     1.14
       y1 ,v2   -0.19         -0.20       -0.19    -0.19
       y2 ,u1   -0.12         -0.10       -0.11    -0.11
       y2 ,u2   1.76           1.76        1.76     1.76
       y2 ,v1   -0.51         -0.62       -0.58    -0.58
       y2 ,v2   1.46           1.53        1.54     1.54
      Notes: Only households aged 30-57 are included.
      a
        BPS baseline method.
      b
        Modified BPS method accounting for the social se-
      curity system explicitly. c BPS method allowing un-
      specified outside insurance. The outside insurance co-
      efficient estimated here is  = 0.1460.
         Table 11: Estimation of Frisch Elasticities
                Model                  Model BPS
                                      a
                 True       Baseline       SSb     Outsidec
      c,p       0.578         0.617        0.595    0.593
      c,w1        0          -0.014       -0.002   -0.002
      c,w2        0           0.021        0.022    0.022
      h1 ,p       0           0.012        0.002    0.002
      h1 ,w1    0.528         0.538        0.526    0.525
      h1 ,w2      0           0.003       -0.005   -0.005
      h2 ,p       0          -0.036       -0.037   -0.037
      h2 ,w1      0           0.005       -0.010   -0.010
      h2 ,w2    0.850         0.818        0.810    0.810
     Notes: Only households aged 30-57 are included.
     a
       BPS baseline method.
     b
       Modified BPS method accounting for the social se-
     curity system explicitly. c BPS method allowing un-
     specified outside insurance. The outside insurance co-
     efficient estimated here is  = 0.1460.




                               50
                          Table 12: BPS Method in Small Samples
                   Data               Model                     Model (Small Sample)
                    BPS            BPS         True             BPS            True
       c,u1     -0.14(0.07)       -0.02        0.01       -0.02(0.009)      0.01(0.002)
       c,u2     -0.04(0.07)        0.02        0.01        0.02(0.012)      0.01(0.002)
       c,v1     0.32(0.05)         0.42        0.35        0.42(0.018)      0.34(0.007)
       c,v2     0.19(0.03)         0.22        0.18        0.22(0.014)      0.19(0.007)
       y1 ,u1   1.58(0.16)         1.47         1.44       1.47(0.008)      1.44(0.003)
       y1 ,u2   0.11(0.06)        -0.03        -0.05      -0.03(0.008)     -0.05(0.004)
       y1 ,v1   0.92(0.08)         1.10         1.16       1.11(0.016)      1.16(0.008)
       y1 ,v2   -0.22(0.04)       -0.20        -0.19      -0.20(0.015)     -0.19(0.008)
       y2 ,u1   0.17(0.11)        -0.10        -0.12      -0.10(0.012)     -0.12(0.006)
       y2 ,u2   1.88(0.23)         1.76         1.76       1.76(0.042)      1.75(0.009)
       y2 ,v1   -0.75(0.14)       -0.62        -0.51      -0.61(0.032)     -0.51(0.013)
       y2 ,v2   1.42(0.08)         1.53         1.46       1.52(0.025)      1.45(0.012)
      Notes: The numbers inside parentheses are standard errors: for "Data BPS", they
      are estimated by BPS using a data set with 10479 household-year observations;
      For "Model (Small Sample)", they are computed based on 100 independent model-
      simulated samples, each of which has 10500 household-year observations. Only
      households aged 30-57 are included.


D     The BPS Method in This Paper
D.1    Formulas for the Transmission Coefficients
    We follow closely the approximation method proposed by Blundell, Pistaferri,
and Saporta-Eksten (2016) (BPS) and try to use notations consistent with the origi-
nal paper. Here we only report the formulas we use for the transmission coefficients,
and the details of the derivation are available in Online Appendix 1 of BPS.
    As in BPS, the wage of earner j in household i at age t is determined by
                                          Wj
                           ln Wi,j,t = Zt       Wj + Fi,j,t + ui,j,t ,

where ZtWj is a group of observable characteristics affecting wages such as age, and
                                 Fi,j,t = Fi,j,t-1 + vi,j,t .

This implies
                                            Wj
                        ln Wi,j,t - Zt            Wj = ui,j,t + vi,j,t .
Define wi,j,t as the unexpected growth of wage that is not explained by the ob-



                                                 51
servables, i.e.,
                                    wi,j,t = ui,j,t + vi,j,t .
For simplicity, we omit the household index i and write it as wj,t . Similarly, we
can define unexpected the growth of consumption, labor supply, and labor income
as ct , hj,t , and yj,t .
    Assuming that the after-tax income T (Y ) is given by (1 - )Y 1-µ , BPS show
that by log-inearizing the first-order conditions and the budget constraints of the
two-earner household problem, we have
                                                                                  
                                                                           u1,t
                    ct       c,u1 c,u2 c,v1 c,v2                
                          
                    y1,t  =  y ,u y ,u y ,v1 y ,v  
                                                           u2,t 
                                                                
                                                                ,
                                                         
                           1 1 1 2 1               1 2 
                                                          v1,t 
                    y2,t     y2 ,u1 y2 ,u2 y2 ,v1 y2 ,v2        
                                                          v2,t
where
            c,uj = c,wj ,
                                c, [(1 - µ)(1 - t )(sj,t + h,wj ) - c,wj ]
            c,vj = c,wj +                                                            ,
                                        c, - (1 - µ)(1 - t )h,
           yj ,uj = 1 + hj ,wj ,
          yj ,u-j = hj ,w-j ,
                                     hj , [(1 - µ)(1 - t )(sj,t + h,wj ) - c,wj ]
           yj ,vj = 1 + hj ,wj +                                                         ,
                                              c, - (1 - µ)(1 - t )h,
                                  hj , [(1 - µ)(1 - t )(s-j,t + h,w-j ) - c,w-j ]
          yj ,v-j = hj ,w-j +                                                                ,
                                             c, - (1 - µ)(1 - t )h,
where t is approximately the share of asset in the total discounted wealth for the
household at age t, sj,t is approximately the share of earner j 's discounted labor
income in the total discounted labor income of the household, and
                                               2
                                      h, =           sj,t hj , ,
                                              j =1
                                               2
                                     h,w1 =          sj,t hj ,w1 ,
                                              j =1
                                               2
                                     h,w2 =          sj,t hj ,w2 ,
                                              j =1



                                               52
and
                         
    c, c,w1 c,w2
   h1 , h1 ,w1 h1 ,w2 
                         

   h2 , h2 ,w1 h2 ,w2
                                                                -1
   1     µq1,t-1 (c,w1 + c,w2 )      µq2,t-1 (c,w1 + c,w2 )
=  0 1 + µq1,t-1 (h1 ,w1 + h1 ,w2 ) µq2,t-1 (h1 ,w1 + h1 ,w2 ) 
                                                                

   0 µq1,t-1 (h2 ,w1 + h2 ,w2 ) 1 + µq2,t-1 (h2 ,w1 + h2 ,w2 )
                                                                                                   
    -c,p + c,w1 + c,w2      c,w1 - µq1,t-1 (c,w1 + c,w2 )       c,w2 - µq2,t-1 (c,w1 + c,w2 )
×  h1 ,p + h1 ,w1 + h1 ,w2 h1 ,w1 - µq1,t-1 (h1 ,w1 + h1 ,w2 ) h1 ,w2 - µq2,t-1 (h1 ,w1 + h1 ,w2 ) 
                                                                                                   

   h2 ,p + h2 ,w1 + h2 ,w2 h2 ,w1 - µq1,t-1 (h2 ,w1 + h2 ,w2 ) h2 ,w2 - µq2,t-1 (h2 ,w1 + h2 ,w2 )

where qj,t-1 = Yj,t-1 /Yt-1 is the share of labor income from the earner j at age t - 1.
    The formulas when the separable preference assumption is imposed can be ob-
tained by assuming the values of all the cross Frisch elasticities to be zero. To esti-
mate the outside insurance coefficient  , one only needs to multiply all the (1 - t )
in the formulas by (1 -  ).
    When taking into account the social security system explicitly, we define the
human wealth as the sum of the discounted after-payroll-tax labor income and the
discounted retirement benefits, and multiply all the (1 - t ) in the formulas for  by
one minus the share of retirement benefits in human wealth.
D.2     Estimation
    The estimation method in this paper follows the empirical strategy in the orig-
inal BPS paper. To apply the method, we first need the data on the unexpected
wage growth wj,t , unexpected consumption growth ct , and unexpected labor in-
come growth yj,t at household level. These can be obtained by regressing the
log-differences of the corresponding variables on observable characteristics and
constructing the residuals, i.e.,
                                   log Xt = Z ^ +  xt ,

where Z represents the observable characteristics, and   ^ is the estimated coeffi-
cients. For the simulated data, because all the households are ex ante identical, Z
contains only a group of age dummies.




                                             53
D.2.1    Wage Covariances
    From the wage process, we know
                                       wj,t = uj,t + vj,t .
                                                                              2     2
Following BPS, we estimate the six wage process parameters, u                   1
                                                                                  , u 2
                                                                                        , u1 ,u2 ,
 2     2
v  1
     , v 2
           , and v1 ,v2 , by GMM with an identity weighting matrix using 7 moment
                      2           2
conditions: E [w1       ,t ], E [w2,t ], E [w1,t w2,t ], E [w1,t w1,t-1 ], E [w2,t w2,t-1 ],

E [w1,t w2,t-1 ], and E [w2,t w1,t-1 ]. This step requires only wage data.
D.2.2 Smoothing Parameters
   The smoothing parameters t and sj,t are calculated directly from the data. The
human wealth of household at age t is calculated as
                                                                              -µ
                                                                    (1 - )Yt1
                Human W ealtht = (1 - )Yt1-µ + Et R -t
                                                  k=1
                                                                             +k
                                                                                 .
                                                                      (1 + r)k
Note that the expected future income levels should technically depend on the cur-
rent states of the households. However, in practice, it is difficult to calculate such
conditional expectations exactly, so following BPS, the expected future income lev-
els are only conditional on characteristics that either do not change over time (e.g.
education) or change in a perfectly forecastable way (e.g. age).
    The smoothing parameter t is then
                                            Assetst
                             t =                            .
                                   Assetst + Human W ealtht
And sj,t is simply
                                          Human W ealthj,t
                              sj,t =      2                         .
                                          j =1   Human W ealthj,t
To be exact, the human wealth here should be the discounted after-tax labor income
of each member, but with non-linear income tax at the household level, it is unclear
how to divide the tax between the two members. Therefore, when calculating sj,t ,
we use before-tax labor income of each member.
D.2.3 Frisch Elasticities and Outside Insurance
   For the Frisch elasticities and the "outside insurance" coefficient, we follow
BPS and use the 31 moment conditions in Figure 8 of the original BPS paper (and
Table 1 of the BPS online Appendix) to conduct a GMM estimation with an identity
weighting matrix. The moment conditions include a set of second-order moments


                                                  54
of ct , yj,t , wj,t , and the lag of them. The formulas for these moment conditions
are derived based on the BPS formulas for ct , yj,t and wj,t . For example,
E (c2                                                        2
    t ) = E [(c,u1 u1,t + c,u2 u2,t + c,v1 v1,t + c,v2 v2,t ) ]

= E [2      2      2      2
     c,u1 (2u1 ) + c,u2 (2u2 ) + 2(c,u1 c,u2 )(2u1 u2 )

+ 2      2      2       2
  c,v 1 (v1 ) + c,v2 E (v2 ) + 2(c,v 1 c,v 2 )(v1 v2 )]
                 N      T
         1
= p lim                     {2            2      2            2
                             c,u1 (i, t)(2u1 ) + c,u2 (i, t)(2u2 ) + 2[c,u1 (i, t)c,u2 (i, t)](2u1 u2 )
        NT      i=1 t=1

+   2            2
    c,v 1 (i, t)(v1 )   + 2           2
                          c,v2 (i, t)(v2 ) + 2[c,v 1 (i, t)c,v 2 (i, t)](v1 v2 )}.

The results for other moment conditions can be derived in a similar way. We also
                                                                pc
impose the symmetry assumptions hj ,p = -c,wj (1-)(11  -µ)Y -µ wj hj
                                                                     , j = 1, 2, and
h2 ,w1 = h1 ,w2 w 1 h1
                w2 h2
                       as the original BPS paper.
D.2.4 Transmission Coefficients
    Collecting the estimation results from previous steps, the transmission coeffi-
cients for each household at each age are calculated using the formulas in Appendix
D.1. The reported transmission coefficients are the sample averages of them.

E       Supplementary Results For Non-separable Prefer-
        ences
    This section reports the calibration of the model with non-separable preferences
and presents all the figures and tables for the model with non-separable preferences
that are not included in the main text, each of which corresponds to one figure or
table for the benchmark model with additively separable preferences.
E.1      Parameters for Non-separable Preferences
    With non-separable preferences, Frisch elasticities are no longer deep param-
eters. Given the functional form in this paper, we are able to derive the Frisch
elasticities as functions of preference parameters and allocations. The formulas
are shown in Appendix F. The preference parameters are then calibrated jointly to
match the Frisch elasticities estimated by BPS in the absence of the separability
assumption, and average hours worked by males and females in the BPS data. The
parameters  ,  and  mainly affect the Frisch elasticities, whereas the parameters


                                                    55
 and  mainly affect labor supply. In particular, for a given set of parameters, the
model is first solved and a panel of household data are simulated. Then, based on
the simulated data and the formulas for Frisch elasticities, the sample averages of
Frisch elasticities and labor supply are calculated and compared with the calibration
targets.40
    For the non-separable preferences, we add an additional parameter , which
is a constant that scales the marginal utility of consumption after retirement.  is
chosen such that the age profile of consumption is smooth at retirement. Consump-
tion typically falls upon retirement in the data, but the literature on the retirement
consumption puzzle shows that it is mainly due to work-related consumption ex-
penditures not modeled here.41
    The values of calibrated parameters of the model with non-separable prefer-
ences and the implied Frisch elasticities are summarized in Tables 13 and 14. The
moments matched in calibration and their values from data are in Table 15.




  40
      Note that, given the functional form of the utility function, there are not enough degrees of
freedom to match all Frisch elasticities perfectly, and we focus on matching the upper triangular
part of the matrix of Frisch elasticities, in particular, c,p , c,w1 , c,w2 , h1 ,w1 , h1 ,w2 and h2 ,w2 .
In fact, there might be no utility function that can match exactly all Frisch elasticities estimated by
BPS, due to the theoretical restrictions between Frisch elasticities imposed by their definitions. In
the calibration of the non-separable utility function we then need to choose between a good fit of
own-price elasticities (c,p , h1 ,w1 and h2 ,w2 ) and cross-elasticities (c,w1 , c,w2 and h1 ,w2 ). The
chosen parameterization is a compromise between both.
   41
      See Hurst (2008) for a survey of this literature.


                                                   56
                   Table 13: Calibrated Model Parameters
                        (Non-separable Preferences)
 Parameter    Governing                                               Value
 A. Preferences
              discount rate of utility                            1.006 × 10-2
              weight of consumption                                   0.124
              weight of male labor supply                             0.413
              consumption Frisch elasticity                            2.24
              substitution between consumption and leisure           -3.00
              substitution between male and female labor supply        3.00
              consumption level after retirement                      0.695
     f        fixed utility cost of female participation             0.0155
 B. Wage Process
 eg2,t -g1,t female-male wage trend ratio                             0.499
 C. Financial Market
     A        borrowing constraints                                  -0.124
Notes: This table reports the values of parameters in the model with non-separable
preferences that are different from the benchmark model with additively separable
preferences. Parameters not included in this table share the same values as in the
benchmark model.




                    Table 14: Calibrated Frisch Elasticities
                         (Non-separable Preferences)
                                 Data BPS       Model True
                     c,p       0.417(0.122)        0.413
                     c,w1     -0.162(0.074)       -0.220
                     c,w2     -0.050(0.077)       -0.094
                     h1 ,p     0.126(0.057)        0.326
                     h1 ,w1    0.681(0.189)        0.940
                     h1 ,w2    0.159(0.071)        0.188
                     h2 ,p     0.079(0.121)        0.326
                     h2 ,w1    0.325(0.140)        0.440
                     h2 ,w2    0.958(0.267)        0.688
                    Notes: The numbers inside parentheses
                    are standard errors from BPS. Only house-
                    holds aged 30-57 are included.




                                       57
              Table 15: Empirical Targets Matched
                  (Non-separable Preferences)
 Empirical Targets                                  Data    Model
 average male labor income                            1     1.000
 average female labor income | work                 0.491   0.490
 female-male ratio of average labor supply | work   0.733   0.734
 average female non-participation rate              0.20    0.200
 average net worth                                  4.188   4.190
 median debt-to-income ratio | debt (age 21-30)     0.163   0.163
Notes: This table reports the empirical moments matched by the model
with non-separable preferences. Moments are for age 30-57 house-
holds unless specified otherwise.




                                58
E.2      Life Cycle Profiles




                       Figure 11: Life Cycles of Cross-sectional Means
                                 (Non-separable Preferences)
Notes: This figure shows the life cycles of cross-sectional means in the model with non-separable
preferences (solid lines) and in the data (dotted lines) together with the 95% confidence interval
(grey bands). The data are from the BPS data set including age 30-57 households. The consumption
life cycle from the data is scaled up to match the life-cycle average of consumption in the model.
(Note that due to the normalization choice, the unit of labor supply here is different from that in the
benchmark model.)




                                                 59
                          Share of Borrowing Constrained Households




                                                                      0.6


                                                                      0.5


                                                                      0.4


                                                                      0.3


                                                                      0.2


                                                                      0.1


                                                                       0

                                                                        22   23   24   25    26    27   28   29   30
                                                                                             Age

                  Figure 12: Share of Borrowing Constrained Households
                               (Non-separable Preferences)
Notes: This figure plots the share of young households on the borrowing constraints in the model
with non-separable preferences.




                                                                                            60
    Figure 13: Life Cycles of Cross-sectional Variances and Female Non-participation
                               (Non-separable Preferences)
Notes: This figure shows the life cycles of cross-sectional variances and female non-participation
rate in the model with non-separable preferences (solid lines) and in the data (dotted lines) together
with the 95% confidence interval (grey bands). The data are from the BPS data set including age 30-
57 households. The life cycles of variances in the model are shifted to match the life-cycle averages
of variances in the data.




                                                 61
E.3     Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance
                                   Male Permanent Shocks                                 Female Permanent Shocks

                          1.00                                                    1.00
              Insurance




                                                                      Insurance
                          0.90
                                                                                  0.95


                          0.80
                                                                                  0.90

                          0.70
                                                                                  0.85
                                  30     40         50      60                           30     40         50       60
                                              Age                                                    Age

                                   Male Transitory Shocks                                Female Transitory Shocks

                                                                                  1.05
                          1.10
              Insurance




                                                                      Insurance
                          1.00                                                    1.00


                          0.90
                                                                                  0.95

                          0.80

                                  30     40         50      60                           30     40         50       60
                                              Age                                                    Age

                                 Figure 14: Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance
                                            (Non-separable Preferences)
Notes: This figure plots consumption insurance over the life cycle against male (left) and female
(right) permanent (top) and transitory (bottom) wage shocks in the model with non-separable pref-
erences.

E.4     Performance of the BPS Method




                                                                 62
Table 16: Estimation of Transmission Coefficients
           (Non-separable Preferences)
          Model                 Model BPS
           True        Baselinea     SSb    Outsidec
 c,u1     -0.15         -0.16      -0.16     -0.15
 c,u2     -0.07         -0.07      -0.07     -0.07
 c,v1     0.24           0.32       0.29      0.27
 c,v2     0.13           0.14       0.12      0.11
 y1 ,u1   1.70           1.73       1.72      1.72
 y1 ,u2   0.09           0.10       0.10      0.10
 y1 ,v1   0.98           0.91       0.94      0.95
 y1 ,v2   -0.27         -0.26      -0.25     -0.25
 y2 ,u1   0.18           0.19       0.19      0.19
 y2 ,u2   1.62           1.59       1.59      1.59
 y2 ,v1   -0.47         -0.57      -0.55     -0.55
 y2 ,v2   1.16           1.26       1.26      1.27
Notes: Only households aged 30-57 are included.
a
  BPS baseline method.
b
  Modified BPS method accounting for the social se-
curity system explicitly. c BPS method allowing un-
specified outside insurance. The outside insurance co-
efficient estimated here is  = 0.2218.




                         63
                  Table 17: Estimation of Frisch Elasticities
                         (Non-separable Preferences)
                        Model                  Model BPS
                         True         Baselinea     SSb      Outsidec
                                                                    a


              c,p        0.413        0.432        0.399      0.377
              c,w1      -0.220        -0.213      -0.206     -0.202
              c,w2      -0.094        -0.091      -0.093     -0.094
              h1 ,p      0.326         0.254      0.246      0.242
              h1 ,w1     0.940         0.914      0.905      0.901
              h1 ,w2     0.188         0.177      0.175      0.174
              h2 ,p      0.326         0.221      0.227      0.230
              h2 ,w1     0.440         0.362      0.357      0.356
              h2 ,w2     0.688         0.663      0.663      0.664
             Notes: Only households aged 30-57 are included.
             a
               BPS baseline method.
             b
               Modified BPS method accounting for the social secu-
             rity system explicitly. c BPS method allowing unspeci-
             fied outside insurance. The outside insurance coefficient
             estimated here is  = 0.2218.

                    Table 18: BPS Method in Small Samples
                          (Non-separable Preferences)
             Data                Model                 Model (Small Sample)
              BPS            BPS       True            BPS               True
 c,u1     -0.14(0.07)       -0.16     -0.15        -0.16(0.009)      -0.15(0.003)
 c,u2     -0.04(0.07)       -0.07     -0.07        -0.07(0.010)      -0.07(0.003)
 c,v1     0.32(0.05)         0.32      0.24         0.32(0.012)       0.24(0.004)
 c,v2     0.19(0.03)         0.14      0.13         0.14(0.008)       0.13(0.004)
 y1 ,u1   1.58(0.16)         1.73      1.70         1.73(0.014)       1.70(0.005)
 y1 ,u2   0.11(0.06)         0.10      0.09         0.10(0.011)       0.09(0.005)
 y1 ,v1   0.92(0.08)         0.91      0.98         0.91(0.018)       0.98(0.009)
 y1 ,v2   -0.22(0.04)       -0.26     -0.27        -0.26(0.018)      -0.27(0.010)
 y2 ,u1   0.17(0.11)         0.19      0.18         0.19(0.016)       0.18(0.006)
 y2 ,u2   1.88(0.23)         1.59      1.62         1.59(0.032)       1.61(0.009)
 y2 ,v1   -0.75(0.14)       -0.57     -0.47        -0.57(0.025)      -0.47(0.010)
 y2 ,v2   1.42(0.08)         1.26      1.16         1.26(0.019)       1.16(0.009)
Notes: The numbers inside parentheses are standard errors: for "Data BPS", they
are estimated by BPS using a data set with 10479 household-year observations;
For "Model (Small Sample)", they are computed based on 100 independent model-
simulated samples, each of which has 10500 household-year observations. Only
households aged 30-57 are included.


                                       64
E.5         Consumption Insurance Decomposition
                            Table 19: Consumption Insurance Decomposition (Male Shocks)
                                            (Non-separable Preferences)
                                                                          Insurance Provided by
                                         Male                         Female Earner                           Income          Savings+             Total
 Economy                                Earner        Composition Extensive Intensive                          Tax       Social Security        Insurance

 A. Permanent Shock
 1-Earner, exogenous income                ­                 ­                ­                    ­          13.3%               34.7%           48.0%
    + male intensive margin              18.5%               ­                ­                    ­          10.8%               39.4%           68.8%
    + female exogenous income            8.9%              27.7%              ­                    ­           8.4%               27.9%           72.9%
    + female extensive margin            6.5%              22.9%            7.2%                   ­           8.4%               29.0%           74.1%
    + female intensive margin           -0.05%             29.6%            2.6%                 13.9%         7.2%               23.9%           77.0%

 B. Transitory Shock
 1-Earner, exogenous income                ­                 ­                ­                    ­          13.3%               84.5%           97.7%
    + male intensive margin             -74.2%               ­                ­                    ­          23.1%           169.7%              118.6%
    + female exogenous income -62.8%                       43.9%              ­                    ­          15.8%           113.9%              110.8%
    + female extensive margin           -67.1%             41.0%           -2.0%                   ­          17.0%           124.5%              113.3%
    + female intensive margin           -65.6%             48.9%           -0.5%                 -3.8%        16.0%           117.1%              112.3%

Notes: This table reports the decomposition results of consumption insurance against male permanent and transitory wage shocks in a sequence of
economies with different sets of insurance channels available. Households aged 21-65 are included. Total Insurance =          m   Insurance(m). Details about
the decomposition method are in Appendix A


                                  Male Permanent Shocks                                                Female Permanent Shocks
                          1.0

                                                                                          1.0

                          0.5
              Insurance




                                                                              Insurance




                                                                                          0.5



                          0.0
                                                                                          0.0




                          -0.5                                                            -0.5

                                 30      40         50           60                                    30     40         50            60
                                              Age                                                                  Age
                                           Male               Female                        Income Tax              Savings+ SS

                           Figure 15: Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance Decomposition
                                             (Non-separable Preferences)
Notes: This figure plots consumption insurance by source over the life cycle against male (left panel)
and female (right panel) permanent wage shocks in the model with non-separable preferences. The
sources are the male earner (solid line), the female earner (dash line), progressive income tax (dash-
dot line), and savings plus social security (dotted line).



                                                                         65
F     Frisch Elasticities for Non-separable Preferences
    In this section, we derive the formulas for the Frisch elasticities with the non-
separable preferences. They are generally functions of household allocations, i.e.,
they are not deep parameters. So we use the sample averages of them as the ap-
proximated true values of the Frisch elasticities, i.e., the "Model True" results.
    The utility function for the non-separable preferences is
                                                                   1-
                                                       -
                            {C  + (1 - )[H1
                                          
                                            + (1 -  )H2 ] }             -1
           u(C, H1 , H2 ) =                                                  .
                                           1-
The intertemporal budget constraint is
                     P C + P A = P (1 + r)A + W1 H1 + W2 H2 ,

where P , W1 , and W2 are the price of the consumption good and the wages for male
and female earners. From the recursive formulation of the household problem, the
first-order conditions are
                          1-
                 uC =       -1   C  -1 = P,
                              1-             
                 uH1 = -        -1   (1 - )-  -1 H1
                                                   -1
                                                      = -W1 ,
                              1-             
                 uH2 = -        -1   (1 - )-  -1 (1 -  )H2
                                                          -1
                                                             = -W2 ,

where  is the lagrangian multiplier on the budget constraint,   C  + (1 -
                    -                         
)[H1    + (1 -  )H2  ]  , and   H1  + (1 -  )H2 . Taking log difference for both
sides of these equations, we get
                      1-
                          - 1)d ln  + ( - 1)d ln C = d ln  + d ln P,
                          (
                        
        1-               
      (    - 1)d ln  + (- - 1)d ln  + ( - 1)d ln H1 = d ln  + d ln W1 ,
                         
        1-               
      (    - 1)d ln  + (- - 1)d ln  + ( - 1)d ln H2 = d ln  + d ln W2 ,
                         
and
          d ln  = Bd ln H1 + (1 - B)d ln H2 ,
                            
          d ln  =  Ad ln C - (1 - A)d ln 
                            
                 =  Ad ln C -  (1 - A)Bd ln H1 -  (1 - A)(1 - B)d ln H2 ,
                           
            C             H1
where A     
                 and B    
                               . Substitute d ln  and d ln  with the formulas above,



                                            66
the system of equations becomes
                                                                     
                                 d ln C             d ln  + d ln P
                                                        
                         G× d ln H1  =  d ln  + d ln W1  ,
                                                        
                                 d ln H2           d ln  + d ln W2
where
                                                                                                        
   ( - 1)(1 - A) -  A          ( - 1 +  )(1 - A)B                    ( - 1 +  )(1 - A)(1 - B)
G=    (1 -  -  )A     [( - 1 +  )(1 - A) - ( + )]B + ( - 1)     [( - 1 +  )(1 - A) - ( + )](1 - B)      .
                                                                                                        

      (1 -  -  )A         [( - 1 +  )(1 - A) - ( + )]B      [( - 1 +  )(1 - A) - ( + )](1 - B) + ( - 1)

By the definition of Frisch elasticities, we have
                                                                
                                          -c,p c,w1      c,w2
                             G -1 = 
                                                            
                                     h  ,p h   ,w   h  ,w
                                                            .
                                     1       1   1   1    2 


                                     h2 ,p h2 ,w1 h2 ,w2
Note that because the values of A and B depend on the allocations chosen by house-
holds, G and the Frisch elasticities all depend on the allocations and are not deep
parameters.
    If we want the Frisch elasticities to be deep parameters with such utility func-
tion, we must have A and B as constants. From the FOC's, this would require
                                                 1-
                                                      A = P C,
                                        1-
                                             (1 - A)B = W1 H1 ,
                                1-
                                     (1 - A)(1 - B) = W2 H2 .


                                    A       PC
                                         =       = Constant,
                                (1 - A)B   W1 H1
                                 A          PC
                                         =       = Constant.
                          (1 - A)(1 - B)   W2 H2
This implies the utility function needs to take the Cobb-Douglas form, i.e.,  = 0
and  = 0. In that case, the utility function becomes
                                                    1- -(1-) 1-
                                           [C  (H1 H2  )    ]   -1
                     U (C, H1 , H2 ) =                             .
                                                      1-
Follow the same method, we can derive that
                                                                                     
         - 1 -        (1 -  )( - 1)                 (1 -  )( - 1)(1 -  )
   G =  (1 -  ) - ( - 1) + ( - 2) + ( - 1) - ( - 1)(1 -  ) + ( - 2)(1 -  ) + (1 -  )  ,
                                                                                     

        (1 -  )  - ( - 1) + ( - 2) +        - ( - 1)(1 -  ) + ( - 2)(1 -  ) - 

and the Frisch elasticity matrix is just G-1 . However, the Cobb-Douglas form is not


                                               67
a good choice because it implies that the ratios between male labor income, female
labor income and consumption expenditures are all constants independent of the
price of consumption and wages, which is counterfactual.

G     Computation Method
    The household optimization problem is solved backwards using the endogenous
grid method proposed by Carroll (2006). With the extensive margin of female labor
supply, for each iteration and each household state, the optimization problem is
solved twice under two alternative scenarios: the current period female labor supply
is strictly positive or zero. The final optimal policy is obtained by comparing the
discounted utility achieved in these two scenarios.
    The grid for asset has 100 grid points, and the distance between two adjacent
grid points increases with the asset level such that the grid points are denser around
the low asset levels where borrowing constraints are more likely to bind. The range
of the asset grid is age-dependent and eventually endogenously determined by the
model to have a better coverage of the more relevant state space.
    The joint process of the two earners' permanent wage components is approxi-
mated by a discrete Markov process with age-dependent sets of states and transition
matrices, and each state corresponds to one possible realization of the two perma-
nent components. The number of states is fixed, but the values of them vary across
ages to match the unconditional dispersion of the joint distribution over the life cy-
cle. The grid points and transition matrices are constructed in the same spirit as
Tauchen (1986), and try to mimic the joint unit-root process. The grid for the two
permanent components has 11 points in each dimension, so there are in total 121
grid points at each age. The discretization of the transitory components is similar
and simpler. Since the transitory components are iid across ages, the grid no longer
needs to be age-dependent, and no transition matrix is required. The grid for the
transitory components has 5 points in each dimension, so there are in total 25 grid
points.




                                         68
References
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. "Consumption
   Inequality and Family Labor Supply". American Economic Review 106 (2):
   387­435.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2006. "The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving
   Dynamic Stochastic Optimization Problems". Economics Letters 91 (3): 312­
   320.
Conesa, Juan Carlos, Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger. 2009. "Taxing Capital? Not a
   Bad Idea after All!" American Economic Review 99 (1): 25­48.
Hurst, Erik. 2008. "Understanding Consumption in Retirement: Recent Develop-
   ments." In Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving, ed. by John Ameriks
   and Olivia S. Mitchell. Oxford University Press.
Rupert, Peter, and Giulio Zanella. 2015. "Revisiting Wage, Earnings, and Hours
   Profiles". Journal of Monetary Economics 72:114­130.
Tauchen, George. 1986. "Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate
   and Vector Autoregressions". Economics Letters 20 (2): 177­181.




                                       69
