                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     A GLOBAL VIEW OF CREATIVE DESTRUCTION

                                       Chang-Tai Hsieh
                                       Peter J. Klenow
                                        Ishan B. Nath

                                      Working Paper 26461
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26461


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We thank Beiling Yan of Statistics Canada for her assistance with the Canadian manufacturing
data; Jean-Felix Brouillette, Eric English and Erxiao Mo for excellent research assistance; and
Sam Kortum for very helpful comments. Hsieh acknowledges support from Chicago Booth's
Polsky Center and Klenow from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research..
All results have been reviewed by the U.S. Census Bureau and Statistics Canada to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Chang-Tai Hsieh, Peter J. Klenow, and Ishan B. Nath. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Global View of Creative Destruction
Chang-Tai Hsieh, Peter J. Klenow, and Ishan B. Nath
NBER Working Paper No. 26461
November 2019
JEL No. F11,F14,F43

                                        ABSTRACT

In the wake of the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement, both the U.S. and Canada experienced a
sustained increase in job reallocation, including firms moving into exporting. The change
involved big firms as much as small firms. To mimic these patterns, we formulate a model
of innovation by both domestic and foreign firms. In the model, trade liberalization quickens
the pace of creative destruction, thereby speeding the flow of technology across countries.
The resulting dynamic gains from trade liberalization are an order of magnitude larger than the
gains in a standard static model.

Chang-Tai Hsieh                                Ishan B. Nath
Booth School of Business                       University of Chicago
University of Chicago                          inath33@gmail.com
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu

Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Klenow@Stanford.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26461
2                             HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH


1    Introduction

Studies by Bernard and Jensen (1999), Eaton and Kortum (2002), Melitz (2003),
and others placed heterogeneous firms at the center of research on interna-
tional trade. The first wave of follow-up research has focused mostly on models
in which trade liberalization leads to a burst of job reallocation and growth, but
no medium or long run effect on either.
    A growing literature seeks to assess the growth effects of trade. Empirical
studies include Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2016) and Aghion, Bergeaud,
Lequien and Melitz (2018). Modeling builds on the foundational work of Rivera-
Batiz and Romer (1991) and Grossman and Helpman (1993). Recent efforts
include Alvarez, Buera and Lucas (2013), Buera and Oberfield (2017), Akcigit,
Ates and Impullitti (2018), and Perla, Tonetti and Waugh (2019).
    In this paper we present facts and a model on the interaction of creative
destruction and trade. We document job reallocation tied to exports in U.S.
and Canadian manufacturing firms before and after the 1988 U.S.-Canada Free
Trade Agreement. Exit and job destruction rates rose for big firms and small
firms, a result in line with the findings of Holmes and Stevens (2014) for the U.S.
in the wake of the China shock.
    In our model, ideas flow across two countries through trade. Innovators
draw from a Pareto distribution building on the technology of the firm selling in
the local market. When innovators take over the market for an existing product
(creative destruction), job reallocation takes place. Domestic firms can take
over foreign markets for a product, and foreign firms can take over the domes-
tic market. When this happens, exported products are also reallocated across
countries.
    The first version of the model features exogenous arrival rates of innovation
as in Garcia-Macia, Hsieh and Klenow (2019). It is a two-economy version of
the influential Klette and Kortum (2004) model of creative destruction, only
with exogenous arrival rates. Our second version of the model endogenizes the
                              GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                 3


arrival rates. We build in diminishing returns to the stock of ideas a la Jones
(1995) and Bloom, Jones, Van Reenen and Webb (2019), so that growth is semi-
endogenous and linked to growth in the number of researchers. In both models,
the two trading countries grow at the same rate in the long run.
   We calibrate the model to fit manufacturing moments in the U.S. vs. the rest
of the OECD. We match TFP growth, growth in research investment, exports
relative to all shipments, and the share of entrants in total employment. To pin
down the Pareto shape parameter we fit the gap in revenue per worker for ex-
porters vs. non-exporters in U.S. plants. We also target value added per worker
and employment in the U.S. vs the rest of the OECD. We infer higher innovation
rates in the U.S. given its higher GDP per worker.
   Once calibrated, we analyze steady states and transition dynamics in re-
sponse to tariff changes. In the exogenous arrival rate version of the model,
lower tariffs boost the growth rate in both the U.S. and the rest of the OECD.
Because the U.S. is more innovative, the rest of the OECD benefits more and its
real consumption wage rises relative to that of the U.S. Lower tariffs also lead to
more job destruction. There is a spike immediately after tariffs are lowered, but
job destruction remains higher in the new steady state.
   In the endogenous arrival version of the model, lower tariffs boost growth
only temporarily. This is because of diminishing returns in idea production.
Ideas do spread faster with lower tariffs, so that each country ascends to a higher
TFP path than before the liberalization. The rest of the OECD benefits more
because they receive more U.S. ideas than they send to the U.S. Welfare gains
from trade, in consumption-equivalent terms, are about 37% in the U.S. and
69% in the rest of the OECD, an order of magnitude higher than in a standard
model with no changes in technology.
   To dissect our dynamic gains from trade, we entertain alternative assump-
tions about idea flows across countries. When we assume countries learn par-
tially from local producers rather than sellers in the local market, the gains from
trade shrink toward the static gains. Thus idea flows are critical to our large
4                              HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



dynamic gains from trade. When we assume countries specialize in innovating
on products they produce, however, the dynamic gains remain large for the U.S.
Given its innovativeness, the U.S. gains a lot from specializing its draws on a
subset of products. Due to limited idea flows across countries, the rest of the
OECD benefits less from trade when there is research specialization. Models
with limited idea flows and research specialization, however, predict much less
reallocation of exported products across countries than observed in the data.
    Our effort is most closely related to three recent papers. Perla, Tonetti and
Waugh (2019) study the impact of trade on exit, entry, domestic technology
diffusion, and growth in a model of symmetric countries. Like us, they find large
dynamic gains from trade. They derive analytical solutions in a model of many
countries, whereas we simulate a two-country model calibrated to evidence
on trade and job flows. Our focus is innovation, idea flows across countries,
and creative destruction, whereas their focus is on the interaction of trade with
domestic technology diffusion.
    We follow Buera and Oberfield (2017) in studying international technology
diffusion in a model with Bertrand competition. They arrive at Frechet distri-
butions of productivity within countries, allowing them to characterize multi-
lateral trade flows as in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003). Our focus is
more empirical, as we try to match evidence on job reallocation associated with
creative destruction from trade.
    Akcigit, Ates and Impullitti (2018) are similar to us in characterizing the im-
pact of tariffs on growth in a two-country model with technology spillovers.
Theirs is a step-by-step innovation model, with escape-from-competition ef-
fects that are crucial for how trade can induce more innovation. They analyze
transition dynamics and optimal R&D subsidies. Their knowledge spillovers
take the form of followers catching up to leaders in one big jump if they fall too
far behind. They emphasize the convergence of patenting in other advanced
countries toward the U.S. in recent decades. In our model and empirics, in
contrast, we focus on how trade affects job reallocation.
                                 GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                      5


        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out nine facts
from U.S. and Canadian manufacturing that we attempt to explain. In Section 3
we present a two-country model of creative destruction and growth with exoge-
nous innovation rates. Section 4 endogenizes the innovation rates. In Section
5 we carry out additional exercises (alternative assumptions about idea flows,
U.S.-Canada trade liberalization). Section 6 concludes.




2        Facts from Canadian and U.S. Manufacturing

We use the U.S. Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) and Canada's Annual
Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The LBD contains administrative employment
records on all nonfarm private establishments with employees in the U.S. for
every year from 1977 to 2013; we look at establishments owned by firms with at
least one manufacturing establishment in the given year.1 The ASM covers all
but the smallest manufacturing establishments every year from 1973 to 2012.2
        From the LBD and ASM we use plant and firm identifiers, employment, and
industry (four-digit SIC or six-digit NAICS). The ASM has information on ex-
ports every five years from 1974 to 1989, for 1993, and every year from 1996
to 2012. The LBD does not measure exports but this information is available
in the micro-data of the U.S. manufacturing census every five years starting in
1987. We merge the establishments in the manufacturing census with the LBD
to measure exports in our LBD sample.3 We aggregate establishment data in the
U.S. and Canada to the firm level and highlight nine facts:


    1. Large Job Flows. Table 1 (rows 1 and 2) presents manufacturing job cre-
          ation and destruction rates over five years in Canada (from 1973 to 2012)

    1
     We include the non-manufacturing establishments of such firms to account for the
relocation of jobs from establishments classified as manufacturing to establishments of the
same firm that are classified as non-manufacturing.
   2
     The survey threshold is currently annual sales of 30 thousand Canadian dollars.
   3
     The LBD and the manufacturing census use the same plant identifiers.
6                                  HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                       Table 1: Job Flows in the U.S. and Canada

                                                            U.S.       Canada
               Job Creation Rate                          31.4%         32.4%

               Job Destruction Rate                       36.6%         31.6%

               Job Destruction from Large Firms           30.7%         15.3%

               Job Creation from Exports                   2.0%         23.3%

            Note: Job creation and destruction rate are calculated over successive
            five year periods from 1987 to 2012 for the U.S. and from 1973 to 2012
            for Canada. Jobs from exports are imputed as the product of firm
            employment and the ratio of exports to total shipments. "Large" refers
            to above-mean employment in the initial year of each five year period.



        and in the U.S. (from 1987 to 2012).4 As in the classic work by Davis, Halti-
        wanger and Schuh (1996), job flows are large. The average job creation and
        destruction rate over five years is about 30% in Canada. The average job
        creation rate in U.S. manufacturing from 1973 to 2012 is also about 30%.
        The U.S. job destruction rate is about 5 percentage points higher.


    2. Job destruction due to "large" firms. Row 3 in Table 1 presents the job de-
        struction rate among firms with above-average employment in the initial
        period. Such large firms account for 84% of all job destruction in the U.S.
        and 48% of all job destruction in Canadian manufacturing.
    4
    The job creation rate between year t and t + 5 is defined as the ratio of (a) the sum
of employment of new firms established between year t and year t + 5 and the change in
employment among expanding firms between the two years; to (b) average total employment
across years t and t + 5. The job destruction rate between years t and t + 5 is the sum of
employment in year t of firms that exited between the two years and the change in employment
between years t and t + 5 among contracting firms divided by average total employment (in
the beginning and ending years). Job flows for the U.S. are calculated for every five year period
from 1987 to 2012. Job creation, destruction, and job destruction from large firms for Canada
are calculated every five years from 1973 to 2008. For 2008 to 2012, we multiply by 5/4 to impute
the flow over five years. Job creation from exports in Canada is calculated from 1974­1979,
1979­1984, 1984­1989, 1989­1993, 1993­1998, 1998­2003, 2003­2008, and 2008­2012, where we
multiply the rate from 1989­1993 and 2008­2012 by 5/4 to impute the flow over five years.
                                   GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                          7


   3. Job creation due to exports. We impute employment due to exports as
       the product of a firm's employment and the ratio of its exports to total
       shipments. Job creation from exports is the sum of imputed employment
       in year t + 5 of new exporters (firms that enter into exporting between
       year t and t + 5) and the change in imputed employment from firms where
       exports increased between the two years. We divide this measure of job
       creation from exports by the average of aggregate employment in years t
       and t + 5. The resulting number, in row 4 in Table 1, shows that the job
       creation rate due to exports is 23% in Canada. The job creation rate due to
       exports in the U.S. is much smaller at 2%.5

   4. Reallocation of export products across countries. Table 2 presents two
       measures of the reallocation of exported products across countries.6 The
       top panel shows the probability that an exported product in a given year
       is no longer exported by the same country the following year. This num-
       ber is about 8% for the average 4-digit manufacturing U.S. export (row 1)
       and 15% for the bottom half of U.S. manufacturing export products.7 The
       bottom panel replicates Hanson, Lind and Muendler (2018)'s measure of
       mean reversion of a country's top export. Row 3 shows the share of the
       country's top exported product in total exports in year t. Row 4 shows the
       ratio of the export share of the same product in year t - 5 relative to the
       share in year t. This ratio averages 66.5% for the U.S. and 86.2% for the
       other OECD countries.8

We next document how job flows changed after the Canada-U.S. Free Trade
Agreement (CUSFTA). This agreement was signed on January 2, 1988, and man-
dated annual reductions in tariffs and other trade barriers over a 20-year period
   5
     Lincoln, McCallum and Siemer (2019) estimate that 29% of U.S. exports in 2002 were by
firms that had been exporting for fewer than 5 years.
   6
     A product in Table 2 is one of the 540 4-digit SITC (revision 2) manufacturing industries in
Feenstra, Lipsey, Deng, Ma and Mo (2005)'s World Trade Database.
   7
     Rows 1 and 2 in Table 2 are the average of one-year rates from 1982­1983 to 2002­2003.
   8
     These numbers are the average of five-year panels from 1982­1987 to 2002­2007.
8                                  HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



             Table 2: Reallocation of Export Products Across Countries

                                                            U.S.       Rest of OECD
         Annual Exit Rate
          All Exported Products                             7.8%            8.4%
          Bottom 50% in Export Sales                       15.1%           15.7%

         Top Export Product
          Share of total exports year t                     5.7%           12.8%
          Share of total exports year t - 5 / year t       66.5%           86.2%


Note: A product is one of 540 4-digit manufacturing industries in Feenstra et al. (2005). Rows 1
and 2 show the probability an exported product in year t is no longer exported by the country in
year t+1, for all exported products and products in bottom half of export sales, respectively. Row
3 shows the share of the top exported product in total exports. Row 4 shows the relative share
of the same product five years before. Entries are averages of one year panels from 1982­1983 to
2002-2003 (rows 1-2) or five year panels from 1982­1987 to 2002­2007 (rows 3-4).



starting on January 1, 1989.9 For Canada, we highlight three differences in 1988­
2003 (Post-CUSFTA) versus 1973­1988 (Pre-CUSFTA):


    5. Job flows increased after trade liberalization. Table 3 shows that job cre-
        ation and destruction rates increased in Canada after CUSFTA.10

    6. Large firms increased job destruction after trade liberalization. Holmes
        and Stevens (2014) show that large U.S. manufacturing firms were adversely
        affected by the surge in imports from China. Row 3 in Table 3 documents a
        similar fact in Canada. The job destruction rate among large (above-mean
        employment) firms increased by 2 percentage points after CUSFTA, out of
        an overall increase in job destruction of 7 percentage points.

    7. Job creation from exports increased after trade liberalization. The last
    9
     The average tariff on manufacturing imports in CUSFTA fell from over 8% to below 2% in
Canada and from 4% to below 1% in the U.S.
  10
     Our Online Appendix (http://klenow.com/global-view-creative-appendix.pdf) shows
that job creation (destruction) rose more in Canadian 2-digit industries with bigger export
(import) tariff cuts.
                                   GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                               9


                               Table 3: Job Flows in Canada

                                                   Pre-CUSFTA         Post-CUSFTA
          Job Creation Rate                           30.0%               31.3%

          Job Destruction Rate                        25.5%               32.7%

          Job Destruction from Large Firms            22.1%               24.0%

          Job Creation from Exports                    9.0%               17.7%

         Note: Pre-CUSFTA is 1978 to 1988. Post-CUSFTA is 1988 to 2003.



         row in Table 3 shows that job creation from exports increased by almost 9
         percentage points in Canada after the trade agreement.


       Table 4 presents the change in job flows in U.S. manufacturing after CUSFTA.
The timing of the U.S. data does not align as well with the trade agreement so
here we focus on the 1972­1987 as the "pre-CUSFTA" period and 1992­2012
as the "post-CUSFTA" period. As documented by a large literature, there was
also a surge of imports from China in the 1992­2012 period, so one should
not interpret the changes in Table 4 as coming only from CUSFTA. Still, job
destruction increased markedly after 1987, by about 6 percentage points (row
2).11 The increase in job destruction was entirely driven by large firms.
       We now look at differences between exporting and non-exporting firms. Fig-
ure 1 plots the distribution of employment (in the left panel) and labor pro-
ductivity (revenue per worker, in the right panel) from the U.S. manufacturing
census in 2012. This figure reveals two additional facts:

   8. Average labor productivity and employment is higher for exporters than
         for non-exporters. This can easily be seen in Figure 1.
  11
    This may seem surprising given the evidence on declining dynamism in Decker,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2014). For U.S. manufacturing firms, this decline was
concentrated in job creation and took place well after CUSFTA.
10                                 HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                              Table 4: Job Flows in the U.S.

                                                    1977­1987   1987­1992   1992­2012
        Job Creation Rate                             33.7%      33.0%       31.1%

        Job Destruction Rate                          31.6%      31.0%       37.8%

        Job Destruction from Large Firms              25.8%      24.9%       32.1%

        Job Creation from Exports                       ­         2.0%        2.0%

        Note: Calculated from U.S. manufacturing census micro-data. Job creation and
        destruction calculated over five year periods. "Large" firms are above average
        employment firms in the initial year.



     9. Overlap of labor productivity and employment between exporters and
       non-exporters. Again, see Figure 1.




3      Exogenous Innovation
This section presents a model of growth driven by creative destruction, where
innovation can come from domestic or foreign firms. The goal is to examine
the dynamic gains from trade liberalization, and to see whether this model can
mimic the nine facts described in section 2.


3.1     Static Equilibrium

The static part of our model is similar to Bernard et al. (2003), or to Dornbusch,
Fischer and Samuelson (1977) only with markup heterogeneity.
     Utility of the home-country representative consumer is given by consump-
tion of a continuum of varieties Cj with measure 1:

                                                1
                                      U=            ln Cj dj.                            (1)
                                            0
                                    GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                11


            Figure 1: Distribution of Employment and Labor Productivity




 Note: The distribution of labor productivity (value-added per worker) and employment of
 exporting and non-exporting firms in the 2012 U.S. Census of Manufacturing.



This utility function implies that consumers spend the same on each variety.12
      Output of each variety is the product of labor and the quality of the blueprint
for the product. We denote Aj as the "best" blueprint for j among domestic
firms. Aj is the corresponding best blueprint for j among foreign firms. If we

order products so that the index j is decreasing in Aj /Aj , then products j  [0, x]

are traded and produced at home, j  [x, x ] are non-traded, and j  [x , 1] are
traded and produced abroad. The cutoff products x and x are defined by

                                           Ax
                                              = Ax                                    (2)
                                           

                                                  Ax
                                          Ax  =                                       (3)
                                                  
where  denotes the relative wage (domestic relative to foreign) and   1 is the
symmetric gross trade cost. When  = 1, x = x and all products are traded.
      The owner of the best blueprint sets their quality-adjusted price to push
their closest competitor out of the market (Bertrand competition), so the gross
markup is the gap between the incumbent firm's marginal cost and the cost of
                                                                     1
 12
      Utility of the foreign consumer is analogously given by U  =   0
                                                                             
                                                                         ln Cj dj .
12                                  HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                                         Table 5: Markups

                         Traded                                              Traded
                    Produced in Home           Non-Traded              Produced in Foreign

                                         Aj                                           Aj /
          Home                               A                                         A        Aj
                                  max    Aj ,  j                                max     j
                                                                                            ,   

                             Aj /                                          Aj
          Foreign            A                                              j    A
                       max    j
                                  , A                              max Aj , 
                                     j




its closest competitor -- domestic or foreign. Table 5 summarizes the markups:
µj for domestic firms and µ                             
                           j for foreign firms. Aj and Aj denote the productivity

of the second best producer in the domestic and foreign markets, respectively.
These potential competitors do not produce in equilibrium but affect markups.
       The relative wage is pinned down by balanced trade:


                                        I  · x = I · (1 - x )                                        (4)


where I and I  denote nominal GDP at home and abroad, respectively. The left
hand side of equation (4) is the home country's exports and the right hand side
is the home country's imports. Nominal GDP in each country is given by

                              µ wL                                           µ w  L 
                    I=      1-                      and          I =
                         1 -  · (1 - x )                                   1 - 1-
                                                                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                   ·x
where µ and µ denote the average gross markup of foreign and domestic firms,
w and w are the home and foreign wage, and L and L are labor supply at home
and abroad.13 More exactly, the average price-cost markup in the U.S. satisfies

                                           x 1          1        x 1
                                               dj   +       ·   0 µf
                                                                      dj
                                  1       0 µj          
                                                                    j
                                    
                                  µ                x + x/

  13
     The expression for nominal income comes from equating nominal income to the revenue
                                                                                          
of local firms plus tariff revenue: I = µ wL + ( - 1) I
                                                        (1 - x ) and I  = µ w L + ( - 1) I · x.
                                       GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                 13


where µf
       j denotes the markup of domestic firms on their exported products. The

expression for the foreign firms' average markup is analogous.
       We can express the real (consumption) wage as a function of the distribution
of the best blueprints, markups, the cutoffs, the relative wage, and the trade
cost. The real wage at home W and in the foreign country W  are given by

                                   x                     1                A
                                             Aj                            j   
                      ln W =            ln        dj +       ln            
                                                                             ·      dj    (5)
                               0             µj          x                µj 

                         
                                   x
                                             Aj 1                     1        Aj
                    ln W =             ln      ·     dj +                 ln    
                                                                                    dj.   (6)
                               0             µj                   x            µj
The home country buys j  [x , 1] from the foreign country, so the domestic
real wage is increasing in the productivity of foreign firms on these products.
Likewise, the foreign country purchases j  [0, x] from the home country so the
foreign real wage increases with domestic firm productivity on these products.



3.2       Innovation

We now introduce dynamics to the model. As in Klette and Kortum (2004), a
firm is a portfolio of products, an entrant has one product while incumbent
firms potentially produce many varieties, and innovation only takes the form of
creative destruction. Unlike Klette and Kortum, we allow trade and for creative
destruction to come from a firm in another country.
       For now we posit constant exogenous arrival rates for innovation. (We will
endogenize arrival rates in the next section.) Arrivals are proportional to the
number of products owned by a firm; a firm with two products is twice as likely
to creatively destroy another firm's variety compared to a firm with one product.
We assume that innovation builds on the quality of the product sold in the in-
novating firm's local market.14 Later we will entertain alternative assumptions,
  14
    Knowledge externalities are routinely built into quality ladder models from Grossman and
Helpman (1991), and Aghion and Howitt (1992) onward. See Coe, Helpman and Hoffmaister
(1997, 2009) for evidence consistent with learning by importing.
14                                  HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                             Table 6: Channels of Innovation

                                              Domestic Firm        Foreign Firm

             Innovation by incumbents                                   

             Innovation by entrants                                     

                                                            1
             Note: The average improvement in quality is    -1 .




such as learning from domestic producers only.
       The quality of an innovation follows a Pareto distribution with shape pa-
rameter  and scale parameter equal to the existing quality level. The average
percent improvement in quality over an existing variety (conditional on innova-
                1
tion) is thus   -1
                     > 0. We add a reflecting barrier whereby the bottom  percent
of products in each year, in terms of their quality, redraw their quality from the
top 1- percent of products. This is in the spirit of what Perla et al. (2019) obtain
endogenously, and will help maintain a stationary distribution of qualities.
       The notation for innovation probabilities is given in Table 6. The probability
a product is improved upon by an incumbent domestic firm is . Conditional on
not being improved by a domestic incumbent,  is the probability the product
is improved by an entering domestic firm. Conditional on not being improved
by any domestic firm,  is the probability the product will be improved by a
foreign incumbent firm. Finally, conditional on the product not being improved
upon by either a domestic firm or by a foreign incumbent,   is the probability
a foreign entrant innovates on the best blueprint. In short, a given product can
be improved upon by a domestic incumbent firm, a domestic entrant, a foreign
incumbent firm, or a foreign entrant.15


  15
    The unconditional probabilities of each type of innovation are ,    (1 - ),    (1 -
)(1 -  ), and      (1 - )(1 -  )(1 -  ). So the unconditional probability a domestic firm
(entrant or incumbent) improves a product is given by  +  , and the unconditional probability
a foreign firm innovates is  +   .
                               GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                 15


   Table 7 summarizes the probability of creative destruction in the domestic
market (rows 1-3) and in the foreign market (rows 4-6) due to innovation by
domestic firms (column 1) and by foreign firms (column 2). The first row shows
the arrival rate of new ideas in the domestic market for a product that is also
exported to the foreign market. The probability this product is improved upon
by another domestic firm is  +  , and a domestic innovator will always replace
the incumbent firm in this market. A foreign firm also improves upon the same
product with probability  +  , but a successful foreign innovator does not nec-
essarily replace the domestic incumbent. Since quality improvement follows a
Pareto distribution, the probability that the quality improvement of the foreign
                                                                            
innovator is large enough to replace the domestic incumbent is min         
                                                                               ,1 .
   For a given innovation rate by foreign firms, higher relative wages  and
lower trade costs  increase the probability that innovation by a foreign firm
benefits domestic consumers. Intuitively, higher domestic wages increase the
probability a foreign innovator will be competitive enough to replace the in-
cumbent in the domestic market. Higher trade costs make the foreign innovator
less competitive compared to the domestic incumbent. Effectively, trade costs
insulate domestic firms from foreign competition in the domestic market.
   The expected growth rate of the real consumption wage in the domestic mar-
ket is the product of the rate of creative destruction in rows 1-3 in Table 7 and the
increases in product quality (conditional on the product being replaced). And
the expected growth rate of the foreign real consumption wage is the product
of the arrival rates in rows 4-6 in Table 7 and the corresponding improvements
in quality. Real growth rates in the two countries depend on the arrival rates of
innovation  +  and  +   , the relative wage  , and the share of each type of
product (x and x ). As discussed in the previous section, the relative wage and
the share of products made by each country are pinned down by balanced trade
and the distribution of relative technologies Aj /A                             
                                                   j . The distribution of Aj /Aj is

endogenous to innovation.
16                            HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                   Table 7: Probability of Creative Destruction

Market       Product Type          Domestic Firm               Foreign Firm

Home       Exported by Home            +                      +   min (   
                                                                         ) ,1
                                                                         A     
              Non-Traded               +                     +   min       j
                                                                          Aj      ,1
                                               
          Imported by Home      ( +  ) min          ,1             +  


Foreign    Exported by Home            +                     +   · min ( ) , 1
                                             Aj     
              Non-Traded      ( +  ) min      A        ,1          +  
                                                j


          Imported by Home      ( +  ) min ( 1 
                                              ) ,1                 +  




     To understand the equilibrium in the model with innovation, it is useful to
consider the case of completely free trade ( = 1). In this case, all products are
traded so the relevant arrival rates in Table 7 are rows 1 and 3 (for the domestic
market) and 4 and 6 (for the foreign market). The probability a domestic firm
creatively destroys another firm is thus given by:


Domestic creative destruction rate = ( +  ) · x + ( +  ) min  - , 1 · (1 - x ) .


The first term is the probability a domestic firm replaces a product made by
another domestic firm and the second term is the probability a domestic firm
replaces a variety produced by a foreign firm. The corresponding rate of creative
destruction by a foreign firm under free trade ( = 1) is:


Foreign creative destruction rate =  +   ·(1 - x )+  +   min   , 1 ·x .


Ceteris paribus, higher  lowers the rate of creative destruction of domestic
firms and raises that of foreign firms. In steady state, the equilibrium relative
wage equates the rate of creative destruction by domestic firms to that of foreign
                                   GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                         17


firms. So, if domestic firms are more innovative, domestic wages are higher but
creative destruction rate of domestic firms is the same as that of foreign firms.
       We close this subsection by contrasting autarky and free trade when the two
countries are symmetric in size and in their innovation arrival rates. In this
special case the relative wage  = 1 and the expressions become simply:

                                                               1
                          Autarky growth rate = ( +  )
                                                               -1

                                                                        1
                  Frictionless growth rate =  +  +  +                      .
                                                                        -1
In autarky each country benefits only from domestic arrivals. With frictionless
trade, each country benefits from both domestic and foreign arrivals. This un-
derscores the scale effect generating dynamic gains from trade in this model.16



3.3       Calibration

The model is summarized by two innovation rates (for incumbents and en-
trants) in each country, the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution of the
innovation draws, and a trade cost. In this section, we infer the value of these
parameters from simple moments in the data.
       For consistency with the model, we assume the world consists of the manu-
facturing sectors in the U.S. and the rest of the OECD ("foreign"). The shape pa-
rameter of the Pareto distribution of innovation draws (), relative employment
(L/L ), innovation rates in Table 6, and the trade cost ( ) jointly determine the
growth rate, the trade share and the relative wage. For a given value of , we can
back out the trade cost and innovation rates from data on total employment, the
growth rate, the trade share, and the relative wage.17 We use the employment
share of new firms to pin down innovation by entrants vs. incumbents. Finally,
  16
      Section A.3 of the online Appendix shows the expected growth rate for the general case with
trade frictions and assymetric innovation rates.
   17
      We describe in the next section how we back out  from the gap in labor productivity
(revenue per worker) between exporters and non-exporters.
18                                 HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                      Table 8: Data Moments used for Calibration

          Data Moment                                Source                       Value
          Revenue per worker exp./non-exp.           U.S. mfg                     1.066

          TFP growth rate                            U.S. mfg                     3.01%

          Value added per worker home/foreign        U.S. and OECD mfg            1.29

          Employment share of entrants               U.S. mfg                     14.4%

          Export share of revenues (home)            U.S. mfg                     10.2%

          Employment home/foreign                    U.S. and OECD mfg            0.389

          Employment growth rate                     U.S. mfg                     ­1.1%

          Trade elasticity from halving              Head and Mayer (2014)        ­5




we use the elasticity of trade flows with respect to trade barriers to back out the
reflecting barrier  and the implied dispersion of product qualities.
       Table 8 displays the data moments we target. In steady state we fit TFP
growth of 3% per year, employment shrinking at 1.3% per year, output per worker
in the home country that is 29% higher than in the foreign country, and a home
trade share of 10%. The innovation rates and trade cost needed to fit these facts
are shown in Table 9.18
       The innovation rates in Table 9 are conditional. The unconditional innova-
tion rates are  +  = 0.160 for domestic firms and  +   = 0.122 for foreign
firms. The innovation rate has to be higher for domestic firms to explain the 29%
higher real wage in the home country. Conditional on the innovation rates and
the relative size of the two economies, the trade share pins down the trade cost,

  18
     We simulate the model with 5,000 varieties in each country. Each variety receives innovation
draws that are randomly assigned to an existing incumbent or a new entrant. The relative wage
is selected to balance trade between the two countries. We simulate for several hundred years
until the economy settles down to a steady-state, at which point we calculate moments. We
utilize a simulated annealing procedure to search for the parameter values that allow us to
match the moments in the data. For more details on our calibration see Section A.2 of our
Online Appendix.
                                     GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                        19


                          Table 9: Estimates of Model Parameters

       Variable             Description                                              Value
                            Shape parameter of innovation draws                       10.9

                            Home innovation rate from incumbent                      13.5%

                            Home innovation rate from entrants                       2.95%

                            Foreign innovation rate incumbents                       11.5%

                            Foreign innovation rate entrants                         3.42%

                            Trade cost                                                1.49

                            Reflecting barrier for product quality                   1.10%



a 50% tariff.19 Finally a reflecting barrier where the bottom 1.1% of products by
quality redraw from the top 98.9% of products generates a trade elasticity of 5.


3.4       Firm Dynamics

Table 10 shows that the model can replicate, at least qualitatively, facts 1-4 that
we presented in Section 2 (large job flows, lots of job destruction at large firms,
some job creation due to exports, and high rates of export turnover). The model
can also speak to facts 5-7 (job flows, job destruction at large firms, and job
creation due to exports all increase after trade liberalization). More specifically:
      Table 10 (rows 1 and 2, column 2) shows the job creation and destruction
rates in the steady state of the model parameterized to fit the moments in Table
8. The job creation rate (over five years) is 32%, and the job destruction rate is
6% higher at about 38%. For comparison, the first column in Table 10 replicates
the U.S. data. The job flows predicted by the model with the parameters in Table
9 are roughly of the same magnitude as in the data (fact 1).



 19
      Eaton and Kortum (2002) and others infer high trade costs to explain bilateral trade flows.
20                                HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



       The third row in Table 10 shows that, consistent with evidence from U.S. and
Canadian manufacturing (fact 2), job destruction in the model also comes from
large (above-mean employment) firms. The job destruction rate by large firms
is 22% in the model, which is about two-thirds of the overall job destruction.
       The fourth row in Table 10 shows that the job creation rate from exports in
the model is 5.7%. In the U.S. data, the number is 2%. We cannot see empirically
when jobs are destroyed because domestic producers are replaced by imports,
but we can calculate this moment in the model. The last row shows that the
job destruction rate due to imports is 7.4%, so about a fifth of the overall job
destruction in the model comes from creative destruction by foreign firms.
       In the data, the probability the U.S. loses an exported product to a foreign
competitor in a given year is 8% for all exported SITCs and 15% for the bottom
half of exported SITCs. In our baseline simulation, the annual probability that
a U.S. export is reallocated to foreign producer is 13% (next to last row of Table
10). The (empirical) average relative share of the top export product five years
prior is 66.5%. To mimic the top exported product, we divide our 5,000 products
randomly into 125 categories, identify the top export category in each year, and
calculate its average relative share 5 years prior. Our simulation yields a 77.5%
average relative share of the top export product (last row in Table 10).
       We next simulate the new steady state of the model with lower trade costs,
holding other parameters constant. A key assumption in this exercise is that do-
mestic and foreign innovation rates do not change when trade costs change.20
We first analyze the effect of reducing trade costs for TFP growth in the two
countries. Figure 2 (left panel) shows that lowering tariffs boosts the growth
rate of TFP in the two countries in tandem. Intuitively lower trade costs make it
easier for a country to build on ideas developed in the other country. Holding
constant innovation rates, moving to a world with frictionless trade increases
the steady-state TFP growth rate from 3.0% to 3.3%. Lower trade costs also raise

  20
    We relax this assumption in the next section, when we endogenize innovation rates. Section
A.3 of our Online Appendix provides more comparative statics under exogenous innovation.
                                 GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                 21


                  Table 10: Firm Dynamics, Data vs. Simulations

          Moment                                   U.S. Data      Simulations
          Job Creation Rate                          31.4%            31.6%

          Job Destruction Rate                       36.6%            38.2%

          Job Destruction from Large Firms           30.7%            22.3%

          Job Creation from Exports                  2.0%             5.7%

          Job Destruction from Imports                 ­              7.4%

          Probability of Losing an Export            15.1%            12.8%

          Top Export Product Turnover                66.5%            77.5%

          Note: The U.S. data is the average from 1987 to 2012. The second column
          shows simulated steady state moments in the model with the parameter
          values from Table 9.



the foreign wage relative to the domestic wage. This is shown in the right panel
in Figure 2. The intuition is that a country who innovates less benefits more
from trade liberalization since it is now easier for the country to "import" ideas.
The home/foreign wage is 1.15 with frictionless trade, versus 1.29 in the baseline
with a roughly 50% tariff rate.
   Figure 3 shows the effect of trade costs on job creation and destruction. Con-
sistent with the evidence from Canada and the U.S. (fact 5), the model predicts
that job flows rise when trade costs fall. Relative to our baseline steady state
( = 1.491), free trade would increase job creation and destruction rates by
about 10 percentage points. Thus a 30 basis point increase in the growth rate is
associated with a proportionally bigger impact on job reallocation. Lower trade
costs facilitate creative destruction from trade for smaller step sizes (i.e., smaller
quality improvements relative to foreign competitors). Figure 3 also shows the
job destruction rate from large firms (those with above-average employment)
for different values of  . Consistent with the evidence from the U.S. and Canada
(fact 6), in the model job destruction from large firms rises when trade costs fall.
22                                   HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH




      Figure 2: Simulated TFP Growth Rate and Relative Wage vs. Trade Costs




     Note: The left panel shows simulated growth rate of the real wage and the right panel
     the relative wage (home/foreign) in the steady state for different values of  . All other
     parameters of model are kept fixed at the values in Table 9.




          Figure 3: Simulated Job Creation and Destruction vs. Trade Costs




Note: The figures simulate the steady state job creation and destruction rates when we vary  but
keeping constant all other parameters at the values in Table 9. The figure simulates the steady
state job destruction rate from large (above mean employment) firms when we vary  but keeping
constant all other parameters at the values in Table 9.
                                   GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                         23


             Figure 4: Simulated Job Flows from Trade vs. Trade Costs




Note: The left panel shows the job creation rate due to exports and the right panel the job
destruction rate due to imports in the steady state for different values of  . All other parameters
of model are kept fixed at the values in Table 9.




    The model predicts an increase in job creation from exports (fact 7) in the
aftermath of trade liberalization. In Figure 4 (left panel), the job creation rate
from exports increases by 10 percentage points when trade costs fall from our
benchmark value ( = 1.491) to completely free trade ( = 1). The right panel
in Figure 4, meanwhile, plots the predicted job destruction rate from domestic
firms who are replaced by imports. The model predicts that moving to friction-
less trade would raise the overall job destruction rate by 10 percentage points.
Unfortunately we do not have an empirical counterpart for this model statistic.
    The left panel in Figure 5 plots the distribution of employment for exporters
and non-exporters in the steady state, using our baseline parameter values from
Table 9. These are the model analogues to facts 8 and 9. Firm size is determined
by the number of products the firm controls, and whether the quality of the
product is high enough to overcome the trade friction. A firm that exports has
at least one product whose quality is high enough to overcome the trade cost. In
the model, this probability is increasing in the firm's number of products. Larger
firms own more products, and firms with more products are more likely to have
24                                HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



     Figure 5: Simulated Distribution of Employment and Labor Productivity




Note: The distributions of employment (left panel) and labor productivity (right panel) in the
steady state of the model with the parameters given in Table 9.




at least one product with sufficient quality to export. The gap in average size
between exporters and non-exporters is not due to any fixed cost of exporting,
but rather the difference in the number of products between the two groups of
firms. Consistent with the empirical distribution of employment in Figure 1, the
model predicts substantial overlap in the distribution of firm size of exporters
and non-exporters. Although firms with fewer products are less likely to export,
some of these products are high enough quality to overcome the trade cost.
     The model also predicts that labor productivity is higher, on average, among
exporters than among non-exporters. In the model, dispersion in labor produc-
tivity is entirely driven by markup heterogeneity. Since the markup is given by
the quality gap between the best and the second best blueprint (adjusting for
wages and tariffs), this gap is increasing in the quality of the best blueprint.
Because a firm with high quality varieties is also more likely to export, such
firms are also more likely to charge higher markups. The gap in average labor
productivity between exporters and non-exporters reflects the gap in average
quality between the two groups of firms. This is similar to Bernard et al. (2003).
                                  GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                      25


A key parameter that governs the gap in average quality between exporters and
non-exporters (and quality dispersion more generally) is the shape parameter
 of the Pareto distribution of innovation draws. We therefore calibrate this
parameter to make the simulated model match the gap in average labor pro-
ductivity between exporters and non-exporters in the U.S. data.21
       Figure 5 (right panel) shows the simulated distribution of labor productivity
between exporters and non-exporters in the model. While labor productivity
(and thus quality when viewed through the lens of our model) of exporters is
higher on average than for non-exporters, the model also generates a substan-
tial overlap in labor productivity between the two groups of firms. The model
generates such an overlap because the quality of many non-exporters can be
large relative to the closest local competitor but may still not be large enough
relative to the foreign firm after accounting for the trade cost and wage gap.
       The empirical dispersion of employment and labor productivity (Figure 1) is
substantially larger than in the simulated data (Figure 5). Our assumption that
preferences over varieties is Cobb-Douglas implies that product quality only
matters for employment when higher quality enables the firm to overcome the
trade barrier. Conditional on selling in a given market at a given price, product
quality has no effect on employment. We could make product quality matter
more for firm employment, and thus get more employment dispersion, if we re-
laxed the Cobb-Douglas assumption. As for the dispersion of labor productivity,
our model abstracts from differences in factor costs within countries, overhead
costs, adjustment costs, and measurement error, all of which are likely present
in the data and behind some of the empirical dispersion in labor productivity.22




  21
    As stated in Table 8, this gap is 6.6%.
  22
    Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013) emphasize the role of overhead costs, Asker,
Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2014) the importance of adjustment costs, and Bils, Klenow
and Ruane (2019) the contribution of measurement error.
26                                 HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



4         Endogenous Innovation

A key assumption we have made so far is that innovation rates are exogenous
parameters. We now consider the effect of reducing trade costs (i.e., tariffs)
when innovation rates are endogenously determined.23
         Suppose the innovation rate (per variety owned) of a domestic incumbent is

                                                         
                                               Ri
                                   =            (1-)/
                                                            ,                              (7)
                                          i A

where Ri denotes labor used for research (per variety owned), A is the geometric
average quality of products sold in the domestic market, i is an efficiency pa-
rameter,  < 1 captures the returns to research effort, and  captures the exter-
nal returns to the stock of ideas. As in Klette and Kortum (2004), underlying (7)
is the assumption of constant returns at the firm level to research effort and the
number of varieties the firm owns (i.e., elasticities of  and 1 -  , respectively).
When  < 1 we have diminishing returns to the stock of ideas so growth is semi-
endogenous and linked to the population growth rate as in Jones (1995).
         Similarly, suppose the unconditional innovation rate of domestic entrants is

                                                         
                                               Re
                                   =            (1-)/
                                                            ,                              (8)
                                          e A

where Re is labor used for research (per variety in the economy) by potential
entrants and e is an efficiency parameter.24
         The return to innovation is the product of the probability of grabbing a vari-
ety from another firm and the expected value of that variety. The new product
can either be sold in both markets or only in the domestic market, and the
value of this new product depends on whether it is traded or non-traded. So

    23
    Section A.4 of our Online Appendix provides a fuller description of this model.
    24
    The innovation rates for foreign firms are given by equations analogous to (7) and (8) with
                          
Ri and i replaced by Ri     and                                            
                                 i in (7), Re and e replaced by Re and e in (8), and average
quality sold in the foreign market instead of in the home market.
                                        GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                              27


the return to innovation is the sum of the expected value of a traded product
and the expected value of a non-traded product (multiplied by the probability
of getting each type of product).
                                                                                            (1-)/
       It will be convenient to normalize the value of a product by A                                . We
define vx and vn as the expected normalized value of a traded and non-traded
product. The following arbitrage equation pins down vx at time t:

                                    1
               vx,t = x,t - i t
                      (1 + gt )(1-)/
                    +                [t (x,t vx,t+1 + n,t vn,t+1 )]                                     (9)
                          1 + rt
                      (1 + gt )(1-)/
                    +                 (1 - x,t ) vx,t+1 - x,t (vx,t+1 - vn,t+1 ) .
                          1 + rt

Here g denotes the growth rate of A, r the interest rate, x expected profits
                        (1-)/
(normalized by A                ), x and n the probability conditional on innovating of
grabbing a traded and non-traded product, x the probability of losing a traded
variety in both markets, and x the probability of losing a traded product only
in the foreign market.25 The first term in (9) is profit net of research expenses,
the second term is the expected value of grabbing a new product, and the last
term is the expected value of an exported variety (next period) adjusted for the
probability of losing the product to a competitor in the foreign market.26




                                                                            
                                                                     Aj                               1 
  25
       The conditional arrival rates are x  x + (x - x) min           A        , 1 + (1 - x ) min          ,1
                                                                        j

                                         
                                  Aj                                                     1 
and n  (x - x) 1 - min             A        ,1      + (1 - x ) min          , 1 - min         ,1     . The
                                     j

                                                                                              
probabilities of losing an exported product are x  ( +  ) +  +   min                                , 1 and
                                                 
x   +   min ( ) , 1 - min                   ,1 .
  26
     We assume linear utility so that the consumption Euler equation implies r = . We set
 = 0.05. Given linear utility and the same discount rate as real interest rate, consumers are
indifferent about the path of consumption for a given present discounted value of consumption.
We assume the consumption path in each country ensures balanced trade.
28                               HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



      The corresponding arbitrage equation for the non-traded product vn is

                                       1
                    vn,t = n,t - i t
                          (1 + gt )(1-)/
                        +                [t (x,t vx,t+1 + n,t vn,t+1 )]                 (10)
                              1 + rt
                          (1 + gt )(1-)/
                        +                [(1 - n,t ) vn,t+1 ] .
                              1 + rt

                                                            (1-)/
where n denotes expected profits (normalized by A                     ) of a non-traded prod-
uct and n is the probability a non-traded product is overtaken by another firm.27
      The privately optimal innovation rates are given by equating the marginal
revenue from innovation to the marginal cost of innovation, which yields:
                                                            
                                     x,t vx,t + n,t vn,t   1-
                             t =                                                        (11)
                                              i
                                                            
                                    x,t vx,t + n,t vx,t    1-
                             t =                                .                       (12)
                                             e
An increase in vx and vn raises the innovation rate with an elasticity that de-
pends on  . As in the model where innovation is exogenous, the equilibrium
is determined by equations (2), (3), (4), and the markup formulas in Table 5,
except that the innovation rates are now pinned down by (9) through (12) plus
the analogues for foreign innovation.
      In steady-state, x , n , vx , and vn are constant so the innovation rates  and
 are constant as well. Differences in innovation rates between countries now
reflect differences in the innovation cost parameter . As before, differences
in innovation rates show up as differences in the relative wage. What is new
in the endogenous innovation model is that the growth rate of the real wage in
steady state is ultimately given by the product of the population growth rate and
/(1 - ) where  < 1.


                                                                 A    
 27
      This probability is given by n  ( +  ) +  +   min           j
                                                                 Aj      ,1
                                 GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                      29


       Table 11: Estimates of Model Parameters under Endogenous Innovation

         Variable    Description                                             Value
                     Return to stock of ideas                                0.120

                     Return to research intensity                            0.643

         e /i        Home entrant/incumbent research cost                     2.52

         i /i        Foreign/home incumbent research cost                     7.88

         e /i        Foreign entrant/home incumbent research cost             16.5




       We set  and  to match the growth rate of TFP, the growth rate of the "popu-
lation" (growth of investments in intellectual property products), and the share
of "labor" devoted to research (share of value added invested in intellectual
property products).28 This yields  = 0.120 and  = 0.643. With these values
in hand, we can back out the innovation cost parameters  consistent with
the arrival rates in Table 9. As shown in Table 11, the implied innovation cost
parameter  is lower in the U.S. to generate higher U.S. innovation rates and
match the higher wage in the U.S. relative to the rest of the OECD.
       We can now re-examine the effect of reducing trade costs, this time with
endogenous arrival rates of innovation. Here, trade liberalization has no per-
manent effect on the long run growth rate, which is pinned down by population
growth. The initial increase in the growth rate due to trade liberalization in-
creases the level of TFP, but with  < 1 this raises the cost of innovation. Thus,
in the new steady state with lower trade costs, innovation rates by each country
are actually lower but the growth rate of TFP is the same.
       Figure 6 plots the effect of a permanent, unanticipated 50% reduction of
trade costs from the baseline (from  = 1.491 to  = 1.245) on innovation rates,

  28
    TFP growth averaged 3.01% per year from 1995­2008 in manufacturing according to the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics KLEMS data. Real intellectual property investments grew 4.12% per
year from 1995­2008 according to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, and such investments
averaged 9.72% of value added in U.S. manufacturing from 1997­2008.
30                                 HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



research labor shares, real consumption, and job flows. It shows that innovation
rates initially rise (fall) in the OECD (U.S.) in the aftermath of a reduction in
trade costs. But as the level of TFP rises in the two countries, arrival rates fall
due to the rising difficulty of innovation. This is due to diminishing returns to
the stock of ideas  < 1. In the new steady state, innovation rates are lower
compared to the initial steady state, though TFP is on a higher path (parallel to
its initial path). TFP is higher despite lower arrival rates within each country
because ideas flow more easily across countries with lower trade costs.
       Like the arrival rates, the share of labor doing research spikes on impact.
Unlike the arrival rates, however, the share of labor doing research ends up
higher in the long run. The bigger market for each successful innovation makes
higher research effort worthwhile despite the endogenously greater difficulty in
coming up with ideas in the long run.29 This result contrasts with Eaton and
Kortum (2001), wherein these two forces exactly offset each other and leave
research effort unchanged.
       Consumption is closely tied to TFP in each country, but is also affected by
tariff revenues and the share of labor diverted from production to R&D. Figure 6
plots real consumption in each country relative to the path of U.S. consumption
in the absence of trade liberalization. Consumption rises on impact in the U.S.
but initially falls in the OECD due to the temporary spike in the share of work-
ers engaged in innovation rather than production. After the initial shock, the
growth rate of consumption increases for a few decades, but eventually slows
down as innovation becomes more difficult with higher TFP. On the new steady
state path, real consumption and TFP are higher, but the growth rate is the same
as in the initial equilibrium. As in the exogenous innovation case, the rest of the
OECD gains more than the U.S. because the U.S. is more innovative.
       Figure 6 also illustrates the effect of the reduction in trade costs on job flows.
Consistent with the evidence from the U.S. and Canada after CUSFTA, job flows

  29
    Similarly, the higher share of labor devoted to research in the rest of the OECD compared to
the U.S. in Figure 6 reflects the larger size of the rest of the OECD's market.
                                   GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                        31


                     Table 12: Gains From Reducing Trade Costs

                                                 50% Reduction in         Relative to Autarky
                                                 U.S.     OECD             U.S.       OECD
Static Gains according to the ACR formula        3.0%         1.2%         1.1%        1.0%

Static Gains in our Model                        4.2%         5.0%        13.3%        15.5%

Dynamic Gains - Exogenous Innovation             9.6%        15.5%        37.0%       104.0%

Dynamic Gains - Endogenous Innovation            7.4%         8.9%        36.9%        69.1%

Entries give the percentage increase in current year consumption (static) or in the present
discounted value of consumption (dynamic) as a result of reducing tariffs from 1.491 to 1.245
(columns one and two) and from 4 to 1.491 (columns three and four). The aggregate trade share
at  = 4 is about 0.4%. We use a discount rate of 5%.



surge in the aftermath of a reduction in trade costs.30 The pace of job flows
remains elevated for decades after a tariff reduction -- certainly within the 15-
year window we examine after the 1988 U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement.
This pattern drives home that there might be dynamics costs (job destruction)
as well as dynamic benefits (knowledge flows) to trade liberalization.31
       Table 12 (columns 1 and 2) displays the welfare gains from a 50% reduction
in tariffs from the baseline. These are in permanent consumption-equivalent
terms, which is equivalent to percentage gains in the present discounted value
of consumption given our specification of linear utility. For comparison, we
start with the static gains implied by the formula in Arkolakis, Costinot and
Rodriguez-Clare (2012). The static gains are higher in our model than in the
ACR formula, but the discrepancy is modest.
       The final two rows of Table 12 present the gains from trade including ef-
fects on innovation. With exogenous arrival rates of innovation, the gains are
more than three times as large as the ACR gains at 9.6% in the U.S. The rest
  30
      Bernard, Redding and Schott (2007) analyze a multi-sector Melitz model which also features
effects of trade liberalization on steady state job flows.
   31
      In our model job destruction is costless. Relaxing this assumption to weigh such dynamic
costs against any dynamic gains is a useful direction for future research.
32                                 HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



           Figure 6: Simulated Effect of a 50% Reduction in Trade Costs


                Arrival rates                              Research labor shares




            Real consumption                                  Job creation rate




Note: The figure shows the simulated arrival rates ( +   ~ and ~ +   ~ ), research labor shares, real
consumption (relative to the path of real consumption in the initial steady state), and job creation
and destruction rates in response to an unanticipated reduction in trade costs from  = 1.491 to
 = 1.245, keeping constant all other parameters at the values in Table 11.
                                      GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                             33


of the OECD gains even more (15.5%) because it gets more ideas than it gives.
Gains are smaller with endogenous innovation rates, but still sizable at about
7.4% in the U.S. and 8.9% in the rest of the OECD. The gains are tempered
with endogenous research effort for two reasons. First, we build in diminishing
returns to the stock of ideas ( < 1). This reduces the cumulative TFP gain
from endogenously rising research effort and from a faster flow of ideas across
countries. Second, higher research effort comes at the cost of less labor devoted
to producing goods. Even in the endogenous innovation case, however, the full
gains are seven times larger than the static ACR formula gains.
       The gap between the static gains implied by the ACR formula and our cal-
culations are much larger when we consider more dramatic changes in trade
costs. In columns 3 and 4 in Table 12 we present the welfare gains from trade
when the steady state trade share goes from 0.4% near autarky ( = 4) to 10.2%
in our baseline (with  = 1.491). The ACR formula predicts a welfare gain of
1.1% for the U.S.32 As the Table shows, the static gains in our model are much
larger than what the ACR formula implies: over 13% for the U.S.
       Clearly, our model does not fall into the ACR class. In our model, trade facil-
itates the flow of ideas across countries. Product quality, and the comparative
advantage gains from trade, varies with trade costs. Figure 7 plots the distribu-
tion of relative quality across products for the U.S. versus the rest of the OECD.
The solid distribution is under our baseline ( = 1.49) and the dashed distribu-
tion is near autarky ( = 4). The relative quality distribution is markedly more
dispersed near autarky. As a result, the trade elasticity is only 3 near autarky,
whereas it is 5 under baseline tariff of  = 1.491.33 The degree of U.S. versus
OECD comparative advantage across products is endogenously stronger near
autarky. This is because ideas are not flowing as quickly between the countries
when there is so little trade, so relative qualities drift apart. If we use a trade
elasticity of 3 rather than 5, the ACR gains more than triple from 1.1% to 3.5%.
  32
    The ACR formula for the welfare gains relative to autarky is (1 - trade share)-1/(trade elasticity) .
We use a trade elasticity of 5 based on the survey by Head and Mayer (2014).
 33
    We calculate local trade elasticities, varying the tariff rate by 10 percentage points.
34                               HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



     Figure 7 also shows that the effect of trade liberalization on relative quality
dispersion is smaller for small changes in trade. This can be seen by comparing
the dotted distribution ( = 1.245) with the dashed distribution ( = 1.491)
in the Figure. Small changes in trade costs have only a modest effect on the
comparative advantage gains from trade in our model. As a consequence, the
ACR gains from cutting tariffs in half are closer to the static gains in our model.
     When going from near autarky to  = 1.49, the trade share initially leaps
from 0.4% to 24.6%. The trade share on impact overshoots the new steady state
trade share of 10.2% precisely because of divergent qualities near autarky. Ap-
plying the ACR formula to the trade share on impact, the ACR static gains are
9.8% for the U.S., compared to 3.5% with a trade share of only 10.2%. As qualities
converge toward each other in response to higher trade flows, the trade share
eventually settles down to 10.2% and the trade elasticity rises from 3 to 5.
     The remaining gap between ACR gains of 9.8% and our model static gains of
13.3% for the U.S. may be due to changes in markups. Markup dispersion within
countries creates misallocation, and markup differences across countries affect
the terms of trade. This is another way in which our model falls outside the ACR
class: the distribution of markups is endogenous to tariffs.
     Figure 8 summarizes the implication of trade costs on real consumption.
The figure shows real consumption (relative to real consumption for the U.S.
at the baseline of  = 1.491) and the trade elasticity in steady-states for a wide
range of tariffs. The consumption path is almost always higher as a result of
lower tariffs. Consumption actually falls, however, as frictionless trade is ap-
proached. At very low tariff levels, the high rate of creative destruction from
imports discourages research effort so much that it outweighs the more rapid
spread of ideas.
     Figure 9 plots the local trade elasticity calculated at the steady-states at vari-
ous trade costs. It shows that the trade elasticity increases with the level of trade
costs. This is an important prediction of a model with idea flows, although we
currently do not have evidence on whether this prediction holds empirically.
                                        GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                          35


                              Figure 7: Relative quality distribution




                  Note: The figure shows the distribution across products of relative
                  quality in the U.S. versus the rest of the OECD for steady states with
                  a U.S. export share of 0.4%, 10%, and 22%.



5          Models with Limited Idea Flows
Our simulations make two key assumptions about the generation of new ideas.
First, we assume innovators build on the productivity level of sellers into the
domestic market. Second, we assume innovators attempt to build on the pro-
ductivity of all products sold in the domestic market. To gauge the importance
of these assumptions for the dynamic gains from trade, we now consider two
alternative assumptions about how new ideas are generated. For simplicity,
these simulations involve exogenous arrival rates of innovation.
         Our first alternative assumes that innovators probabilistically build on sell-
ers with probability  and on domestic producers with probability 1 - .34 Our
second alternative assumes that innovators build on all products with probabil-
ity  and on the subset of products that are domestically produced with proba-
    34
         If a product is imported, innovators build on the quality of the last domestic producer.
36                                  HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                      Figure 8: Real consumption vs. trade costs




            Note: The figure plots simulated equilibrium real consumption relative
            to the consumption path in the U.S. with  = 1.491 in steady-states with
            differing trade costs, keeping constant all other parameters at the values
            in Table 11.



bility 1 -  . Such research specialization ( < 1) allows countries to experience
more frequent innovations on the subset of products they produce, and more
so the higher the share of products imported.
       The top panel in Table 13 shows the gains from trade under these alterna-
tive assumptions about idea flows.35 The first column reproduces our baseline
specification ( = 1 and  = 1). The second column reduces the frequency with
which innovators learn from sellers to 30% ( = 0.3) but does not allow research
specialization ( = 1). Doing so dampens the effect of trade costs on growth
rates from 47 basis points per year in the baseline to 13 basis points per year
with limited idea flows. The consumption-equivalent gains from trade in the
U.S. fall from 37% in the baseline to 27%, and in the OECD fall from 104% to
  35
    Specifically, Table 13 calculates the effect of changing  to move from a steady state with a
trade share of 0.4% to a trade share of 10.2% (keeping unchanged the other parameters).
                                     GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                     37


                         Figure 9: Trade elasticity vs. trade costs




                Note: The figure plots the trade elasticity in steady-states with
                differing trade costs, keeping constant all other parameters at the
                values in Table 9. The local trade elasticity in each steady state is
                calculated by varying trade costs by 10%.



48%.36 Thus, limiting the flow of ideas across countries materially reduces the
dynamic gains from trade.
       The final column of Table 13 adds research specialization to limited idea
flows ( = 0.3 and  = 0.3). The effect of trade on steady-state growth (+48
basis points per year) is actually larger relative to that in the middle column (13
basis points), and is similar to that in the baseline specification (47 basis points).
The U.S. gains slightly more in consumption-equivalent terms in this case, 40%
versus 37% in the baseline. Thus, even if ideas flow in a more limited way, trade
may still create large dynamic gains if it facilitates research specialization. The
consumption-equivalent gains from trade are smaller in the OECD because it
gains less from specialization (it is larger) and because it suffers more from
  36
   Recall that the rest of the OECD gains more from idea flows than the U.S. because it is less
innovative in our calibration. It therefore suffers more from limiting idea flows.
38                                    HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



                     Table 13: Alternative Assumptions on Idea Flows

                                                                  =1        = 0.3      = 0.3
                                                  Data            =1       =1          = 0.3

       Gains from Trade (Trade share from 0.4% to 10%)
         in annual Growth                           ­            0.47%      0.13%      0.48%

        Gains from Trade U.S.                       ­            37.0%      27.3%      40.3%

        Gains from Trade OECD                       ­            104.0%     47.8%      33.1%


       Export Product Churn U.S.
        Prob. losing exports                     15.1%           12.8%       5.9%      1.1%

        Top Export Product Turnover              66.5%           77.5%      87.9%      95.4%

       Note: The top panel shows the gains from trade (consumption-equivalent welfare) from
       changing  to move from a steady state with a trade share of 0.4% to a trade share of 10%.
       The bottom panel shows the simulated export churn in a steady state with a trade share
       of 10%. Column two is the baseline specification. Column three reduces the frequency
       with which innovators learn from foreign producers to 30% ( = 0.3); the other 70% of
       draws build on domestic producers. Column four allows for research specialization, so
       that 70% of innovation ( = 0.3) draws are in products a country produces; the other
       30% draw from all products. In each case, innovation parameters are re-estimated to
       match the targeted moments in Table 8 while  and  are held fixed at the values shown
       in Table 9. Arrival rates are exogenous.



reduced idea inflows given U.S. innovativeness.
       How can we assess the realism of these alternative models of idea flows?37
We first examine the implication of the models for export product turnover.
Recall one of our facts is the high turnover rate of a country's exported prod-
ucts. The bottom panel in Table 13 gives our two measures of export product
turnover. The model with limited idea flows and no research specialization
( = 0.3 and  = 1) generates less export turnover compared to the data (and
the baseline model): the predicted exit rate of an average product drops to 6%
  37
   We do not entertain a model in which trade fails to tether growth rates across countries
because such a model would be inconsistent with the similarity of observed growth rates across
OECD countries (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 2005).
                                   GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                        39


per year and the SITC with the highest level of exports in a given year tends to
account for 87.9% of total exports five years earlier. In our baseline simulation,
these two numbers are 12.8% and 77.5%, respectively. The last column shows
that adding specialized research ( < 1) lowers export product turnover more
dramatically. The exit rate of an average product is only 1.1% per year and the
export share of the top product five years earlier is 95.4% of its current share.
       In the baseline model with idea flows across countries, the trade elasticity
is sensitive to the level of trade barriers. This is not the case when flows of
ideas between countries are limited. Figure 10 plots the distribution of quality
of the U.S. versus the rest of the OECD in the model with limited idea flows
and research specialization. The figure plots the distribution of relative quality
in the steady-state with a trade share of 10.2% and the near-autarky case with
a trade share of 0.4%. In contrast to the model with idea flows (Figure 7), the
dispersion of relative quality is about the same in the two steady-states shown
in Figure 10. As a consequence, the trade elasticity will be about the same with
high trade costs as with low trade costs.
       The change in jobs flows in the aftermath of CUSFTA (facts 5-7) is also rele-
vant for assessing whether trade facilitates idea flows. In Section 2, we empha-
sized that job flows, job destruction at large firms, and job creation associated
with exports all increased noticeably in Canada after the agreement. Here we
simulate the impact of CUSFTA on job flows.38 We analyze the effect of lowering
the gross tariff rate from 1.39 to 1.25 to match Canada's trade shares of 25%
before CUSFTA (1978­1988) and 37% after CUSFTA (1988­2003). We do this for
three cases: in our baseline model ( = 1 and  = 1); under limited idea flows
( = 0.3 and  = 1); and with both limited idea flows and research specialization
( = 0.3 and  = 0.3). We re-estimate other parameters in each case so that the
model matches the empirical wage in the U.S. relative to Canada. We set the
population in the U.S. relative to Canada to match the data.

  38
   Until now we carried out simulations with the rest of the OECD because its larger size drives
home the importance of scale for the dynamic gains from trade.
40                                   HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



           Figure 10: Relative quality distribution with limited idea flows




              Note: The figure shows the distribution across products of relative
              quality in the U.S. versus the rest of the OECD for steady states with a
              trade share of 0.4% and 10% in the model with limited idea flows and
              research specialization.



       Table 14 presents the predicted change in job flows in Canada after trade
liberalization in the three models.39 The first column shows the change in em-
pirical moments and the second column shows the change in the simulated
moments in the base case ( = 1 and  = 1). The base case model matches
the patterns in the data: rising job creation, job destruction, and job creation
from exports. The model overstates job creation but well matches both job
destruction and job creation from exports. Note that no parameter values were
chosen to target any of the data moments in Table 14.
       The last two columns in Table 14 show the simulated change in job flows
with limited idea flows (column 3) and with research specialization (column 4).
The increase in job flows predicted by these two models generally understates
  39
   We focus on changes in Canada rather than the U.S. because CUSFTA was a much bigger
shock to the Canadian economy given its large trade share with the U.S.
                                  GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                           41


      Table 14: Job Flows in Canada -- Post-CUSFTA versus Pre-CUSFTA

                                                       =1            = 0.3         = 0.3
                                          Data         =1           =1             = 0.3
    Job Creation Rate                    +1.3%        +6.7%         +4.0%          +4.3%

    Job Destruction Rate                 +7.2%        +6.7%         +4.0%          +4.3%

    Job Creation from Exports            +8.7%        +8.7%         +5.8%          +6.1%

   Note: Pre-CUSFTA is 1978 to 1988. Post-CUSFTA is 1988 to 2003. Job creation and
   destruction are calculated over five year periods. Simulations use a version of the model
   estimated to match the relative wage and population of the U.S. and Canada, with a
   trade liberalization event that matches the 12 percentage point increase in Canadian
   export share from the pre-CUSFTA to post-CUSFTA period. Arrival rates are exogenous.



the increase in job flows in Canada after CUSFTA. The increase in the job de-
struction rate is slightly above half of the increase seen in the data. The gap
would widen for lower values of  and  .
   One could also entertain the possibility that ideas flow in ways unrelated
to trade altogether. Ramondo, Rodr´
                                  iguez-Clare and Sabor´
                                                       io-Rodr´
                                                              iguez (2016)
argue that ideas flowing independent of trade (or even FDI) would help explain
why small countries do not tend to be poorer than large countries. It could also
contribute to export product turnover. It could not, however, explain why job
flows increased in a sustained way in Canada after CUSFTA.
42                              HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



6     Conclusion
We documented facts about trade and job reallocation in U.S. and Canadian
manufacturing in recent decades. After the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement
in 1988, job destruction rates spiked and remained elevated through 2012 (our
latest year of data). The increase in job destruction rates and exit from exporting
occurred equally at big and small firms in Canada.
     Motivated by these facts, we constructed a two-country model of creative
destruction and trade. In the model, foreign and domestic firms take over each
other's markets more frequently when trade barriers are lower. This stimulates
growth in the long run under exogenous innovation rates. When we endogenize
innovation and build in diminishing returns, lower tariffs boost growth only
temporarily. Still, trade liberalization raises levels of productivity permanently.
Compared to (near) autarky, such dynamic gains are an order of magnitude
larger than the usual static gains from trade.
     We see several directions for future research. One is to explicitly incorporate
frictions to reallocating workers in response to trade-induced creative destruc-
tion. Another route is to study events such as China joining the WTO. A third
avenue would be to obtain more direct evidence on knowledge spillovers (e.g.
the frequency of imitation of rich country producers by developing country
producers, or of learning from domestic producers vs. foreign sellers in the local
market). We think idea flows will need to be tied to trade flows to explain why
trade liberalization ushers in more rapid job reallocation in a sustained way.
     We end with a conjecture about optimal innovation policy in our setting.
Because of domestic knowledge spillovers, national governments may find it
optimal to subsidize domestic R&D. But they might not internalize knowledge
spillovers to foreign producers who build on domestic innovations. The world
might need a "Global Technical Change Accord" to internalize these positive
externalities, just as we need Global Climate Change agreements to internalize
negative pollution externalities.
                                GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                   43


References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,"
  Econometrica, 1992, 60 (2), pp. 323­351.

  , Antonin Bergeaud, Matthieu Lequien, and Marc Melitz, "The Impact of Exports on
  Innovation: Theory and Evidence," 2018.

Akcigit, Ufuk, Sina T. Ates, and Giammario Impullitti, "Innovation and Trade Policy in a
  Globalized World," 2018.

Alvarez, Fernando E, Francisco J. Buera, and Robert E. Lucas, "Idea Flows, Economic
  Growth, and Trade," 2013.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, "New Trade Models,
  Same Old Gains?," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94­130.

Asker, John, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Jan De Loecker, "Dynamic Inputs and Resource
  (Mis)Allocation," Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (5), 1013­1063.

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta, "Cross-Country Differences
  in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection," American Economic Review,
  2013, 103 (1), 305­334.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, "Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause,
  Effect, or Both?," Journal of International Economics, 1999, 47 (1), 1­25.

  , Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, "Plants and Productivity
  in International Trade," American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1268­1290.

Bernard, Andrew B, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, "Comparative Advantage
  and Heterogeneous Firms," Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (1), 31­66.

Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Cian Ruane, "Misallocation or Mismeasurement?," 2019.

Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, "Are Ideas
  Getting Harder to Find?," 2019.
44                                 HSIEH, KLENOW, NATH



  , Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, "Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact
  of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity," Review of Economic Studies,
  2016, 83 (1), 87­117.

Buera, Francisco J. and Ezra Oberfield, "The Global Diffusion of Ideas," 2017.

Coe, David T., Elhanan Helpman, and Alexander W. Hoffmaister, "North-South R&D
  Spillovers," Economic Journal, 1997, 107 (440), 134­149.

  ,    , and    , "International R&D Spillovers and Institutions," European Economic
  Review, 2009, 53 (7), 723­741.

Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, "Job Creation and Destruction,"
  MIT Press Books, 1996.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, "The Role of
  Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (3), 3­24.

Dornbusch, Rdiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul Samuelson, "Comparative Advantage,
  Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," American
  Economic Review, 1977, 67 (5), 823­39.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, "Technology, Trade, and Growth: A Unified
  Framework," European Economic Review, 2001, 45 (4-6), 742­755.

     and   , "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica, 2002, 70 (5), 1741­1779.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo,
  "World Trade Flows: 1962-2000," NBER Working Paper 11040, 2005.

Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Peter J. Klenow, "How Destructive is
  Innovation?," Econometrica, 2019.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, "Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (1), 43­61.

     and   , Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT press, 1993.
                                GLOBAL DESTRUCTION                                  45


Hanson, Gordon, Nelson Lind, and Marc-Andreas Muendler, "The Dynamics of
  Comparative Advantage," 2018.

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, "Gravity Equations:          Workhorse, Toolkit, and
  Cookbook," Handbook of International Economics, 2014, 4, 131­195.

Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens, "An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size
  Distribution, with Geography and Intra-and International trade," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2014, 122 (2), 369­421.

Jones, Charles I., "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political
  Economy, August 1995, 103 (4), 759­784.

Klenow, Peter J. and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, "Externalities and Growth," Handbook of
  Economic Growth, 2005, 1, 817­861.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum, "Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (5), 986­1018.

Lincoln, William, Andrew McCallum, and Michael Siemer, "The Great Recession and a
  Missing Generation of Exporters," IMF Economic Review, 2019.

Melitz, Marc J., "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
  Industry Productivity," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Perla, Jesse, Christopher Tonetti, and Michael E. Waugh, "Equilibrium Technology
  Diffusion, Trade, and Growth," 2019.

Ramondo, Natalia, Andr´
                      es Rodr´
                             iguez-Clare, and Milagro Sabor´
                                                           io-Rodr´
                                                                  iguez, "Trade,
  domestic frictions, and scale effects," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10),
  3159­3184.

Rivera-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul M. Romer, "Economic Integration and Endogenous
  Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106 (2), 531­555.
