                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ENDOGENOUS LEVERAGE AND DEFAULT IN THE LABORATORY

                                        Marco Cipriani
                                         Ana Fostel
                                        Daniel Houser

                                      Working Paper 26469
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26469


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We thank Olivier Armantier, Elena Asparouhova, Peter Bossaerts, John Duffy, Douglas Gale,
Antonio Guarino, Chad Kendall, John Geanakoplos, David Hirshleifer, Charlie Holt, Rosemarie
Nagel, Shyam Sunder, and Bill Zame (discussant) for a helpful suggestions and discussions. We
also thank for comments seminar audiences at Bank of Canada, Chapman University, NY-Fed,
NYU, UC-Irvine, University of Utah, USC, Yale. We thank Aaron Plesset, Jingnan Chen, Lina
Diaz, Jeff Gortmaker, Philip Mulder, Reed Orchinik, Adam Spiegel, and Joe Step for outstanding
research assistance during this project. The views in this paper should not be interpreted as
reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marco Cipriani, Ana Fostel, and Daniel Houser. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Leverage and Default in the Laboratory
Marco Cipriani, Ana Fostel, and Daniel Houser
NBER Working Paper No. 26469
November 2019
JEL No. A10,C90,D52,D53,G10

                                          ABSTRACT

We study default and endogenous leverage in the laboratory. To this purpose, we develop a
general equilibrium model of collateralized borrowing amenable to laboratory implementation
and gather experimental data. In the model, leverage is endogenous: agents choose how much to
borrow using a risky asset as collateral, and there are no ad-hoc collateral constraints. When the
risky asset is financial, namely, its payoff does not depend on ownership (such as a bonds),
collateral requirements are high and there is no default. In contrast, when the risky asset is non-
financial, namely, its payoff depends on ownership (such as a firm), collateral requirements are
lower and default occurs. The experimental outcomes are in line with the theory's main
predictions. The type of collateral, whether financial or not, matters. Default rates and loss from
default are higher when the risky asset is non-financial, stemming from laxer collateral
requirements. Default rates and collateral requirements are closer to the theoretical predictions as
the experiment progresses.

Marco Cipriani                                   Daniel Houser
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                 George Mason University
33 Liberty Street                                4400 University Drive, MSN 1B2
New York, NY 10045                               Fairfax, VA, 22030
marco.cipriani@ny.frb.org                        dhouser@gmu.edu

Ana Fostel
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall, Suite 222
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
anafostel@virginia.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26469
           Keywords: Collateral, Default, Double Auction, Experimental Economics,
        Leverage
           JEL Codes: A10, C90, D52, D53, G10.



1       Introduction

Since the recent financial crisis, there has been a renewed academic interest in col-
lateralized debt markets. One important question is understanding how markets set
collateral requirements and whether collateralization is enough to prevent default.
In a recent paper, Fostel and Geanakoplos (2015) (FG) characterize equilibrium
leverage and default in binomial economies with collateralized lending, incomplete
markets, and financial assets serving as collateral.1 FG defines a financial asset as an
asset that does not provide direct utility to agents, and whose payoffs do not depend
on ownership. Examples of financial assets are common stocks and bonds; in con-
trast, examples of non-financial assets are houses, which provide direct utility, and
productive assets such as land and firms, whose payoff depends on the managerial
skills of their owners.2 In the FG economy, collateral is the only enforcement mecha-
nism; as a result, debt contracts are non recourse, that is, they default whenever they
promise more than the value of the collateral. FG show that if only one equilibrium
exists, there is no default. The only debt contract traded (the "max-min" contract)
promises the value of the collateral in the worst state of the world, thus assuring that
collateral requirements (the amount of collateral per unit of promise) are enough to
guarantee delivery. If there are other equilibria involving default, they are all equiv-
alent, in terms of prices and real allocations, to the no-default equilibrium. Hence,
the possibility of default impacts equilibrium (because lenders require collateral to
back promises, thereby affecting real allocations), yet actual default does not (be-
cause all equilibria are equivalent). Finally, FG also show that, with very realistic
frictions (e.g., when sourcing collateral is costly), all default equilibria disappear and
the max-min contract is the only debt contract traded.
One key assumption in FG is that all assets serving as collateral are financial. When
    1
     For a literature review on collateralized borrowing in general equilibrium models, see Fostel
and Geanakoplos (2014).
   2
     Note that there are assets that are generally thought of as financial but are not financial
according to FG's definition (e.g., a bond taxed at different rates according to country of residency);
similarly, "Lucas trees" are financial assets according to this definition.



                                                  2
assets serving as collateral are non financial, theory does not guarantee the existence
of a non default equilibrium; moreover, default generally occurs as long as agents'
incentives to borrow are strong enough, and it affects prices and real allocations.
Indeed, several papers in the collateral general equilibrium literature provide robust
examples of default equilibria when such assumptions are violated.3 As FG write,
their results "may explain why there are some markets (like mortgages) in which
defaults are to be expected, while in others (like repos) margins are set so strictly
that default is almost ruled out."4
In this paper, we study collateral requirements and default in a controlled experi-
ment; guided by the theory, we contrast laboratory outcomes when the asset used
as collateral is financial and when it is not. In the laboratory, we can address this
question by having subjects trade a financial and a non-financial asset, while keep-
ing constant subjects' asset valuations. This obviously cannot be done with field
data (for instance, there are several institutional reasons why default rates on repo
contracts and land-backed mortgages may differ).
To this purpose, we develop a model that retains the crucial features of FG, but it
is simple enough to be implemented in the laboratory. More precisely, we consider
a binomial economy where agents can issue debt contracts using a risky asset as
collateral. Agents are allowed to borrow as much as they wish using collateral;
collateral requirements are endogenously determined in equilibrium. We study two
economies: in the "Financial-Asset economy" (from now on, FA-economy), the asset
is financial; in the "Non-Financial Asset economy" (from now on, NFA-economy)
the asset is not financial. Under both specifications, the equilibrium is unique. As
FG predict, in the FA-economy, the only debt contract traded is the max-min debt
contract, and there is no default. In contrast, in the NFA-economy, equilibrium
collateral requirements are lower and therefore there is default: agents trade promises
that exceed the collateral payoff in the low state of world. Importantly, agents' asset
valuations are the same across economies, and agents are able to borrow as much
as they want; nevertheless, when assets are non financial, equilibrium borrowing,
leverage, and asset prices are higher.
We bring the model to the laboratory by having students play in a double auction
experiment with collateralized borrowing. We implement the two economies with
two different treatments, the "FA-treatment" and the "NFA-treatment." In bring-
  3
      See for example Geanakoplos (1997), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012), Simsek (2013).
  4
      See for instance, Baklanova et al., 2019.


                                                3
ing the model to the laboratory, we face two important challenges. First, in the
theoretical model, borrowing and lending occur through several collateralized debt
contracts, each traded in a separate market and with its own price. Setting up a
double auction with simultaneous trading in several debt markets is hard (see for
instance, Asparouhova, 2006); in our experiment, the problem is compounded by the
presence of the collateral requirement tying these markets together. Our solution
is to link the credit and asset market in the double auction: subjects post orders
that determine their simultaneous position in both the asset and the credit market.
Second, most of the double-auction experiments on asset markets use non-financial
assets in order to generate gains from trade. In the FA-treatment, we create gains
from trade through heterogeneous beliefs. Implementing belief heterogeneity in the
laboratory is hard, because of the general disfavor toward lying to subjects in exper-
imental economics. Our solution is to allow for the realized state of the world to be
different for Buyers and Sellers, while at the same time keeping subjects' incentives
aligned with those of the theory.
The experimental outcomes are in line with the theory's main predictions. The type
of collateral, whether financial or not, matters. Default rates are higher in the NFA-
treatment than in the FA-treatment. Although, in contrast to the theory, default
occurs also in the FA-treatment, the losses from default are much lower. Lower
default rates and default losses stem from stricter collateral requirements: to issue
the same debt contract, subjects need to post twice as much collateral in the FA
versus the NFA-treatment. Note that, as theory predicts, default does not prevent
trading: indeed, in both treatments gains from trade are fully realized. Default rates
and collateral requirements converge to the theoretical prediction as the experiment
progresses: subjects learn that whether an asset is financial matters for its collateral
capacity even though subjects value financial and non-financial assets the same.
Finally, theory predicts that, in both treatments, Buyers should use all their cash as
downpayment. In the laboratory, this happens in the FA-treatment but not in the
NFA-treatment, where Buyers end up with positive cash balances while at the same
time borrowing; we relate this result to the non-recourse nature of the contracts.
This paper belongs to a large literature in experimental finance, starting with Smith
(1962), testing asset pricing models in a laboratory financial market where subjects
trade in a double auction. For instance, Bossaert et al. (2007) find empirical support
for the CAPM in a double auction experiment; Crokett et al. (2018) use a double
auction to study a Lucas-tree model. This literature generally finds that double-


                                           4
auctions converge to the equilibrium of the underlying theoretical model (see, e.g.,
Asparouhova et al., 2003, Bossaerts and Plott, 2008, Plott, 2008).5 Recently, Cipriani
et al. (2012 and 2018) have studied the asset-pricing implication of collateralized
borrowing in a laboratory financial market: as predicted by the theoretical literature
(see, for instance, Fostel and Geanakoplos, 2008 and Geanakoplos and Zame, 2014),
leverage is priced and creates deviations from the Law of One Price. In contrast to
our paper, in Cipriani et al. (2012 and 2018), leverage is exogenously set by the
experimenter, there is only one type of collateral, and, by construction, default never
occurs.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the theoretical model. Section
3 describes the experimental design and experimental procedures. Section 4 presents
the results. Section 5 concludes. All supplementary material is presented in the
Appendix.



2       Theory

2.1     The Financial Asset Economy

2.1.1    The Model

There are two periods, t = 0, 1. At time 1, there are two states of the world, s = H
and s = L, (High and Low). In the economy, there is a continuum of risk-neutral
agents with unit mass; there are two types of agents, i = B and i = S , (Buyers and
Sellers). Buyers and Sellers have different beliefs about the probability of state High,
q i for i  B, S.
There are two assets in the economy, cash and a risky asset Y (from now on, "the
asset") with payoffs in units of cash. The asset payoff in state s = H, L is given by
Ds , with DH > DL . We denote by p the price of Y in terms of cash (the numeraire)
at time 0.
At t = 0, agents of type i are endowed with mi units of cash and ai units of the asset.
An investor's payoff measured in units of cash in each state s = H, L is denoted by
 i
s  . Agent of type i  I maximizes their expected payoff given by
    5
    Convergence is not a feature of the double auction per se; indeed, Crockett et al., 2011, provide
an example in which a double auction does not converge to equilibrium because theory predicts it
should not.


                                                 5
                                    U i = q i H
                                              i
                                                + (1 - q i )L
                                                            i
                                                              .                                    (1)

In addition to trading the asset, agents can borrow and lend through collateralized
(non-contingent) debt contracts. Since the only repayment enforcement mechanism
is collateral, all borrowing must be collateralized, otherwise agents would have no
incentive to repay. Agents can borrow and lend through collateralized debts contracts
indexed by j  J, where J = R+ is the set of all available debt contracts. Each debt
contract j is a non-contingent promise to pay j at time 1 backed by one unit of asset
Y serving as collateral; only the seller (borrower) of the debt contract needs to post
collateral, the buyer (borrower) does not.6 Hence, 1    j
                                                          is the collateral requirement
for each dollar the seller of contract j promises to pay at time 1. Note that, in
the traditional general equilibrium model with no collateral requirements, a debt
contract is fully characterized by the non-contingent promise alone. In a one-period
economy, there is only one debt contract; the market for this contract clears at a price
(and interest rate) in equilibrium. In contrast, in collateral general equilibrium, each
debt contract j  J is characterized by both its promise and the collateral backing
it. Even in a one-period economy, each debt contract j with the associated collateral
requirement 1  j
                 is a different financial contract. Each debt contract is traded in a
different market, with its own equilibrium price and interest rate. In equilibrium, all
debt contracts j  J are priced, although only a subset may be actually traded.7
We assume that the debt contract is non-recourse: the maximum borrowers can lose
if they do not honor their promise is their collateral.8 As a result, agents will never
choose to repay more than the value of the collateral. In each state s  {H, L}, the
actual delivery of a contract j is given by

                                            min{j, Ds }.                                           (2)


Whenever j > Ds , the borrower pays less than the full promise j in state s, and
hence defaults on the obligation. In other words, in this economy, a debt contract
will default in all states in which the promise j is greater than the value of the
   6
     One could think of the debt contract as a zero-coupon bond, where j is the face value of the
bond.
   7
     In the collateral general equilibrium literature, the terms of a financial contract are summarized
by the ordered pair (Aj , Cj ). The first component, Aj denotes the promise in each terminal state.
The second component, Cj , denotes the assets used as collateral to back the promise.
   8
     That is, lenders do not have the right to seize anything beyond the collateral backing a promise.


                                                  6
collateral.
Denote by bj the price of the debt contract j at time 0: an agent can borrow bj units
of cash today by selling the debt contract j (promising to pay j tomorrow). Similarly,
an agent can lend bj units of cash today by purchasing the debt contract promising
                                                                                (j -b )
to pay j tomorrow. The interest rate associated to a debt contract j is rj = bj j .
If the promise j is smaller than or equal to DL , the contract never defaults; in this
case, rj is the riskless interest rate.
Denote by i                                                                        i
             j the number of debt contracts j agent i decides to buy or sell; if j > 0,
the agent is buying debt contracts j and hence lending cash; if i       j < 0, the agent
is selling debt contracts j and hence borrowing cash. Given the asset and debt
contract prices (p, (bj )j J ), at time 0, each investor i decides cash holdings, w  0,
asset holdings, y  0, and debt contract trades, j , to maximize (1) subject to the
budget constraint:
                              py + w  pai + mi -       (j )bj ,                      (3)
                                                            j J


and the collateral constraint:

                                             max(-j , 0)  y.                                          (4)
                                       j J



The budget constraint states that the value of cash and asset holdings cannot exceed
the value of initial endowments (of cash and the risky asset) plus the proceeding of
any net collateralized borrowing.9 The collateral constraint states that if an agent
borrows, they must hold the required collateral at time 0. In particular, if an agent
borrows by selling debt contract j , so that j < 0, they need to hold one unit of asset
Y as collateral per debt contract sold. Hence, the total amount of debt contracts
sold, among all potential debt contracts available to be traded, cannot exceed their
total asset holdings y.10
Agent i's final payoff in state s  {H, L} is equal to the sum of their final cash
holdings and the payoff accruing from their asset holdings plus the delivery of their
net lending:11
   9
      If j J (j )bj < 0, the agent is a net borrower.
  10
      If an agent is lending, and hence buying a debt contract, the collateral constraint (4) is trivially
satisfied: j > 0 and y  0 (since short sales of the risky assets are not allowed).
   11
      If the agent is a net borrower, then j J (j )min{j, Ds } < 0, reflecting the repayment at time
1.


                                                    7
                            i
                            s = w + yDs +             (j )min{j, Ds }.
                                                j J


A Collateral Equilibrium consists of asset price, debt contract prices, individual cash
holdings, asset holdings, and contract trades such that agents maximize their utility
(1) subject to their budget (3) and collateral constraint (4), and all markets clear.12
In our model, agents face a menu of debt contracts j  J , each promising j and
collateralized by one unit of Y . Taking the price of each contract, bj , as given,
they choose which contracts to trade; in other words, collateral requirements are
endogenous. Moreover, since collateral is scarce, only a few (or even only one contract
as we will see below) will be actively traded in equilibrium.


2.1.2    Parameter Values and Equilibrium Analysis.

Table 1 shows the parameter values we use when implementing the FA-economy in
the laboratory.
                          Table 1: FA-economy Parameterization.
                   P arameters     DH    DL    qB      qS    mB    mS    aB   aS
                   V alues         500   100   0 .8    0.2   300   0     0    3
                   This table shows the parameter values of the FA-economy.

In this economy, the risky asset is a financial asset, since its payoffs do not depend
on ownership. As shown in Table 1, the asset payoff is DL = 100 in state Low and
DH = 500 in state High for both Buyers and Sellers. Agents have different beliefs
about the likelihood of the states of the world. Buyers are more optimistic than
Sellers: the probability of the state being High is q B = 0.8 for Buyers and q S = 0.2
for Sellers. Belief heterogeneity generates heterogeneity in agents' asset valuations
(420 for Buyers and 180 for Sellers), which is needed for trading to occur. Finally,
Buyers are endowed with all the cash, mB = 300, whereas Sellers are endowed with
all the risky assets, aS = 3. Accordingly, Buyers are on the demand side and Sellers
on the supply side of the asset market.13
  12
     Our model does not allow for contingent financial contracts (e.g., short-selling). As a result,
even if the number of available securities (assets and debt contracts) is larger than the number of
states, they may not be fully span the state space (for example, it may not be possible to construct
a security that only pays out in state Low). Because of this, the Collateral Equilibrium may not
implement the Arrow-Debreu equilibrium, and hence markets are incomplete.
  13
     The parameters are chosen so as to make the economy amenable to laboratory implementation.



                                                 8
The unique equilibrium in the FA-economy is described in Tables 2 and 3.14
   Table 2: Equilibrium Collateral Requirements and Prices in the FA-economy.
               Promise j   Asset Price p     Borrowing bj =100    Interest rate rj =100
                  100          200                 100                      0
    This table shows the equilibrium promise, asset price, borrowing, and interest rate in the
                                        FA-economy.


       Table 3: Equilibrium Allocations and Final Payoffs in the FA-economy.
                                              Buyers    Sellers
                                      y          3         0
                                    j =100      -3         3
                                      w          0       300
                                    H          1200      600
                                     L           0       600
  This table shows equilibrium cash, asset holdings, and number of debt contracts traded in the
                                          FA-economy.

From FG, we know that there is an equilibrium in which the only debt contract
traded is j = 100 (and the associated collateral requirement is 1/100), and hence
there is no default; in Appendix I, we show that this equilibrium is unique. Since
agents are risk neutral and there is no discounting, the riskless interest rate is zero;
therefore, the price of the riskless debt contract promising j = 100 (what Buyers
actually borrow) is bj =100 = 100. The equilibrium asset price is 200.
Since Buyers' expected value (420) is greater than the equilibrium price, they buy
as many units of the risky asset as they can afford (3 units) on margin: for each
unit of the asset that they purchase, they borrow 100, and pay a downpayment of
100 to cover the price of 200. Hence, Buyers sell 3 debt contracts j = 100, backed
by their total asset holding; this implies, at a zero interest rate, a total borrowing of
300. On the other hand, since Sellers' expected value of the asset, 180, is lower than
the price, they sell all their endowment of the asset and lend to Buyers through debt
contract j = 100 at a zero interest rate.
Buyers' final payoffs are 1200 and 0 in state High and Low respectively. The zero
payoff in state Low results from Buyers leveraging the risky asset with a contract
that promises the whole value of the collateral in state Low and holding no cash.
The model's predictions regarding leverage and default do not hinge on the extreme heterogeneity
in endowments (Buyers hold all the cash and Sellers all the assets supply). Having Sellers and
Buyers on only one side of the market simplifies the laboratory implementation considerably (see,
for instance, in the double auction literature, Smith, 1962).
  14
     See Appendix I for equilibrium analysis and uniqueness proof.



                                                 9
In contrast Sellers' final payoffs are constant across states (600), since Sellers sell
all their risky asset endowment, and only hold riskless assets (cash and the j = 100
bond).
Finally, the rest of the equilibrium values, omitted from Tables 2 and 3, are i   j =
0, i = B, S, j = 100, and bj = q S min{j, 500} + (1 - q S )min{j, 100}, j. That is, all
contracts with promise j = 100, although priced, are not traded in equilibrium: all
contracts with promise j < 100 have an equilibrium price of bj = j and an interest
rate of 0; all contracts with promise 100 < j < 500 have an equilibrium price of
bj = 0.2j + 0.8(100); all contracts with promise j 500 have an equilibrium price
of bj = 0.2(500) + 0.8(100) = 180, the Seller's valuation of the risky assets. As
explained in Appendix I, all contract prices are pinned down by lenders' (Sellers')
zero expected profit condition.


2.2     The Non-Financial Asset Economy

In the NFA-economy, the asset is non-financial since its payoffs depend on i, the
                                                                                   i
agent owning the asset: the asset payoff to agent i in state s = H, L is given by Ds ,
       i     i
with DH > DL .
Heterogeneity in asset payoffs introduces a subtlety when defining debt contract
deliveries. Note that since the payoff of the risky asset depends on ownership, the
delivery of the debt contract will also depend on whether the borrower is a Buyer or
a Seller. In particular, the actual delivery of a contract j is given by

                                                   i
                                           min{j, Ds },                                           (5)


where i is the agent selling the debt contract (the borrower).15 A real-world example
is borrowing by entrepreneurs or farmers with different abilities; if they default,
their collateral (the firm or the field) is repossessed, but its value will depend on the
entrepreneur's (or farmer's) productivity. That is, the value of the collateral depends
on the borrower's characteristics, since the repossession happens after the borrower
put in their labor.16 '17
  15
     Note that, although the payoff of the contract depends on its seller, this is still a competitive
general equilibrium model, albeit with market segmentation. For a discussion, see Appendix I.
  16
     Another example is real estate (a house), whose value depends on how its owner maintains it.
  17
     In all our analysis, we assume that the collateral is borrower-held. One could also study a model



                                                 10
Table 4 shows the parameter values we use when implementing the NFA-economy in
the laboratory.
                       Table 4: The NFA-economy Parameterization.
                                      B      S
                    P arameters     DH     DH     DL     q     mB     mS     aB    aS
                    V alues         500    200    100    0.8   300    0      0     3
                   This table shows the parameter values of the NFA-economy.

In this economy, the asset is non-financial. Whereas the asset payoff in state Low
DL = 100 is the same for both Buyers and Sellers, the asset payoff in state High is
                      B                             S
higher for Buyers (DH    = 500) than for Sellers (DH   = 200). Moreover, Buyers and
Sellers attach the same probability q = 0.8 to the state High, hence the difference in
asset payoff is the only source of asset valuation heterogeneity across agents. Initial
endowments are identical across the two economies. Note that the expected value of
the risky asset for both Buyers and Sellers is the same in both economies, 420 for
Buyers and 180 for Sellers. In other words, in the NFA-economy, the asset valuations
do not change for either Buyers and Sellers with respect to the FA-economy; the only
change is that the asset is no longer financial. Nevertheless, as we will see, in the
NFA-economy, equilibrium borrowing and default are very different.
The unique equilibrium in the NFA-economy is presented in Tables 5 and 6.18
  Table 5: Equilibrium Collateral Requirements and Prices in the NFA-economy.
                Promise j     Asset Price p    Borrowing bj =375     Interest rate rj =375
                   375            420                320                     0.17
  This table shows equilibrium promise, asset price, borrowing, leverage and interest rate in the
                                         NFA-economy.


in which the collateral is held by the lender. This would make no difference in the FA-economy
(since the asset is financial), but it would make a difference in the NFA-economy. In case of default,
the debt contract would pay according to the payoff of the lender; this for instance would be the case
if the ability of the holder of the collateral at the time of default determines the risky asset's payoff.
From a theoretical standpoint, both modeling choices are justifiable; from an experimental point of
view, our choice has the desired effect of increasing the predicted spread in outcomes between the
FA and the NFA-economy.
   18
      See Appendix I for equilibrium analysis characterization and uniqueness proof.




                                                   11
     Table 6: Equilibrium Allocations and Final Payoffs in the NFA-economy.
                                          Buyers    Sellers
                                    y       3          0
                                            -3         3
                                    w       0        300
                                    H      375       1260
                                    L       0        600
 This table shows equilibrium cash, asset holdings, and number of debt contracts traded in the
                                        NFA-economy.

Since, in the NFA-economy, the asset is non financial, violating one of the assump-
tions in FG, the existence of a default-free equilibrium cannot be guaranteed. Indeed,
as shown in Appendix I, the unique equilibrium in this economy involves default,
since Buyers borrow only through the debt contract promising j = 375; the as-
sociated collateral requirement (1/375) is lower than in the FA-economy (1/100).
The j = 375 contract fully delivers min{375, 500} = 375 in state High but only
delivers min{375, 100} = 100 in state Low. As a result, there is default in state
Low. The price of debt contract j = 375 is given by Sellers' break-even conditions
bj =375 = 0.8(375) + 0.2(100) = 320, with an associated interest rate of rj =375 = 0.17.
The equilibrium asset price is 420. Since this is equal to Buyers' expected value, they
are willing to buy as many units of the risky asset as they can afford (3 units) on
margin. For each unit of the asset that they purchase, Buyers borrow bj =375 = 320,
and pay a downpayment of 100 to cover the unit price of 420. Hence, Buyers sell 3
debt contracts, backed by their total asset holdings.
Sellers sell all their endowment of the asset because their expected value of the asset,
180, is lower than 420, the price. They lend against collateral to Buyers at an interest
rate of 17 percent by buying 3 contracts j = 375.
Buyers' final payoffs are 375 in state High and 0 in state Low. As in the FA-
economy, the zero payoff in state Low stems from Buyers' leveraging with a contract
that promises more than the value of the collateral in state Low and holding no cash.
Since the Buyers are paying a higher price for the asset than in the FA-economy, their
payoff in state High is lower. In contrast to the FA-economy, Sellers' final payoffs
are not constant (1260 in state High and 600 in state Low) since now they hold the
risky debt-contract j = 375.
Finally, the rest of the equilibrium values, omitted from Tables 5 and 6, are i
                                                                              j =
0, i = B, S, j = 375, and bj = 0.8min{j, 500} + 0.2min{j, 100}, j.
It is important to note that the presence of default in equilibrium is a robust feature of


                                              12
the NFA-economy, and not a fluke of our parameterization. As discussed in Appendix
I, given utility and endowments parameters, there is always a minimum level of asset
payoff heterogeneity above which equilibrium always involves default.


2.3     The Equilibria in the FA and NFA-Economies

In both the FA and the NFA-economy, agents can borrow or lend through any debt
contract j (collateral requirements and default are endogenous); moreover, agents'
asset valuations are the same in both economies (420 for Buyers and 180 for Sellers).
So, why do agents choose to borrow through contract j = 100 in the FA-economy,
whereas in the NFA-economy they choose to borrow through contract j = 375? In
other words, why are collateral requirements set high enough in the FA-economy so
as to prevent default, whereas in the NFA-economy they are set low enough so that
default happens in equilibrium?19
Under both parameterizations, p = 180 (Sellers' valuation) can never be an equilib-
rium price: competition among Buyers pushes the price of the asset above Sellers'
valuations; Buyers finance their purchases by issuing collateralized bonds. In the
NFA-economy, Buyers' competition pushes the asset price all the way to their valu-
ation (420); Buyers finance their purchase by selling a bond with promise j = 375,
which defaults in state Low. In contrast, in the FA-economy, Buyers are willing
to increase their borrowing only up to the no-default threshold (j = 100), which
finances the asset purchase at the equilibrium price of 200.
In the NFA-economy, gains from trade in the asset market arise because the asset
payoffs are higher for Buyers. Since Buyers and Sellers have identical preferences,
they agree on the pricing of all the debt contracts. Buyers are willing to pay a
higher interest rate and competition pushes the price of the risky asset up to Buyers'
valuation. In this economy, default always occurs unless Buyers afford to purchase
all the asset supply at a price equal to their valuation by borrowing 100 or less.20
In the FA-economy, gains from trade in the asset market arise because of differences in
preferences (Buyers have more optimistic beliefs). Unlike the NFA-economy, however,
this heterogeneity in preferences affects not only the valuation of the risky asset, but
those of the bonds as well. In particular, Buyers value the risky asset and all bonds
  19
    In what follows, we provide an intuitive argument; for a technical discussion, see Appendix I.
  20
    Remember that there is always a minimum level of payoff heterogeneity above default occurs
(see Appendix I).


                                               13
with a face value above 100 (risky bonds) more than Sellers.21 When Buyers make
a leveraged purchase, they go long on the asset and short on the bond. For j > 100
differences in preferences affect both legs of the trade in opposite directions: for this
reason, one can prove that no leveraged position with j > 100 is optimal.22



3      The Experiment

3.1     The Experiment Design

The experiment was run at the Interdisciplinary Center for Economic Science (ICES),
at George Mason University. We recruited subjects in all disciplines using the ICES
online recruiting system.23 Subjects had no previous experience with the experiment.
The experiment was programmed and conducted with the software z-Tree.24
The experiment consisted of five sessions. Twelve students participated in each
session for a total of 60 students. Each session consisted of two treatments, corre-
sponding to the two economies described in Section 2:

    · The Financial Asset Treatment (FA-treatment), where we implemented the
      FA-economy of Section 2.2.

    · The Non Financial Treatment (NFA-treatment), where we implemented the
      NFA-economy of Section 2.3.

In each session, the same group of students played in both treatments, thus allowing
us to study the difference in behavior with one-sample statistical techniques. In
order to control for possible order effects in the data, in Sessions 1 and 2, we ran
the NFA-treatment first, and in Sessions 3, 4 and 5 we ran the FA-treatment first.
Remember that the agents' valuation of the asset is the same in the FA and in the
  21
      Because they attach lower probability to state Low and therefore to default.
  22
      In an economy where there is both heterogeneity of beliefs and dividends pay according to
ownership, default would occur and would affect prices and payoffs; the reason is that although
Buyers value both risky bonds and the risky asset more than Sellers, they have an additional gain
from trade on the risky asset (higher dividend) that does not affect their valuation of the risky
bonds.
   23
      When the number of students willing to participate was larger than the number needed, we
chose the subjects randomly in order to reduce the chance that the students in the experiment knew
each other.
   24
      Fischbacher (2007).


                                               14
NFA-economy, for both Buyers and Sellers. However, the asset is financial in the
FA-economy, but non-financial in the NFA-economy.25
We ran twelve rounds of the first treatment and ten rounds of the second treatment
in each session. The first four rounds of the first treatment and first two rounds of
the second treatment were for practice, and did not determine students' payments.
Thus, in all sessions, there were eight (non-practice) paid rounds for each treatment.
An important challenge in bringing the theoretical model to the laboratory stems
from the fact that, in the theoretical model, many debt contracts j , (in particular
any contract such j  R+ ), each collateralized by one unit of the risky asset, can be
traded. Hence there are many markets in the model: the market for the asset and the
markets for each debt contract j , each market with an associated equilibrium price,
bj , and interest rate rj . In the theoretical model, although all debt contracts j are
priced in equilibrium, only one (j = 100 in FA and j = 375 in NFA) is actively traded.
It is very hard for the experimenters to set up a double auction where trading in any
debt contract j and the risky asset happens contemporaneously while at the same
time assuring that the collateral requirement is satisfied. Moreover, the theoretical
equilibrium consists of buying on margin, a transaction which simultaneously involves
going long on the asset and short on the debt contract; such transaction is hard to
implement through two separate double auctions since in continuous time it is hard
for subjects to execute two trades contemporaneously. Restricting the set of possible
debt contracts to a few markets (that is, a few levels of j ) is also not an option
since the whole purpose of our exercise is to study how collateral requirements arise
endogenously.
Our solution is to allow Buyers (Sellers) to borrow (lend) only as they purchase (sell)
the risky asset (and from the same counterparty); they do so by specifying a Down-
payment and a Promise in the Buy (Sell) offers. Therefore, in the laboratory, we only
observe the Downpayment, the Promise, and whether there is default. We are not
able to decompose the Promise into interest and borrowing, which are undetermined
because of the portfolio restriction (similarly, we are not able to decompose the total
  25
     Note that keeping the asset valuations constant was necessary, otherwise higher borrowing
and default in the NFA-treatment could have been the result of higher asset valuations, hardly a
surprising finding. Moreover, whereas in the NFA-economy trading can happen only because of
payoff differences, in the FA-economy for trading to occur there must be differences in beliefs (or in
subjects' preferences). In order to keep valuations constant and have equilibrium trading in both
economies, we decrease Sellers' payoff in state High, while increasing their belief on the probability
of state Low.



                                                 15
cost of the Buyers' position into price of the risky asset and interest).26 This inde-
terminacy does not prevent us from answering the main question of the paper, the
interplay between collateral and default.27


3.2      The Procedures

We first describe the procedures:
1. At the beginning of the experiment, we gave written instructions for the first
treatment to all subjects.28 After reading the instructions aloud, we gave the subjects
time to ask questions, which were answered in private.
2. All payoffs were denominated in an experimental currency called E $. The risky
asset was referred to as a "widget."
3. At the beginning of the session, each subject was randomly assigned to be either
a Buyer or a Seller. In every round, there were six Buyers and six Sellers. Subjects
could see their role in the left corner of their computer. Subjects maintained the
same role throughout the experiment.
4. At the beginning of the round, each Buyer was given E $300 and each Seller was
given 3 units of the asset.
5. Subjects traded the asset in a double auction by exchanging it among themselves
for 200 seconds. They used the trading platform shown in Appendix III.
6. During the 200 seconds of trading activity, Buyers could post Buy Offers and
Sellers could post Sell Offers. To post a Sell Offer, a Seller would enter two numbers:
i) the Downpayment: the payment they wanted to receive at the time of the trade;
and ii) the Promise: the payment they wanted to receive at the end of the round.
The offer appeared immediately on everyone's screen in a column labeled "Current
Sell Offers" (the identity of the subject making the offer was not revealed). Similarly,
to post a Buy Offer, a Buyer would enter two numbers: i) the Downpayment: the
payment they were willing to make at the time of the trade and ii) the Promise: the
  26
     In the equilibrium of the unrestricted model, Buyers only borrow while buying the asset, and
Sellers only lend while selling the asset; for this reason, it is easy to show that our equilibria survive
the portfolio restriction imposed in the laboratory.
  27
     See Cipriani et al. (2012 and 2018) for an experimental analysis of collateralized borrowing and
asset pricing.
  28
     Instructions are in Appendix III. In the instructions, the first treatment played in the session
was referred to as Part A and the second as Part B.


                                                   16
payment they were willing to make at the end of the round.29 Buyers and Sellers
could cancel their offers at any time.
7. A trade took place whenever a Buyer accepted a Sell Offer posted by a Seller
or a Seller accepted a Buy Offer posted by a Buyer. At the time of the trade, the
Downpayment was debited from the Buyer to the Seller; and an asset was transferred
from the Seller to the Buyer.30 Subjects' screens always displayed their current
holdings of cash and assets, the list of past trades in the round, all outstanding Buy
and Sell offers, and the time left before the end of the round (see Appendix III).31
8. After the 200 seconds elapsed, the state of the world was realized, and subjects'
payoffs were computed and appeared on subjects' screens. Each subject's per-round
payoff was computed by summing the per-trade payoffs of each trade.32 In order to
avoid a zero-payoff, a E $1, 200 bonus was added at the end of each round.33
9. After round 1 ended, a new round started. The first treatment continued until 12
rounds were played. Each round was independent from the previous one: subjects
were not allowed to carry over endowments of cash or assets from one round to the
next.
10. After 12 rounds were played, the second treatment was played for 10 rounds. We
gave additional written instructions to all subjects. After reading the instructions
aloud, we gave the subjects time to ask questions, which were answered in private.
After both treatments ended, we randomly chose 1 round out of the 16 paying rounds
(8 per treatment) for payment purposes. The payoff of that round was converted
into dollars at the rate of E$35 per $1. Subjects were also paid a show-up fee of $5.
We paid subjects in private immediately after the end of the experiment.
  29
     A Seller could submit any number of Sell Offers as long as he had assets left to sell. A Buyer
could submit any number of Buy Offers as long as the Downpayment of each Buy Offer was smaller
than the cash available to the Buyer.
  30
     Note that our trading procedure is different from a standard double auction where a trade
happens whenever orders cross. The reason is that in our experiment orders cannot be ranked as
they consist of two elements (the Downpayment and the Promise).
  31
     Subjects' own outstanding offers and trades are highlighted.
  32
     That is, the per-round payoff computation does not include the value of the initial endowment.
  33
     E$1,200 is the upper-bound in potential losses. This maximum loss is attained when a Seller
sells their entire endowment at a price of 100 (the value of the asset in state Low) in the FA-
treatment in a round in which the state of the world turns out to be High, that is, 3(100-500).




                                                17
3.2.1      Heterogeneity of beliefs

In the NFA-economy, beliefs are homogeneous: both Buyers and Sellers believe that
the state of the world is High with probability 0.8. In the experiment, the state of
world was determined by picking a ball from a bag with 5 balls numbered from 1 to
5; if the ball bore a number higher than one, the state of the world was High.
In contrast, in the FA-economy, Buyers and Sellers disagree about the state prob-
abilities. Implementing heterogeneity of beliefs in the laboratory is hard since all
subjects are playing in the same financial economy, and there is a generally accepted
prohibition in experimental economics against deceiving subjects.34
We solve the problem by having different states of the world for Buyers and Sellers:
we compute the state of the world for Buyers as if they lived in an economy in which
state High has probability 0.8; we compute the state of the world for Sellers as if
they lived in an economy in which state High has probability 0.2. In particular, the
experimenter picked a ball from a bag with five numbered balls. The state of the
world was determined according to Table 7. If the ball's number was 2, 3, or 4, the
state of world was High for Buyers but Low for Sellers. If the ball's number was
either 1 or 5, the state of the world was Low (1) or High (5) for both Buyers and
Sellers. We explain this procedure clearly to subjects in the instructions, so they
knew that the state of the world was determined differently for Buyers and Sellers.35
                     Table 7: State High and Low in the FA-Treatment
                          Ball Number    1      2       3       4      5
                          Buyers         Low    High    High    High   High
                          Sellers        Low    Low     Low     Low    High
       This table shows how the state of the world was determined for Buyers and Sellers in the
                                             FA-economy.

Note that, in those rounds when the state of the world was High for Buyers and Low
for Sellers, the payoff of each Buyer was computed as if everyone's state of the world
was High; similarly, the payoff of each Seller was computed as if the state of the world
  34
    See, e.g., Cooper (2014).
  35
    An alternative solution could have been to try to influence subjects' assessments on the like-
lihood of state High through some sort of "framing" (e.g., by trying to affect Buyers' and Sellers'
perception of the likelihood of the state of the world through the wording of the Instructions). We
decided against it as we would have lost control over subjects' beliefs about the two states of the
world. Given that the goal of our experiment is to study how leverage and default differ depending
on whether the collateral is financial or not, maintaining control over beliefs in the laboratory (and
therefore over asset valuations across treatments) was very important.



                                                 18
was Low. This means that in such rounds, although Buyers are fully delivering on
their promises, Sellers are nevertheless facing default.36
Our procedure to implement heterogeneous beliefs described in this section is not
equivalent to the heterogeneity in valuations in the NFA-economy. In the NFA-
economy, when the state is High, the asset is worth 500 to Buyers and 200 to Sellers;
each subject's payoff is computed taking this difference into account; in contrast, as
explained above, in the FA-economy, when the state of the world is High for Buyers
but Low for Sellers, a Buyer's payoff is computed as if the value of the asset were
500 for everyone, whereas a Seller's payoff is computed as if the value of the asset
were 200 for everyone.


3.2.2    The Per-Trade Payoff

Given the determination of the state of the world described in the previous sub-
section, we now define subjects' payoffs. Buyers' per-trade payoff is the difference
between the asset's payoff to Buyers and how much they paid for the asset. In both
treatments, Buyers' per-trade payoff is given by


                                      B               B
                                     Ds - d - min(j, Ds )

where how much they pay for the asset is given by the sum of i) how much they pay
at the moment of the transaction, the Downpayment, and ii) how much they pay
at the end of the round, the minimum between the Promise and asset's payoff to
Buyers.37
Because of how the state of the world is determined, Sellers' per-trade payoff is com-
puted differently across treatments. In the FA-treatment, Sellers' per-trade payoff is
the difference between how much they receive from selling the asset and the asset's
payoff to Sellers. That is,
                                             S      S
                                d + min(j, Ds  ) - Ds
  36
      Suppose that a Buyer and a Seller trade a promise DL < j < DH , and the state of the world
is High for Buyers but Low for Sellers. In this case, the Buyer repays his promise but the Seller
only receives DL ; the experimenter pockets the difference (something we explained to subjects in
the Instructions).
   37
      The payment at the end of the round comes from equation (2): a Buyer will never repay the
Seller more than the final value of the collateral (that is, they will default whenever the Promise is
higher than the final value of the asset).



                                                 19
where how much they are paid for the asset is given by the sum of i) how much they
receive at the moment of the transaction, the Downpayment, and ii) how much they
receive at the end of the round, the minimum between the Promise and asset's payoff
to Sellers. As we mentioned in Subsection 3.2.1, when we implement heterogeneous
beliefs in the FA-treatment, the realized state of the world may be different for
Buyers and Sellers; the delivery of the debt contract (and therefore whether there
was default or not on the transactions) was computed for each subject according to
their realized state of the world.
In contrast, in the NFA-treatment, the delivery of the debt contract is always de-
termined according to the value of the asset to Buyers. As a result, the per-trade
payoff for Sellers is given by

                                               B      S
                                   d + min(j, Ds ) - Ds .


Note that in the description of the data, we will use the word "default" whenever
the Promise was greater than the final value of the risky asset. In the laboratory,
however, we never explicitly used or defined the term. Instead, we explained that a
Buyer's payment at the end of the round was the minimum of the Promise and the
final value of the asset.



4      Results

4.1     Allocations and Gains from Trade

In the theoretical model described in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, subjects' ability to leverage
allows the realization of gains from trade in both the FA and the NFA-economy: the
risky asset changes hands from Sellers (who value it less) to Buyers (who value it
more). Table 8 shows that experimental outcomes are largely consistent with this
prediction. In all sessions of both treatments, across all paid rounds, Sellers end up
with only a small amount (0.24 in FA and 0.03 in NFA) of their original endowment
of the risky assets (3 units), whereas Buyers hold almost all the risky-asset supply
(2.76 in FA and 2.97 in NFA).38 In other words, through trading and collateralized
borrowing subjects (almost) fully realize gains from trade in the laboratory.
  38
    As we discuss in Section 3, we paid subjects based on their earnings in one round extracted
from the last 10 rounds of both the FA and the NFA-treatment. Therefore, in all the empirical


                                              20
Since almost the entire supply of the risky asset exchanges hands during trading,
the number of trades in each round is close to 18 trades (the total asset supply) per
round. Indeed, as Table 9 shows, there are on average 16.55 trades per round in
the FA and 17.8 trades per round in the NFA-treatment. Finally, on average, most
trading activity occurs in the first 60 seconds of trading (see Figure 1), which suggests
that subjects had enough time and trading activity was not cut short arbitrarily.
                             Table 8: Final Asset Allocations.
                                          FA                 NFA
                          Session   Buyers Sellers     Buyers Sellers
                             1       2.63    0.38       2.92     0.08
                             2       2.54    0.46       2.94     0.06
                             3       2.90    0.10       3.00     0.00
                             4       2.90    0.10       2.98     0.02
                             5       2.83    0.17       3.00     0.00
                            All      2.76    0.24       2.97     0.03
 This table shows average final asset holdings of Buyers and Sellers across all paid rounds of all
                                    sessions and by session.


                          Table 9: Number of Trades per Round
                                     Session    FA     NFA
                                        1      15.75   17.50
                                        2      15.25   17.63
                                        3      17.38   18.00
                                        4      17.38   17.88
                                        5      17.00   18.00
                                       All     16.55   17.80
This table shows the mean number of trades per round across all paid rounds of all sessions and
                                        by session.


analysis, unless we explicitly state otherwise, we report results from those rounds only. We report
results across all rounds in Appendix II.




                                                21
                  Figure 1: Proportion of Transactions within Rounds




This figure displays the proportion of transactions within each 20-second period of the 200-second
round relative to the total number of transactions in the round. Each point in the chart shows the
         average proportion for a given time interval across all paid rounds of all sessions.



4.2     Default

In Table 10, we report, across all paid rounds and sessions, the proportion of transac-
tions that default in the FA and NFA-treatments, separately for rounds in which the
state of the world was Low and rounds in which it was High; for the FA-treatment,
we consider the state of the world to be Low when it was Low for Buyers, so as to
keep the same (ex-ante) proportion of rounds with a Low state of the world as in
the NFA-treatment.39 '40 Theory predicts that default should never occur in state
High in either treatment. This was indeed the case in the experiment: the propor-
tion of contracts with default was zero in the FA-treatment and very close to zero
(only one contract defaulted across all paid rounds of the five treatments) in the
  39
      Across the five sessions, in the NFA-treatment, the state of the world was Low in 7 rounds out
of 40; in the FA-treatments, Buyers' state of the world was Low in 13 and Sellers' state of the world
in 33 rounds out of 40.
   40
      In Appendix II, we report the same statistics on the NFA-treatment computed by considering
the state of the world to be Low when it was Low for Sellers. The results are similar.



                                                 22
NFA-treatment.
Theory predicts that when the state of the world is Low, default occurs in the
NFA-treatment but not in the FA-treatment. In the laboratory, when the state is
Low, across all sessions, 86 percent of contracts default in the NFA-treatment, but
only 42 percent in the FA-treatment, a statistically significant difference (Wilcoxon
signed-rank test: p-value=0.06).41 In other words, although we observe default in
both treatments, the proportion of contracts that default is significantly lower when
theory predicts that no default should be observed.
The higher prevalence of defaults in the NFA-treatment is also observed at the round
and subject level. Indeed, as Figure 2 shows, the distribution of defaults per Low
round in the NFA-treatment is to the right of that in the FA-treatment: as reported
in Table 11, the number of defaults in the median Low round decreases from 16 in
the NFA-treatment to 6 in the FA-treatment. Similarly, we observe a stark difference
between the NFA and the FA-treatment if we look at subjects' median behavior. As
Figure 3 shows, the distribution of defaults per Buyer in the NFA-treatment is to the
right of that in the FA-treatment; as shown by Table 11, the median Buyer defaults
in 3 trades in the NFA-treatment, but only 1 in the FA-treatment.
In the theoretical model, default should occur in the NFA-economy; it should not in
the FA-economy. In the experiment, we observe some default in both the FA and
the NFA-treatment, albeit with very different frequency. In order to understand the
importance of default in the laboratory, it is also useful to study "by how much"
subjects default. Indeed, the experimental data show that not only are there fewer
defaults in the FA-treatment; defaults also entail lower losses for Sellers. Table 12
reports the average loss from default in the two treatments, measured as the average
difference between the promise the actual delivery, for state-Low rounds.42 Across
all sessions, the average default loss was 177 in the NFA-treatment versus 51 in
the FA-treatment, a statistically significant difference (Wilcoxon signed-rank test:
p-value=0.06). This confirms the theoretical prediction that default is an important
  41
     All Wilcoxon signed-rank tests in the paper are run at the session level. For each session, we
compute the average of the variable(s) of interest. For each variable, we obtain a sample of five
observations. We test for differences across treatments with a paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test;
and for equality of a variable to its theoretical counterpart with single-sample Wilcoxon signed-rank
tests. We ran the tests on session averages in order to take into account any possible dependency
among subjects' behavior within sessions. The p-values of all statistical tests mentioned in the
paper are reported both in the tables throughout the paper and, together, in Appendix II.
  42
     As we mentioned above, in state High, default almost never occurs in the laboratory, and the
loss from default is therefore zero.


                                                 23
outcome with non-financial assets, but much less so when assets are financial.
                   Table 10: Proportion of Transactions that Default.
                                            Low   State   High   State
                              Session      FA      NFA    FA      NFA
                                 1         0.06    0.94   0.00    0.00
                                 2         0.13    0.83   0.00    0.00
                                 3         0.67    1.00   0.00    0.00
                                 4         0.31    0.71   0.00    0.00
                                 5         0.64    1.00   0.00    0.01
                                All        0.42    0.86   0.00    0.00
                             Predicted       0       1      0       0
                            FA vs. NFA     0.06
This table shows the proportion of transactions that default in each treatment across all paid Low
 rounds of all sessions and by session. The last row reports p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank
                  tests on the nulls that FA proportions equal NFA proportions.


           Figure 2: Histogram of the Number of Defaults per Low Round.




 This figure displays the histogram of the number of defaults per Low round across all Low paid
                                      rounds of all sessions.




                                               24
        Figure 3: Histogram of the Average Number of Defaults per Buyer.




This figure displays the histogram of the average number of defaults per Buyer across all Low
                                  paid rounds of all sessions.


                             Table 11: Default Distribution.
                                           Round        Buyer
                             Statistic   FA NFA      FA NFA
                               P10        1     9     0      1
                               P25        4    15     0      1
                             Median       6    16     1      3
                               P75       12    18     3      5
                               P90       12    18    11.5    9
This table shows the distribution of defaults per Low round and the distribution of defaults per
                        Buyer across all Low paid rounds of all sessions.




                                              25
                             Table 12: Average Default Loss.
                                                   Low State
                                     Session      FA NFA
                                        1          21    222
                                        2          17    110
                                        3          76    203
                                        4          22    134
                                        5          87    324
                                       All         51    177
                                    Predicted       0    275
                                   FA vs. NFA     0.06
 This table shows the average loss from default across all Low paid rounds of all sessions and by
  session. The last rows reports the p-value from a Wilcoxon signed-rank test on the nulls that
              average losses in the FA-treatment equal those in the NFA-treatment.



4.3     The Promise

In our experiment, default occurs when the promise exceeds the value of the collateral
(the asset payoff at time 1). Therefore, in order to understand why in the laboratory
default occurs much more often in the NFA than in the FA-treatment, we analyze
Buyers' promises. According to the theoretical model, in the FA-economy, the equi-
librium promise is j = 100 (the asset payoff in state Low), and default never occurs.
In contrast, in the theoretical NFA-economy, the equilibrium promise is j = 375,
and default occurs in state Low. In other words, in the FA-economy, the collateral
requirement per dollar promised at time 1 ( 1  j
                                                 ) is set high enough so as to prevent
default, whereas in the NFA-economy the collateral requirement is set so low that
default occurs in state Low.
Figure 4 reports the cumulative histogram of promises in the experiment. The mass
of the promise distribution in the FA-treatment is to the left of that in the NFA-
treatment. Indeed, the empirical cumulative distribution of promises in the NFA-
treatment first-order stochastically dominates that of the FA-treatment; consistently
with the prediction that in the FA-treatment borrowing becomes too expensive be-
yond the default threshold, there is a large jump in the cumulative distribution at
100 (across all paid rounds and sessions, 34% of transactions have a promise of 100).
As Table 13 shows, the average promise in the FA-treatment is 135, higher than its
theoretical counterpart, 100 (the difference is significant, with a Wilcoxon signed-
rank test p-value of 0.06). In contrast, the average promise in the NFA-treatment is
284, lower than its theoretical counterpart of 375 (the difference is not statistically


                                                26
significant, with a Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-value of 0.13). Therefore, we observe
that promises are much higher in the NFA-treatment than in the FA-treatment.
The difference between the average promise in the two treatments (149) is both
quantitatively important and statistically significant (Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-
value of 0.06). We obtain similar results if we look at median promises instead of
average promises.
Similarly to the frequency of default studied in Section 4.2, the higher level of
promises in the NFA-treatment is also observed at the round and subject level.
Indeed, as Figure 5 shows, the distribution of the average promise per round in
the NFA-treatment is to the right of that of the average promise per round in the
FA-treatment; indeed, as Table 14 shows, in the median round the average promise
decreases from 264 in the NFA-treatment to 128 in the FA-treatment. Moreover,
we observe a stark difference between the NFA and the FA-treatment if we look at
subjects' median behavior: as shown in Table 14 and Figure 6, the average promise
of the median Buyer is 236 in the NFA-treatment, but only 136 in the FA-treatment.
                    Figure 4: Cumulative Histogram of the Promise.




This figure displays the cumulative histogram of the Promise across all paid rounds of all sessions.




                                                27
                           Table 13: Mean and Median Promise.
                                                 FA               NFA
                          Session         Mean    Median     Mean Median
                             1            101       100      310      350
                             2            138       100      206      185
                             3            173       175      299      300
                             4            101       100      222      200
                             5            161       150      382      405
                            All            135      100      284      300
                         Predicted         100      100      375      375
                     Actual vs. Theory    0.06               0.13
                       FA vs. NFA         0.06
  This table shows the mean and median promise across all paid rounds of all sessions and by
  session. The last two rows report p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on the nulls that
         medians equal their theoretical values and that FA median equal NFA median.


                          Figure 5: Average Promise per Round.




This figure displays the distribution of the average promise per round by treatment across all paid
                                        rounds of all sessions.




                                                 28
                          Figure 6: Average Promise per Buyer.




This figure displays the distribution of the average promise per Buyer by treatment across all paid
                                        rounds of all sessions.

                       Table 14: Distribution of Average Promises.
                                             Round         Buyer
                               Statistic   FA NFA       FA NFA
                                 P10        92  188      47    96
                                 P25       101 216       76   144
                               Median      128 264      136 236
                                 P75       166 358      163 321
                                 P90       178 397      198 396
  This table shows the distribution of average promises per round and per Buyer across all paid
                               rounds of all sessions and by session.

In Section 4.2, we discuss the higher proportion and cost of default in the low
rounds of the NFA-treatment. Default in the laboratory happens when subjects'
promises are above 100. As Table 15 shows, whereas 41 percent of trades have a
promise greater than 100 in the FA-treatment, the number reaches 87 percent in
the NFA-treatment, a statistically significant difference (Wilcoxon signed-rank test:
p-value=0.06); this is why we observe a higher proportion of default in the NFA-
treatment than in the FA-treatment. Moreover, the average promise in all trades
in which the promise is greater than 100, E (j |j > 100) (the average promise in



                                                29
a trade that defaults in state Low) is 316 in the NFA-treatment, but only 223 in
the FA-treatment (although the difference is not statistically significant, Wilcoxon
signed-rank test: p-value=0.19). This explains why as reported in Section 4.2, the
loss from default is higher in the NFA than in the FA-treatment.
            Table 15: Descriptive Statistics for Promises Greater than 100.
                                          Pr(j > 100)    Mean | j > 100
                            Session       FA     NFA     FA      NFA
                               1         0.143 0.879     270      345
                               2         0.238 0.887     301      224
                               3         0.755 0.979     199      304
                               4         0.288 0.664     185      295
                               5         0.610 0.951     235      400
                              All        0.415 0.872     223      316
                          FA vs. NFA      0.06           0.19
 This table shows descriptive statistics for promises greater than 100 across all paid rounds of all
sessions and by session. The last row reports p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on the null
                                   FA values equal NFA values.


                         Figure 7: Average Promise over Rounds.




This figure shows the mean promise across all sessions in each round for each treatment with the
                              unpaid (practice) rounds shaded.




                                                30
                            Table 16: Promises over the Rounds
                                    FA   Treatment                  NFA Treatment
             Session         Practice    1-2   3-6    7-8    Practice 1-2     3-6    7-8
                1              179       110   98      98      223     248 319       357
                2              206       152 136      127      156     195 198       234
                3              152       182 171      167      181     218 299       380
                4              123       111 103       86       94     174 222       266
                5              186       188 154      150      261     320 392       424
               All             163       149 133      126      185     231 287       332
            Predicted          100       100 100      100      375     375 375       375
        Actual vs. Theory      0.06      0.06 0.13    0.31     0.06    0.06 0.13     0.44
          Early vs. 7-8        0.13      0.06 0.06             0.06    0.06 0.06
This table shows the average promise across all paid and unpaid (practice) rounds of all sessions
and by session. The last two rows report p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on the nulls
that means equal their theoretical values and that means from earlier rounds equal means from
                                           rounds 7-8.

Finally, we study how the promise evolves over the rounds of trading. In Figure
7 and Table 16, we report the average promise over all rounds, both paid and un-
paid (shaded area).43 In the practice rounds, the average promise in the FA and
NFA-treatment are close (163 and 185), respectively above and below their theoret-
ical counterparts. As the experiment continues and subjects become more experi-
enced in trading, the average promise in the FA-treatment converges downward to
its theoretical counterpart (100), while the average promise in the NFA-treatment
convergences upward towards its theoretical counterpart (375). Indeed, although in
the practice rounds and in the first two paid rounds the difference between exper-
imental outcomes and theoretical predictions is significant (as it is in the overall
experiment), it ceases to be so from round 3 onward (see the Wilcoxon signed-rank
tests at the bottom of Table 20). In other words, as the experiment progresses, in
both treatments, the promise converges towards the predictions of the model: sub-
jects learn that borrowing in excess of 100 is too costly in the FA, but worthwhile in
the NFA-treatment.


4.4     Cash and Downpayment

In the equilibrium described in Section 2, in both the FA and the NFA-economy,
Buyers use all their cash endowment (300 per Buyer) as a downpayment in order to
  43
    As discussed in Section 3, we ran 4 unpaid practice rounds in the treatment run first (the NFA-
treatment in Sessions 1 and 2 and the FA-treatment in Sessions 3, 4 and 5) and only two in the
treatment run second; as a result, in Figure 7 and Table 16, unpaid rounds 1 and 2 in the shaded
area, are computed over a smaller number of sessions (2 in the NFA and 3 in the FA-treatment).


                                                31
buy all the asset supply (3 units per Seller); this implies zero final cash holdings and
a downpayment per asset of 100.
                      Table 17: Mean and Median Downpayment.
                                                FA              NFA
                         Session         Mean    Median    Mean Median
                            1            110       100      70      50
                            2             99       100      64      50
                            3             93        95      58      25
                            4             74        75      64      50
                            5             95       100      39      35
                           All             94      100      59       50
                        Predicted         100      100     100      100
                    Actual vs. Theory    0.44              0.06
                      FA vs. NFA         0.06
This table shows the mean and median downpayment across all paid rounds of all sessions and by
 session. The last rows report p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on the null that medians
              equal their theoretical values and that FA median equal NFA median.

As Table 17 shows, in the FA-treatment, the experimental outcomes are very close
to the prediction of the theoretical model. The average downpayment across ses-
sions is 94, statistically indistinguishable from 100 (Wilcoxon signed-rank test: p-
value=0.44). In contrast, in the NFA-treatment the downpayment is roughly half as
much of what theory predicts, on average 59 across sessions (significantly different
from 100, with a Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-value of 0.06).




                                                32
                     Figure 8: Mean Downpayment across Rounds.




  This figure shows the downpayment in each round averaged over all sessions with the unpaid
                                (practice) rounds shaded.


                   Table 18: Downpayment Throughout the Rounds.
                                         FA                             NFA
             Session        Practice   1-2    3-6    7-8    Practice   1-2    3-6    7-8
                1             116      126    111     97       91       87     68     56
                2              94      100    102     92       88       69     62     62
                3              95       96     89     99       86       75     54     48
                4              78       79     72     73       76       65     62     66
                5              90      105     96     86       59       48     39     32
               All             92      100     93     89       82       69     57     53
            Predicted         100      100    100    100      375      375    375    375
        Actual vs. Theory     0.44     1.00   0.63   0.06     0.06     0.06   0.06   0.06
          Early vs. 7-8       0.19     0.13   0.31            0.06     0.13   0.19
   This table shows the mean downpayment across all paid and unpaid (practice) rounds of all
sessions and by session. The last two rows report p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on the
   nulls that medians equal their theoretical values and that medians from earlier rounds equal
                                    medians from rounds 7-8.

Moreover, the evolution of downpayments through the experiment is different from
the evolution of promises described in Section 4.3. In particular, as Figure 8 and Ta-
ble 18 show, in the FA-treatment, the downpayment starts very close to its theoretical
counterpart and remains there through the experiment (the average downpayment


                                               33
in the practice rounds is not significantly different from that in the last two rounds,
with a Wilcoxon rank-sum test p-value of 0.19). In contrast, in the NFA-treatment,
the downpayment starts below 100 and as subjects increase their promises through
the rounds, it decreases to an average of 53 in the last two rounds. In other words,
in the NFA-treatment, subjects' downpayment does not converge to the theoretical
equilibrium as the experiment progresses.
                              Table 19: Average Final Cash.
                                               FA                 NFA
                        Session          Buyers Sellers     Buyers Sellers
                            1              10     290         96      204
                            2              49     251        112      188
                            3              30     270        127      173
                            4              86     214        111      189
                            5              31     269        182      118
                           All             41     259        126      174
                    Buyers vs. Sellers    0.06               0.19
                      FA vs. NFA          0.06    0.06
 This table shows the average final cash holdings for Buyers and Sellers across all paid rounds of
all sessions and by session. The last two rows report p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on
the nulls that FA means equal NFA means for a subject type and that Buyer means equal Seller
                                      means for a treatment.

Of course, since in the FA-treatment the downpayment is close to the theoretical
prediction, Buyers end up with almost no cash. Indeed, as Table 18 shows, Buyers'
average final cash in the FA-treatment is 41, whereas Sellers end up holding almost
the entire cash endowment, with an average final cash of 259 (the difference between
Buyers' and Sellers' cash holdings is statistically significant, with a Wilcoxon signed-
rank test p-value of 0.06). In contrast, in the NFA-treatment, Buyers hold on to a
significant amount of cash, almost half their cash endowment. Buyers' average final
cash is 126, whereas Sellers' average final cash is 174, a non-statistically significant
difference (Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-value equal 0.19).
The fact that, in both the FA and NFA-treatment, Buyers end up with positive cash
holdings does not necessarily imply that they are not cash-constrained: their final
cash holdings may not be sufficient to buy another asset since in the laboratory the
asset is indivisible. In Table 20, we report the average proportion of Buyers who are
cash-constrained at the end of a round taking into account the asset indivisibility.
Buyers were cash-constrained when their final cash holdings were less than (or equal
to) the average downpayment in the round (which is needed to buy an extra unit of
the asset). On average, 82 percent of Buyers were constrained in the FA-treatment;



                                               34
in contrast, in the NFA-treatment, only 35 percent of Buyers were constrained.44
                      Table 20: Proportion of Cash-constrained Buyers.
                                        Session             FA     NFA
                                           1                0.98   0.46
                                           2                0.79   0.35
                                           3                0.92   0.31
                                           4                0.50   0.46
                                           5                0.92   0.15
                                          All               0.82   0.35
                                     FA vs. NFA             0.06
                               Rounds per Median Buyer        5      2
                               Buyers per Median Round        8     2.5
 This table shows the proportion of cash-constrained buyers across all paid rounds of all sessions
and by session; it also shows the number of rounds in which the median buyer is constrained, and
the number of buyers that are cash-constrained in the median round, across all paid rounds of all
   sessions. The last row reports p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on the null that FA
statistics equal their NFA counterparts. A buyer is defined to be cash-constrained if at the end of
a round, the buyer's final cash holdings are strictly smaller than the average downpayment during
                                             the round.

There is a significant difference between Buyers' behavior in the NFA and in the FA-
treatment: in the NFA-treatment, surprisingly, not only Buyers borrow more than
in the FA-treatment, but they maintain significantly larger cash balances at the end
of the round; as a result, as we discussed above, they are often not cash-constrained.
This puzzling behavior can be explained by the coexistence of non-recourse debt with
Buyers' desire to protect themselves in case state Low is realized. In an economy
with uncollateralized borrowing and full recourse, Buyers cannot protect themselves
by borrowing while holding positive cash balances (because cash balances can be
seized by lenders). In contrast, in our economy, since loan repayment is limited
to the value of collateral (no recourse), cash holdings allow Buyers to increase the
payoff in state Low, while at the same time financing their purchase of the risky
asset through higher borrowing. And that is exactly what Buyers do in the NFA-
treatment; indeed, through the round, as their Promise increases, their downpayment
decreases (see Figures 7 and 8). Why do we not observe such behavior in the FA-
treatment? Because, as explained in Section 2.3, heterogeneity of beliefs makes
borrowing in excess of 100 very expensive; as a result, Buyers use all their cash
balances to purchase the risky asset.45
  44
       These proportions are computed considering each Buyer in each round as a different observation.
  45
       For the interested reader, we present a formal argument in Appendix I.




                                                   35
4.5    Conclusions

Do markets set collateral requirements high enough to prevent default? We address
this question through a laboratory experiment.
To this purpose, we develop a theoretical model of collateralized borrowing that is
amenable to laboratory implementation and collect experimental data. Two types
of risky assets can be used as collateral: financial assets (whose payoff does not
depend on ownership, like a bond) or non-financial assets (whose payoff depends
on ownership, like a firm). Theory predicts that when assets used as collateral are
financial, collateral requirements are set high enough that default never occurs. In
contrast, when assets used as collateral are non financial, collateral requirements are
low and default happens.
The laboratory results confirm the theory's main prediction: whether collateral is
financial or non financial matters. Default rates and loss from default are higher
when assets used as collateral are non financial. Although, in contrast to the theory,
default occurs also with non financial assets, the loss from default is much lower.
Lower default rates and default losses stem from stricter collateral requirements: to
issue the same bond, subjects post twice as much collateral when assets are non
financial. Finally, default rates and collateral requirements converge to the theoret-
ical prediction as the experiment progresses: subjects learn that whether an asset is
financial matters for its collateral capacity even though subjects value financial and
non-financial assets the same.



References

Asparouhova, E., "Competition in Lending: Theory and Experiments," Review of
Finance, 10, 189-219, 2006.
Asparouhova, E., Bossaert, P., and C. Plott, "Excess Demand and Equilibration
in Multi-security Financial Markets: the Empirical Evidence," Journal of Financial
Markets, 6(1), 1-21, 2003.
Baklanova, V., Caglio, C., Cipriani, M., and A. Copeland, "A New Survey of the U.S.
Bilateral Repo Market: A Snapshot of Broker-Dealer Activity," Review of Economic
Dynamics, 33, 228-249, 2019.



                                          36
Cipriani, M., Fostel, A., and D. Houser, "Collateral Constraints and the Law of One
Price: an Experiment," Journal of Finance, 73(8), 2757-2786, 2018.
Bossaert, P. and C. Plott, "From Market Jaws to the Newton Method: the Geom-
etry of how a Market can Solve System of Equations," Handbook of Experimental
Economics Results, Vol 1 (Elsevier Amsterdam), 2008.
Peter Bossaerts, Charles Plott and William R. Zame, "Prices and Portfolio Choices
in Financial Markets: Theory, Econometrics, Experiment," Econometrica, 75 (2007),
993-1038.
Cooper, "A Note on Deception in Economic Experiments," Journal of Wine Eco-
nomics, 9(2), 2014.
Fischbacher, Urs, "z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments,"
Experimental Economics 10, 171-178, 2007.
Fostel, A. and J. Geanakoplos, "Leverage cycles and the anxious economy," American
Economic Review, 98, 1211-1244, 2008.
Fostel, A. and J. Geanakoplos, "Endogenous Collateral Constraints and the Leverage
Cycle," Annual Review of Economics, 6, 771-799, 2014.
Fostel, A. and J. Geanakoplos, "Leverage and Default in Binomial Economies: A
Complete Characterization," Econometrica, 83(6), 2191-2229, 2015.
Geanakoplos and Zame, 2014: John Geanakoplos and William R. Zame, "Collateral
Equilibrium I: A Basic Model," Economic Theory (to appear).
Holt, C. and S. Laury, "Risk aversion and incentive effects," American Economic
Review 92, 1644-1655.
Plott, C., "Properties of Disequilibrium Adjustment in the Double-Auction Mar-
kets," Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, Vol 1 (Elsevier Amsterdam),
2008.
Smith, V. L., "An Experimental Study of Competitive Market Behavior," Journal
of Political Economy, 70, 111-137, 1962.




                                        37
