                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CHOOSING RACIAL IDENTITY IN THE UNITED STATES, 1880-1940

                                         Ricardo Dahis
                                          Emily Nix
                                          Nancy Qian

                                      Working Paper 26465
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26465


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We thank Ran Abramitzky, Martha Bailey, Leah Platt Boustan, Guilhem Cassan, Katherine
Eriksson, James Feigenbaum, Joe Ferrie, Claudia Goldin, Jeffery A. Jenkins, Larry Katz, John
Matsusaka, Magne Mogstad, Suresh Naidu, Santiago Perez and Marco Tabellini for their insights
and numerous useful suggestions; the participants at the U.C. Berkeley Haas OliverWilliamson
Seminar, U.C. Davis Economic History Seminar, Vancouver School of Economics Economic
History Seminar, LSE/NYU Conference on Political Science and Political Economy, VATT
Helsinki, Statistics Norway, USC PipeWorkshop, andWashington Area Economic History
Dinner. We are grateful to Suresh Naidu, Gregory Niemesh, Trevon Logan, and John Parman for
generously sharing their data; and thank Joris Mueller for excellent research assistance. All
mistakes are our own. Comments and suggestions are welcome. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ricardo Dahis, Emily Nix, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Choosing Racial Identity in the United States, 1880-1940
Ricardo Dahis, Emily Nix, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 26465
November 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. J1,J15,N3

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper documents that a large number of African American men experienced a change in
racial identity to white during 1880 to 1940, while analogous changes were negligible for other
races. We provide descriptive evidence that is consistent with the conventional wisdom that
"passing" for white was a response to severe discrimination, and came at great personal cost. The
findings suggest that contrary to traditional economic thinking, racial identity is neither entirely
exogenous nor fixed over the lifetime, and responds to incentives.


Ricardo Dahis                                    Nancy Qian
Northwestern University                          MEDS
2211 Campus Drive                                Kellogg SOM
Office 3386                                      Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208                               2001 Sheridan Rd.
rdahis@u.northwestern.edu                        Evanston, Il 60208
                                                 and NBER
Emily Nix                                        nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
University College London
Room 223-A
Drayton House
London
United Kingdom
and USC Marshall FBE
e.nix@ucl.ac.uk
1    Introduction

Race is an important determinant of opportunities and outcomes. Most studies in economics

treat race as entirely exogenous and fixed over an individual's lifetime. In contrast, other

disciplines of social science provide a large body of evidence that some individuals have

discretion over their racial identity.1 Akerlof and Kranton (2000) famously points out that

"the choice of identity may be the most important `economic' decision people make... eco-

nomic analyses of, for example, poverty, labor supply, and schooling have not considered

these possibilities".

    The primary goal of our paper is to make progress on this agenda by providing novel

evidence on the fluidity of racial identity in a historical context: pre-Civil Rights United

States. The findings of our study will emphasize the importance of allowing for endogeneity

in conceptualizing racial identity.

    In our context, discrimination against African Americans was severe and the "one-drop

rule" dictated that an individual was "black" if he had one or more black African ancestors.

At the same time, extensive (often nonconsensual) racial mixing during previous genera-

tions caused many African Americans to have the physical traits of Europeans. Historical

accounts describe some of these individuals leaving behind their black identities to live as

white, often at great personal and emotional cost. "Passing [choosing to change one's racial

identity from black to white] came into existence during slavery and increased in frequency

during the Jim Crow period. Individual African Americans chose to pass to escape dis-

crimination and increase employment opportunities. The costs of passing, however, were

high including emotional stress from cutting ties to one's family, condemnation from some

segments of the black community, and the constant fear of being 'discovered' by whites"

(Rockquemore and Brunsma, 2007, Chap. 1). However, the total magnitude of "passing"

for white is unknown and has been a subject of heated debate for over one hundred years.
   1 For example, later in the introduction, we discuss the classic sociology studies by Eckard (1947) and Hart

(1921) on racial classification change during the early 1900s. More recent studies in sociology, such as Alba, Lin-
deman, and Insolera (2016) and Saperstein and Penner (2012), examine changes in self-reported racial identity
in modern U.S. data.




                                                        1
African American Studies scholar, Werner Sollors, summarizes the existing evidence and

describes it as "dramatically heterogeneous and range from hundreds to millions" Sollors

(1999, p. 281).

    The main difficulty has been the lack of reliable data. Sociologists have attempted to

infer from aggregate population statistics the "missing" black (or "extra" white) population

across censuses (not accounted for by births, deaths or net migration). These accounting

exercises face the difficulty that the historical data, particularly vital statistics and especially

for African Americans, are crude and measured with error.2 For example, at the lower end,

Eckard (1947) estimates that 0.25% of black males over age ten in the 1930 census are miss-

ing in the 1940 census after accounting for mortality and net migration.3 On the higher

end, Johnson (1925, Figure 37) uses census data to infer that 335,000 (2.5%) black men and

women passed to white each year, implying an intercensal rate of around 21%. Recent ge-

netic evidence suggests very high rates of passing, but are difficult to interpret because they

are not representative of the population and do not reveal at what point in history passing

occurred.4

    Our study addresses this important question with a relatively new technique from the

economic history literature, which links individual census records for men over time. This

allows us to observe whether an individual changes race over time without using the rela-

tively more problematic vital statistics and migration data.5 The linked sample also allows

us to provide descriptive evidence on the motivations and constraints for passing.

    Using a two-sided linking algorithm that mitigates errors, we find that over 300,000 black

males passed for white during 1880 to 1940 (i.e., 16.6% per census interval on average).

Amongst the black men who passed for white, approximately 30% "reverse-passed" to black
   2 For a detailed discussion of the difficulties in accounting exercises, see, for example, Elo and Preston (1997)

and the references within. See, for example, Khanna and Johnson (2010) for a discussion of the range of esti-
mates.
   3 Hart (1921), in another well-known study, conducts a population accounting exercise for white Americans

using the 1910 and 1920 Censuses. The "extra" white individuals in 1920 cause him to deduce that a quarter of
a million black Americans (2.5% of the black population) changed their race to white.
   4 See the Background Section for a more detailed discussion.
   5 Similar to most previous studies that link individuals across censuses, we focus on men because women are

difficult to successfully link across censuses due to the frequency of last name changes with marriage.




                                                         2
in the following census. Since the linked sample is only a part of the total population, the

lower bound rate of passing for the population can be obtained by assuming that unlinked

individuals never pass for white: our estimates imply that, on average, at least 1.4% of the

all black men passed for white each census interval. Taken literally, this is 5.6 times higher

than the 0.25% rate from Eckard (1947), which has served as the benchmark lower bound in

the literature.6

    We interpret passing as an active choice. It was illegal for black individuals to live as

white ones. An observed change in racial classification in the census required a change in

lifestyle and situation so that a person would be accepted as white by those he encountered.

This includes the census enumerator, who determines the race of respondents in historical

censuses. There are two important caveats for our preferred interpretation. The first is the

concern that black men are linked to white men who are not their future selves by mistake.

We show this is unlikely with a large number of sensitivity checks, alternative linking al-

gorithms and falsification exercises.7 The second concern is that white enumerators may

have erroneously coded the race of correctly linked black men as white without any inten-

tion to pass from the black census respondent. We believe that this was unlikely because of

residential segregation and the scrutiny over race in the historical context.8 This concern is

also inconsistent with the findings of negligible rates of passing from white to black, which

should present enumerators with similar difficulties; and across the Asian races of Chinese,

Japanese and Korean, for whom enumerators would presumably have a similarly, if not

more, difficult time distinguishing.

    The second part of our analysis examines when and how individuals passed for white.

This was more likely to occur in states where miscegenation was illegal, that were more

democratic, where there were better opportunities for education, and if the individual was
   6 The  rate of passing for the population implied by our estimates is higher if the extrapolation weights by
observables. See Appendix Section F.
   7 See Section C.3 and Table A.2 for sensitivity checks. See Section C.4 and Table A.4 for replication of our

results using alternative linking algorithms. See Section 5.2 and Table A.3 for the falsification exercises.
   8 For example, in their study of race counts in the historical census, Strmic-Pawl, Jackson, and Garner (2018)

state ".. In this era, the Census Bureau had a near obsession with maintaining the lines among races, specif-
ically with political, economic, and social concerns about safeguarding Whiteness and maintaining the racial
hierarchy".


                                                       3
unmarried or had fewer children. Those who passed for white experienced an increase in

income, even after controlling for individual characteristics; were more likely to geograph-

ically relocate (to communities with a higher share of white residents, and often, out of the

South); and their family members would need to pass together or be left behind. These

descriptive results are consistent with the historical evidence that discrimination was an im-

portant driver in the choice to pass for white, middle class African Americans were more

likely to pass, and that one of the main costs was being cut off from one's community and

family. We also provide additional results, such as for individuals who are classified as

"mulatto" or who have distinctively black names.

    In summary, the results show that the lower bound of the number of black men who

passed for white is much higher than previously thought. Moreover, the evidence is consis-

tent with passing having been a response to severe discrimination and came at high personal

costs. The estimates are specific to our context. However, the insight that identity can be a

choice, even along dimensions as rigidly defined as race in pre-Civil Rights United States, is

generalizable.

    Our work is closely connected to the small but growing number of empirical stud-

ies that document the correlation between identity and social and economic incentives in

the context of caste in India (Atkin, Colson-Sihra, and Shayo, 2019; Cassan, Keniston, and

Kleineberg, 2020; Cassan, 2015; Cassan and Vandewalle, 2017); religious identity for Jews

in medieval Europe (Botticini and Eckstein, 2012); ethnic identity in contemporary China

(Jia and Persson, 2019); racial identity for Native Americans in contemporary United States

(Antman, Duncan, and Barham, 2015); and racial identity in contemporary Brazil (Cornwell,

Rivera, and Schmutte, 2017). Our historical context complements the recent work of Fouka,

Mazumder, and Tabellini (2018), which finds that the Great Migration of African Americans

increased the strength of identity for white Europeans in the Northeastern United States.9
    9 This literature has traditionally comprised of theoretical studies (e.g., Akerlof and Kranton, 2000; Bénabou

and Tirole, 2011).We do not present a formal model in the paper because of space constraints, but our results are
highly compatible with the model by Bénabou and Tirole (2011) . Also see Austen-Smith and Fryer (2005) and
Ruebeck, Averett, and Bodenhorn (2009) for studies of the contemporary U.S. context, Bodenhorn and Ruebeck
(2003) for a discussion of the historical U.S. context, and Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier, and Zenou (2016) for a study
of the context of immigrants in Europe today.



                                                         4
      This study is related to two strands of the economic history literature. First, we add

to works on racial identity in the historical United States by quantifying the magnitude of

the "passing" phenomenon and providing a large body of evidence on the correlates of

passing.10 Our findings complement the innovative study by Mill and Stein (2016), which

find that 10% to 13% of mulatto sons in the 1910 census pass for white in 1940 (within the

linked sample), and that passing is associated with higher income.11 Second, we add to

recent studies that conduct automated linking.12 The two-sided linking algorithm improves

on the one-sided linking algorithms used in existing studies by reducing the possibility of

false positives.13 The recent review of machine-linking methods by Abramitzky, Boustan,

Eriksson, Feigenbaum, and Pérez (2019), which is concurrent to our study, recommends

two-sided linking as the most rigorous method. To the best of our knowledge, this and our

study are the first to emphasize this methodological advantage.14

      This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the historical background. Section

3 describes the data. Section 4 summarizes the linking algorithm. Section 5 presents the

estimates of the rates of passing as well as the descriptive patterns of passing within the

linked sample. Section 6 concludes.



2     Background

2.1     Post-Reconstruction and Jim Crow

The years 1880-1940 coincided with the end of Reconstruction and the start of the Jim Crow

laws that preceded the Civil Rights Act of 1964. This was a period when formal and informal
   10 See, for example, Ruebeck, Averett, and Bodenhorn (2009) for a discussion about race in the historical U.S.

context.
   11 This study focuses on sons who are classified as "mulatto" from families with both black and mulatto chil-

dren.
   12 For example, see the pioneering studies of Ferrie (1996) and Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2012).
   13 An earlier working paper by two of the authors, Nix and Qian (2015), used one-direction links that poten-

tially suffered from finding false positive passing. The current study makes significant improvements in this
respect with two-sided linking, which is discussed in more detail in the paper.
   14 The main analysis will demonstrate that the rates of passing that we estimate are much lower than those

from one-sided linking. In the Appendix, we also document that the rates of passing we estimate are slightly
lower than or similar to alternative two-sided linking algorithms.



                                                       5
discrimination towards the black population severely limited their political, economic and

social opportunities relative to the white population. Southern states passed laws intended

to disenfranchise the black population (Woodward, 2002, p. 83). These changes significantly

reduced the number of black voters.15

    The black population faced restrictions such as the complete segregation of whites and

non-whites in all facilities (e.g., restaurants, schools, water fountains, buses), where the fa-

cilities provided to non-whites were usually lower quality than those provided to whites.

Many regions practiced strict neighborhood segregation, where public services such as sew-

ers and electricity ended at the boundaries of the white neighborhoods. In other places,

particularly urban areas, there could be segregation within buildings (e.g., across floors)

(Packard, 2003, p. 102-103). Miscegenation ­ i.e., interracial marriages ­ and sometimes even

non-marital sexual relationships were also made illegal (Packard, 2003, p. 99). Discrimina-

tion was also "enforced" informally by organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan. Non-whites

seen as violating white supremacy were often harassed, and sometimes murdered. Between

1882 and 1968, approximately 3,446 African Americans were lynched (Tuskegee Institute,

2010).

    Blacks earned much less than whites.16 Black men and women were shut out of most

non-menial jobs (Sharfstein, 2011, p. 255). Sundstrom (1994) shows that the large differences

in black and white occupational choices were driven in part by social norms that rejected

black workers as supervisors over white workers.17
  15 For example, in Mississippi less than 9,000 out of 147,000 voting age blacks were registered to vote. In
Louisiana, the number of black registered voters decreased from approximately 130,000 in 1896 to 1,342 by 1904.
In Georgia, only four percent of all black males were registered to vote (Keyssar, 2000, loc. 2695).
  16 Margo (1990) discusses the striking stability of the black-to-white earnings ratio from 1900 to 1940 and the

potential causes of these gaps, with African American men earning between 45%-48% the income of white
American men over this entire period. Also see, for example, Carruthers and Wanamaker (2017), Collins and
Margo (2011) and Card and Krueger (1992). Wright (2013) discusses how the Civil Rights movement undid
many of the barriers to black economic success that existed during our time period and led to large economic
gains for black men and women. Returns to skin color are analyzed and discussed in more depth in Bodenhorn
(2015).
  17 There was also significant variation in the formal laws which affected the rights and opportunities facing

blacks within states, as well as in the informal enforcement of state or federal laws. For example, Carruthers and
Wanamaker (2013) document substantial variation in the relative quality of schooling for black students across
counties. Keyssar (2000, loc. 3052) notes that the economic qualifications for voting varied across municipalities
in New York.




                                                        6
      Severe racial discrimination was not isolated to the South. For example, the Ku Klux

Klan was based in Indiana during the early 20th Century and had large memberships in

Maine and Oregon (Packard, 2003, p. 127). California, which had introduced laws to restrict

property ownership of Asians during the 19th Century, extended them to include other non-

white races such as black (Packard, 2003, p. 100). When Woodrow Wilson became president,

he segregated the District of Columbia's federal agencies, which had been integrated for the

previous fifty years (Packard, 2003, p. 123). Many schools in Illinois, Ohio, Pennsylvania and

New Jersey were completely segregated, even though it was de jure illegal. Between 1913

and 1948, 30 out of the then 48 states enforced anti-miscegenation (mixed-race marriage)

laws (Vile, 2003).


2.2    Racial Mixing before 1880

According to the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database, a total of 305,326 African Slaves were

ever brought to North America. Almost 70% were adult men.18 By the eve of the Civil War in

1860, there were a total of 4,427,294 individuals classified as black, over 3.9 million of whom

were slaves.19 To understand the magnitude of passing in our study, it is important to note

the large number of light skinned people of African extraction by 1880. "By the time that

slavery ended, a majority of American Negroes bore in their genetic make-up some degree

of white, which is to say European, ancestry" (Packard, 2003, p. 95).20 To demonstrate the

wide gradient of color for former slaves, emancipated "White and Colored Slaves" were

used for a propaganda tour of the North in 1863.21 Past studies have argued that those

who had Caucasian features may have had stronger economic incentives to pass for white

because they had the most to lose from Jim Crow laws since they were likely to have been
  18 See   https://www.slavevoyages.org/assessment/estimates.
  19 Children inherited the status of the mother under slavery; the child of a slave woman is always born a slave.

Thus a high degree of mixing between white men and black slave women could have contributed to the large
increase in the slave population.
  20 Rockquemore and Brunsma (2007) notes that "the vast majority of interracial sex consisted of exploitative

unions between white male slave owners and their black female slaves" (Rockquemore and Brunsma, 2007,
Chap. 1).
  21 See Appendix Figures A.1-A.2c, which are taken from the article entitled, "White and Colored Slaves" by C.

C. Leigh (Harper's Weekly, January 30, 1864, p. 71).



                                                        7
more educated, have higher skill jobs, and own property (Bodenhorn, 2002).


2.3   Genetic Evidence of Race Today

The best available genetics evidence shows substantial racial mixing in previous genera-

tions. Individuals today who identify as African American are 24% European and 73.2%

African on average. Moreover, a significant proportion of individuals who self-report as

European Americans have African ancestry: 3.5% have at least 1% (at least one ancestor in

the past eleven generations). In Louisiana and South Carolina, 12% of self-identified Eu-

ropean Americans have at least 1% African Ancestry (Bryc, Durand, Macpherson, Reich,

and Mountain, 2015).22 Since European-Americans are approximately 72.4% and African-

Americans are approximately 12.6% of the U.S. population today, taking literally the possi-

bility that 3.5% of the European-American population are black under the "one-drop rule"

implies that approximately 20% of black Americans passed for white. Hammer, Chamber-

lain, Kearney, Stover, Zhang, Karafet, Walsh, and Redd (2006) conducts a similar exercise

with an independent sample. This study does not report national average statistics, and

instead compares genetic compositions across regions. They find that for white Americans,

the lowest amount of African ancestry is in the Southwest (0.8%) and the highest in the

Northeast (10%). Doing a similar calculation as before, these genetic results translate to

rates of passing of 57.4% in the Northeast and 4.6% in the Southwest, which could reflect

a higher rate of passing in the Northeast or that those who passed migrated to the North.

Neither of the genetic studies discussed here use random samples and they may therefore

not be representative of the population they study (the United States, the Southwest, or the

Northeast). Meigs, Grant, Piccolo, López, Florez, Porneala, Marceau, and McKinlay (2014)

obtained a random sample of the population in Boston. They find that 8.63% of the ancestry

of European Americans is African, which translates to a rate of passing of 49.6% of the black

population.
  22 Notethat genetic studies such as the one discussed face numerous caveats from difficulties such as non-
random sampling of the population. See Bryc, Durand, Macpherson, Reich, and Mountain (2015) for a detailed
discussion.



                                                     8
2.4     Defining Race

Racial "science" and eugenics, with beliefs that race captures biological and inherent physi-

cal and moral traits, were popular during the period that we study. Much of this was based

on Carl Lineaus's 1735 publication, Systema Naturae, which classified the races as the follow-

ing:

        Africanus: black, phlegmatic, relaxed; hair black, frizzled; skin silky; nose flat;

        lips tumid; women without shame, they lactate profusely; crafty, indolent, neg-

        ligent; anoints himself with grease; governed by caprice.

        Europeaeus: white, sanguine, muscular; hair long, flowing; eyes blue; gentle,

        acute, inventive; covers himself with close vestments; governed by laws

        (Smedley, 1993, p. 164).

These explicitly racist beliefs led whites to believe that if they had been exposed to blacks,

they would be able to infer a person's degree of "blackness" from his appearance and de-

meanor.23 The legal definition of black, which was based on the fraction of one's blood that

was black, varied across states and over time. During the Jim Crow era, most states used

the "one drop rule", which meant that a person is black if she has only one drop of African

blood (Packard, 2003, p. 98).

      In practice, for many individuals of mixed extract, race was determined by association

because this "degree-of-blood rule did not in fact make it impossible for people to cross

racial lines" (Gross, 2009, loc. 4123). In his well-known study, Davis (2010, p. 14) points

out that "The concept of 'passing' rests on the one-drop rule and on folk beliefs about race

and miscegenation, not on biological or historical fact".24 In describing the successful suit

for white identity by a mixed race woman named Alexina Morrison, Gross (2009, p. 55)

points out that ".. race was not obvious. Nor did the rule about `negro' identity... decide the

question. More persuasive to the [white] witnesses and jurors at the trial were stories about
  23 SeeGross (2009, Ch. 7).
  24 Also,
         see Smith (2006) for a detailed discussion of the difficulties and methods that white individuals devel-
oped to distinguish between black and white, given the difficulty of distinguishing based on sight alone when
there were many mixed-race individuals.


                                                       9
the hidden marks of race as interpreted by experts, and stories about Alexina's behaviour

dancing at white balls, her mingling with white families, her love affairs with white men...

separation became the key to whiteness. People who had associated with whites must be

whites themselves, just as people who had associated with blacks had to be black... In other

words, race by association ... trumped any other sort of physical or documentary evidence"

(Gross, 2009, loc. 1083, 1356).25 As historian Carol Wilson noted when discussing her book

on the successful lawsuit of Sally Miller, an enslaved woman who claimed a white identity

(and freedom), "Southern whites want desperately to believe that they can tell the difference

between white people and black people. And so the fact that white people accept her as a

white person, they consider that factual evidence. Well, she must be white, because we think

she's white..." Wilson (2016).26


2.5     Passing for White

In the context of our study, passing required a person to have physical features that are

commonly shared by whites, to behave and dress like a white person, and to associate with

white people. Passing most often required a person to move to a white community where

the individual was not previously known by others as a black person since "...Caucasian

appearance was irrelevant if public knowledge existed of one's black ancestry" (Packard,

2003, p. 96). The exceptionally high rates of internal U.S. migration presumably made it

easier for mixed race individuals to move and adopt a white identity.

      Our study takes place when the incentives to pass were arguably at their highest since

the end of slavery. Jim Crow severely eroded the economic opportunities and civil liberties

of anyone identified as black, even as the number of educated and skilled African Americans
  25 There are several examples of racial classification by association from lawsuits. See the review by legal

historian Ariela Gross (Gross, 2009). In each successful case, the person suing to be legally identified as white
would demonstrate that she or he has been accepted by white friends and attended all white functions (e.g.,
assemblies, balls). The women also sometimes agreed to a physical inspection of her whiteness and provided
testimony to her virtuous behavior, which was assumed to be impossible if she was of African extraction. In
each case, the judge appealed to the jury to use their "common sense".
  26 In the modern U.S. context, sociologists have documented that the perception of whether an individual is

black is positively correlated with socio-economic status expressed by activities such as incarceration (Penner
and Saperstein, 2008) or attire (Freeman, Penner, Saperstein, Scheutz, and Ambady, 2011).



                                                       10
grew rapidly in the post-Civil War era. "The harder whites made it for blacks to earn a living,

educate their children, and just make it through a single day without threat or insult, the

greater the incentives grew for light-skinned blacks to leave their communities and establish

themselves as white... the drumbeat for racial purity, the insistence that any African ancestry

­ a single drop of blood ­ tainted a person's very existence, accelerated the migration to new

identities and lives" (Sharfstein, 2011, p. 235-236). William Pickens of the NAACP stated

in 1927, "if passing for white will get a fellow better accommodations on the train, better

seats in theater... and may even save his life from a mob, only idiots would fail to seize the

advantage of passing, at least occasionally if not permanently" (Janssen, 2016).

    Passing was known to have occurred for individuals of all ages. Children sometimes

passed from black to white because their parents passed or because parents sent light skinned

children to live with white families to allow the children to pass.27 Some passed as young

adults to attend school, obtain a job, or to marry a white person (or a black person who had

passed for white).28 Others passed when they were older simply because of the overwhelm-

ing discrimination they faced or to provide a better life for their children.29

    Passing was not always permanent. Sometimes, individuals passed to obtain a job or

attend school, and then later reverse passed to black.30 Other times, circumstances would

force one who had passed as white to reverse pass back to being black. An example is

the family of Stephen Wall, who "For the next ten years the family moved neighborhoods

repeatedly from white to black to white again" (Sharfstein, 2011, p. 270).31

    Given that one had to move away from his black community and live with whites to

pass, one of the greatest costs associated with passing for white was the near permanent

separation from a person's community and family. Spouses and children who could not

pass for white would be left behind. We investigate this with the data later in the paper.32
  27 See Williams (1996) and Dawkins (2012).
  28 See Sharfstein (2011) and Williams (1996).
  29 See Sharfstein (2011).
  30 See Hobbs (2014).
  31 Also see Gordon (1999) and Williams (1996).
  32 A large body of anecdotal evidence shows that those wishing to pass often completely disassociated them-

selves with their past lives. For example, historian Allyson Hobbs recalls the experience of her relative who
passed for white after high school. Her grandmother said to the relative, "you're going to graduate, you're


                                                     11
    See the Online Appendix Section A for summaries of case studies that illustrate the costs

and benefits of passing for white.



3    Historical Censuses

We use individual-level data from the U.S. historical censuses for the years 1880 - 1940.

These were digitized and made available to researchers by Ancestry through the NBER.33

For each individual, we observe variables such as the first name, last name, age, county

of residence, state of residence, state or country of birth, race, gender, relationship to the

household head and marital status. Father's and mother's birth states and countries are

available for the years 1880 - 1930.

    Our study focuses on males because of the difficulties in linking women, who usually

change their names after marriage. We restrict our attention to those under age 55 in the base

year because higher mortality rates for older ages reduce the number of links.34 The main

exercise divides individuals into two racial categories: white and black. Racial classification

was determined by the enumerator in the historical censuses. The categories change over

time. To be consistent, "black" in our study includes mulatto individuals, which are separate

categories for some years.35 After we present the main results, we will also compare the

rates of passing for mulatto individuals to those of black individuals in years when the two

groups are distinct.
going to leave Chicago, you're going to go to California, and you're going to become a white woman. And
this is the best thing for you". The young girl protested, she didn't want to leave her friends, her family, the
only life she'd ever known. And her grandmother said, "no, this is the best thing for you. You'll have the best
life chances if you do this" (Sloan, 2013). In his biography, Williams (1996) recounts how his mixed race father
passed for white by moving from Indiana to Washington D.C., and married a white woman. In his recount of the
experience of the Wall family, Sharfstein (2011) discussed how the children who moved away from their home
in Washington D.C. passed for white, and the one son who remained behind and his daughter were classified
as black.
   33 The 1850 and 1860 Censuses only reported names of free blacks. Since most of the black population was

enslaved, this means that these earlier data contain names for only a small subset of the population in which
we are interested. For the 1870 Census, only the 1% sample is currently digitized. The data from 1890 were lost
to a fire. Note that Nix and Qian (2015) uses similar data provided by FamilySearch. The current study uses
Ancestry because of the availability of information on occupations, the race of spouses and the number and race
of children.
   34 We later demonstrate that this restriction does not affect our findings.
   35 See Appendix Section B.1 for details on racial classifications in the Census.




                                                      12
    Enumerator instructions were vague.36 It is generally believed that enumerators inferred

the race of respondents based on physical appearance, behavior and association. The re-

quirements for a person of African extraction to be classified as white in the census were

presumably similar to the requirements for the legal cases discussed by Gross (2009) in Sec-

tion 2.

    Passing in our context refers to a change in census identification from black (including

mulatto individuals) to white from one census to the next. The individual historical census

data were not used for other purposes such as employment or taxes.37 Thus, there was no

reason for an individual to pass for white for the census per se. Rather, consistent with the

historical accounts in the previous section, we assume that the choice to pass required a

change in lifestyle and situation so that a person would be accepted as white by those he

encountered, including the census enumerator.

    Thus, our prima facie interpretation is that passing for white in the historical Censuses is

an active choice. However, it is also possible that enumerator error results in passive passing

in the data by miscoding the race of a light-skinned individual who had no intention of pass-

ing. For example, the enumerator often obtained information for the household from one

or two individuals. Given the legal and social environment (e.g., residential segregation),

enumerators may have assumed that all residents of the household (not in hierarchical rela-

tionships) are either white or non-white. However, since mixed-race cohabitation is illegal

for the most part, this phenomenon is unlikely to lead to the census data recording as white

a black individual who did not mean to pass for white. Also note that most enumerator er-

rors would simply lead to the individual being dropped from the linked sample. We discuss

enumerator error in more detail in the next two sections of the paper.
  36 SeeAppendix B.1.
  37 Themain purpose of the U.S. census is to determine the number of representatives per state in the house
and the number of electoral votes. It is also used to compute aggregate statistics. By law, information that can
be used to identify individuals is not released until 72 years later.




                                                      13
4      2-Sided Unique Perfect Links

We identify links as individuals who have a unique link going forwards in time (i.e., a black

man i in year t matches one and only one man of any race in year t + 10 ), for which the

linked individual in year t + 10 also has a unique link going backwards in time (i.e., the

linked individual in year t + 10 matches one and only one man in year t who is the initial

black man i). Links must have perfect spelling matches in first and last names, as well as

match on other information (e.g., approximate age, birth state, etc.). For brevity, we call this

the 2-Sided Unique Perfect (2SUP) link.38

      The main benefit of the two-sided linking procedure relative to the one-sided procedures

used in past studies is that it mitigates the possibility that mistaken links will produce false

passing for white. One-direction links identify the individual in year t + 10 who is the best

match for the black man in year t, but do not require that the black man in year t is the best

match for the individual in year t + 10. Mistaken links are likely to cause us to over state

the number of those who pass from black to white because there are more white men than

black men in the population. The problem is mitigated with the 2-sided link because we

only identify a link as one that is the best match in both directions.

      Our linking algorithm will overstate the true rate of passing only if all of the following

conditions are satisfied for the black individual i in year t : 1) there are no black individuals

in year t + 10 who can be linked to him (e.g., the black individual died in between censuses,

or there was an enumerator error); 2) there is one and only one white individual in year

t + 10 that can be linked to him; and 3) when linking backwards, the linked white individual

in year t + 10 links only to the initial black individual i in year t (e.g., the true link for the

white individual is not in the base year census due to transcription error or because he

moved to the U.S. in between the two censuses).39
    38 For
        computational feasibility, we use a randomly selected 10% sample of the black male population in each
base year t. The restriction only applies to the base year sample. We always link to the full population of all
males in the subsequent census, and again to the full population of all males in the initial census when linking
backwards. Thus, the restriction should not affect the accuracy of the links.
  39 Our results are similar if we restrict the sample to black men born in the United States in the base year.

These are available upon request.




                                                      14
      Two common concerns for linking in our context are enumeration error and intentional

name changes. Enumerator error can only bias the rate of passing upwards if all three condi-

tions above are true. We will present a large body of evidence in the paper and the Appendix

against this possibility. The linked sample will naturally omit any individual who changed

his name when he passed for white. We discuss this more when we examine individuals

with distinctively black names.

      The key advantage of the 2SUP link is that it should contain very few Type I errors (false

links). We investigate this issue by manually checking a large sample of 2SUP links. We find

little evidence of erroneous links. In addition, we conduct several falsification exercises and

a large number of sensitivity checks and show that the rates of passing are similar or higher

if we use alternative algorithms from other studies. These are shown later in the paper and

in Appendix C.



5     Main Results Using the Linked Sample

5.1     The Rate of Passing in the Linked Sample

5.1.1    Blacks Passing for White

Table 1 Panel A column (1) shows that 16.6% of black males with 2SUP links passed for white

during the five census intervals for which we have data. Panel B column (1) shows that this

is 30,239 individuals in the 10% sample, and therefore approximately 302,390 individuals in

the full population. Our results mean that at least 302,390 black men under age 55 passed for

white in the following census during the period 1880-1940. Note that there are five intervals

during this period: 1880-1900, 1900-1910, 1910-1920, 1920-1930, 1930-1940. In the paper, we

will often refer to this sample as men from the base years of 1880-1930.

      Since we only observe race during the census year, we will not be able to account for

instances of passing and reverse passing that occur within the same census intervals ­ i.e.,

if someone passed for white, but then returned to being black before the next census, they

would not be counted as passing in our estimates.


                                                15
   All linking procedures face a similar conceptual difficulty in extrapolating statistics from

the linked sample to the population because of the concern that the linked sample may not

be representative. Table 1 Panel C column (1) shows that 8.6% of black males in the base

year are linked using 2SUP. When we compare the characteristics of individuals in the 2SUP

sample and the population, we find that the means are very similar in magnitude, but the

large sample size means that the differences, though small, are statistically significant.40

   This leaves two possible and very different directions for extrapolating population statis-

tics. One is to say that the differences in sample means are not economically meaningful and

directly extrapolate the 16.6% rate of passing from the 2SUP sample to the population. Al-

ternatively, one can take the stance that such differences are meaningful despite the small

magnitudes. To be conservative and thorough, we consider the second line of inquiry. If

we make the extreme assumption that unlinked individuals never pass, the population rate

of passing for black men under age 55 would be 1.4% (0.086 × .166). Appendix Section F

discusses less extreme extrapolations using weights based on observable characteristics.

   For comparison, column (2) provides analogous statistics using the traditional one-direction

link, also with unique perfect spelling matches. The substantially higher rates of passing,

26.8%, and higher rates of being linked, 14.1% instead of 8.6%, are consistent with our prior

that 2SUP will mitigate false positives relative to one-direction links but link fewer individ-

uals. Henceforth, we will only present estimates using the 2SUP links.

   Appendix Table A.6 presents the results disaggregated by census intervals.


5.1.2     Race Transition Matrix

Table 2 presents a race transition matrix for Blacks, Whites, Native Americans, Chinese,

Japanese and Koreans. The latter three categories are separately reported only in 1920-1940

(i.e., the 1920-1930 and 1930-1940 linked intervals).41 For comparison purposes, the results

in this section for other racial categories will also focus on these two linked intervals.42
 40 SeeAppendix Table A.7.
 41 SeeAppendix Table A.1 for a comprehensive list of racial categories in each census.
 42 Our results are very similar if we use all available years for each category. They are available upon request.




                                                      16
    Panel I reports the rates of links and changes in racial classification within the linked

samples for each racial category with at least fifty thousand observations. Row A presents

the rates of passing for black to other races for this sample. It shows that 84.8% of black

males remain black, 15% pass for white, 0.1% become Native American, and 0.1% are clas-

sified as Chinese in the following census.

    In row B, we repeat the exercise for white males (i.e., identified as white and under age

55 in the base year).43 Table 2 row B shows that only 0.7% of the 2SUP links pass from white

to black. 99.1% remained white. The rates of passing to the other categories are similarly

negligible.

    These results, which are aligned with the socio-economic incentives to pass for another

race, support our interpretation that a change in racial classification in the census reflects an

active choice to pass rather than an inactive process driven by enumerator errors because

any difficulty that enumerators had in distinguishing between white and black men should

be reflected in both the rates of passing from white-to-black, as well as that of black-to-white.

    Rows C and D present the rates of racial classification change for Chinese and Japanese

men.44 We find that 8.2% of Chinese men and 7% of Japanese men become white, and a neg-

ligible share change to non-white races other than their own. These patterns are consistent

with the two groups of Asian men having faced more discrimination than white men, and

similar levels of discrimination to each other.

    Row E examines the rates of passing for men classified as Native Americans.45 We find

that 27.8% passed for white and 2.2% became black. This is consistent with historical evi-

dence that there was much racial mixing prior to our study period and that the official defi-

nition for Native Americans was more ambiguous than for other groups. In some censuses,
  43 We use 2% of the white male population from each base year for computational feasibility. We use a smaller

sample than for linking black males because the white population is much larger. Note that the rate of links for
white men is substantially higher than for black men, 20% instead of 9.3%. This is consistent with the fact that
fewer white men had common names than black men.
  44 The links use 100% of the Chinese and Japanese male population in each base year, 1920 and 1930, because

of their small size. The rates of links for Chinese and Japanese men are lower than for black men, 7.3% and 5.4%
versus 9.3%. This is consistent with the higher share of common names for Asians in the historical censuses.
  45 We use the 100% sample of males classified as Native Americans in each base year because of their small

population size.




                                                      17
enumerators were instructed to classify individuals with mixed white and Indian ancestry

as "white" if their community accepts them as white. For other races, the definition was

based solely on ancestry.46

    The main takeaway from these results is that black men are much more likely to pass for

white than men of other races who are categorized based on ancestry. This is consistent with

the fact that black men arguably faced the most severe discrimination. Equally important is

the finding that the rates of white passing to black (or any other race), which includes the

"reverse-passing" discussed later in the paper, are negligible. This is consistent with the fact

that white men had little incentive to live as another race.47


5.1.3      Passing Across East Asian Categories

If the observed rates of passing are driven by enumerator confusion due to similar physical

appearances of individuals who belong to different legal racial classifications, we should

also observe high rates of passing across the three East Asian groups, which have relatively

similar physical appearances. At the same time, these three groups faced broadly similar

levels of discrimination and no barriers to inter-racial marriage, such that there were lim-

ited incentives to actively pass across groups ­ i.e., a Chinese individual had little incentive

to become legally Japanese or Korean. As such, passing across Asian categories provides a

useful placebo.48 Table 2 Panel II presents the results. In addition to Chinese and Japanese

men, we include those identified as Korean, which is a relatively smaller population and

thus left out of Panel I. We observe negligible rates of passing across the categories of Chi-

nese, Japanese and Korean ­ from 0.1% to 0.4%. These findings support our claim that 2SUP

links are not subject to frequent enumerator error and our interpretation that passing was

motivated by socio-economic incentives.
  46 See Appendix Section B.1 for enumerator instructions. See Sandefur and McKinnell (1986) for a discussion
of the history of Native American racial identity and interracial mixing with whites.
  47 One may be concerned that the the commonality of names between whites and other races varies across

the latter, which could affect the probability that enumerators will miscode a race as white. We address this in
Appendix Section D.
  48 See Appendix Section B.1 for enumerator instructions for classifying Asians.




                                                      18
5.1.4    Reverse Passing

Historical accounts note occasions when a person classified as "white" will choose to change

their race to "black". The first is if he marries a black woman who cannot pass for white.

Given the illegality of miscegenation, this means that the white man would need to pass for

black. The second is if he is a black man who passed for white, who subsequently chooses to

reverse pass to be black again (e.g., to return to his family if they cannot pass for white). The

historical evidence provides many examples for the latter, which we focus on in this section.

To investigate the percentage of individuals who pass, but then revert to being black in

the following census year, we link individuals across two consecutive census intervals ­

i.e., link individual i in year t to himself in year t + 10, and link him in t + 10 to himself

in t + 20. Table 1 Panel D column (1) presents the rates of passing for the sample linked

over two consecutive censuses for comparison. 17% of the sample passed for white. This is

comparable to the 16.6% that passed for white in the sample that is linked over one census

interval in Panel A. Panel D column (2) shows that 30% of those who passed to become

white later reverse passed to black.49

      These results show that race was fluid and many individuals crossed back and forth

across identities. The presence of reverse-passing from "white" to black also implies that

the rate of passing from individuals who are born white to black was even lower than the

0.7% estimate from the previous section.


5.2     Falsification Exercises

One way to investigate the concerns of enumerator error or false links is by conducting fal-

sification tests. The first uses literacy. Individuals can only become more literate over time.

Changing from literate to illiterate must therefore reflect a mistaken link (or enumerator er-

ror). Thus, if we find that the latter change occurs more in the sample of those who pass
   49 Recall that interpreting these rates of reverse-passing requires a similar caveat to interpreting the rates of

passing shown earlier. Since we only observe individuals in census years, we will undercount reverse passing
if the person reverts back to his white identity by the following census (e.g., the individual is black in year t,
white in year t + 10, black in year t + 11 to t + 19, and white again in year t + 20). Also note that reverse-passing
is included in the count of whites passing for black in Table 2.



                                                         19
than those who do not pass, we would be concerned that our findings are confounded.

    Appendix Table A.3 column (1) shows that amongst those who passed from black to

white, 3% changed from literate to illiterate. This is comparable to the 5.1% for those who

did not pass in column (2). In contrast, the share of the linked sample to become literate

over time is similar or slightly higher for those who pass for white: 32.9% versus 31.4% for

those who do not pass. These results do not support the concern that mistaken links cause

false positive passing in the linked sample.

    A second falsification check uses the ages of children. For each linked individual, we

are able to observe all children living in his household and their ages in years t and t + 10.

We calculate the average reported age of children who are zero to five years old in year t

and the average reported age of children who are ten to fifteen years old in year t + 10.50

If the difference between the average ages of the children in years t and t + 10 is further

from 10 for the children of individuals who passed for white than those who did not pass

for white, we would be concerned about the presence of more bad links in the population of

those who pass. In row C of Appendix Table A.3, we find that the difference in reported and

observed ages of children are similar for the children of those who pass and those who do

not pass (9.49 versus 9.52). Note that if we compare the average ages of all individuals who

are identified as children of the household head without any restriction on their age, the

differences in average age between the two censuses are 5.72 versus 5.14 (not presented in

the table). The differences are less than ten because older children move out of the household

and younger ones are born. Nevertheless, the similarity between the two groups suggests

that the similarity in the restricted sample is not an artifact of the restricted age range.

    To show that our results are unlikely to be an artifact of mistaken links, we also conduct

a large number of sensitivity exercises and replicate the results using alternative linking
  50 This  exercise is restricted to linked household heads (for whom we can identify children using the variable
for the relationship to the household head) in the base years of 1900-1930. To avoid compositional effects due
to fertility and older children leaving the household, we restrict our attention to children who are ages 0 to 5 in
the base year. Note that this exercise does not require that age is reported accurately, but only that measurement
error (e.g., age heaping) occurs similarly between households where the household head passed for white versus
households where he did not pass for white. We focus on household heads with no more than ten children
within the specified age range to reduce measurement error.




                                                        20
algorithms. See Appendix Section C.3.


5.3     Descriptive Patterns of Passing for White

Motivated by historical accounts and the existing studies, this section uses the 2SUP sam-

ple to examine descriptive patterns of passing, its association with other behaviors such as

marriage and migration, and whether passing is correlated with social and economic oppor-

tunities.


5.3.1      The Mulatto Category

In 1880, 1910 and 1920, "mulattos" ­ i.e., individuals of both African and European descent

­ comprised a separate category from black.51 The instructions to enumerators were vague

and historians have been dubious about the usefulness of this categorization because of the

limited number of black Americans without any European extract.52 This and the need for

consistency across years motivates the grouping together of "mulattos" and "blacks" for the

main analysis. In this section, we follow earlier studies such as Mill and Stein (2016) and

repeat our investigation for a sample of individuals who are classified as mulatto in the base

year.

      Table 3 Panel A uses a sample of individuals who are categorized as mulatto in 1910 and

links them to the 1920 census, when mulatto remains a separate category; and a sample of

individuals categorized as mulatto in 1920 and links them to the 1930 census, when mulatto

is no longer a category.53 We find that from 1910 to 1920, only 25.9% remain mulatto, which

is consistent with the notion that the mulatto category was very hard for enumerators to

systematically and consistently define. 54.2% of individuals become black, while 19.5% be-

come white. The latter is comparable to the 16.6% rate of passing we find in our main 2SUP

sample for the same census interval (see Table A.6 row C), where we do not distinguish
  51 See Appendix Section B.1 for a detailed discussion on the definition for mulattos each census year.
  52 "After 1920, the U.S. Census Bureau dropped the `mulatto' category, the government having concluded
that at least three-quarters of all American Negroes bore white genes and thus officially specifying people as
mulattoes no longer made much sense" (Packard, 2003, p. 98).
  53 Note that in 1910, 25.05% of the "black" (i.e., black + mulatto) population is mulatto, and in 1920, 10.36% is

mulatto.


                                                        21
between individuals categorized as mulatto from those categorized as black. In the 1930

census, when mulatto is no longer a category, 85.1% of those in the mulatto category in 1920

become black, whereas 14.3% become white. Again, the rate of passing to white is similar

to the rate of 15% from the main 2SUP sample for the same census interval (see Appendix

Table A.6 row D).54

    Panel B presents the rates of passing for those who were categorized as black instead

of mulatto in the years when both categories existed. Column (2) shows that between 1910

and 1920, 74% remained black, 10.3% became mulatto and 15.7% passed for white. Between

1920 and 1930, when mulatto was eliminated as a category, 84.8% became black and 15.2%

passed for white.

    A comparison of Panels A and B yields several insights. First, those who are classified

as mulatto in Panel A are less likely to become black, more likely to remain mulatto, and

slightly more likely to pass for white than those who are classified as black (in 1910-1920)

in Panel B. This supports the belief that individuals in this category were on average more

likely to have European physical appearances and thus could more easily pass for white.

At the same time, the results show that there is very little persistence in being categorized

as mulatto (Panel A column 2) and that the difference in the rates of passing for white is

not very large (Panels A and B column 3). This is consistent with the belief that the large

share of mixed race individuals made it difficult for census enumerators to accurately and

consistently categorize individuals as mulatto or black.55


5.3.2   Distinctively Black and White Names

Motivated by Cook, Logan, and Parman (2014), we investigate whether the rates of passing

are lower for individuals with distinctively black names and who choose to keep the same
  54 Note  that Mill and Stein (2016) finds that 10% to 13% of sons who are classified as mulatto in families with
black and mulatto children in 1920 become white in 1940. Our estimates may differ slightly from theirs because
of the difference in sample (we examine all mulatto males), the difference in time frame (we examine one census
interval), or the difference in linking algorithm (they use a one-direction linking algorithm).
  55 The Census stated that "the principal reason for giving up the attempt to separate blacks and mulattoes

was the fact that results of the attempt in past censuses had been very imperfect" and "not even approximately
accurate" (Hochschild and Powell, 2008, p. 79).



                                                       22
name in the next census, for whom passing is presumably more difficult. Similarly, we

investigate whether the rates of passing for black individuals with distinctively white names

is higher. We take historically black names from Cook, Logan, and Parman (2014).56 Table 3

Panel C shows that, as expected, the rate of passing for those with distinctively black names

is much lower, 7.4%, as opposed to 16.6% in the full population. These results are likely

to understate the rates of passing amongst all those born with a distinctively black name

since some may change their names when they pass for white, in which case they will not

be linked.

    To identify distinctively white names, we adapt Cook, Logan, and Parman's (2013) method

for white males.57 As expected, the rate of passing is higher, at 24.3%. This is consistent with

the notion that it is easier to pass for white with a white name, and having such a name may

be positively associated with characteristics that enable one to pass for white.58


5.3.3      Spouses

Miscegenation (mixed-race marriage) was illegal in many states for much of our context, and

existing studies such as Fryer (2007) observe that approximately 0.5% to a little over 1% of all

black male marriages are to white women during the Jim Crow era. As in this earlier study,

we find that 1.3% of all marriages for black men are to white women. This statistic excludes

black men who pass for white when they marry white women, which would presumably

be most black men in mixed race marriages since miscegenation was illegal in most of our
  56 The names are are Abe, Abraham, Alonzo, Ambrose, Booker, Elijah, Freeman, Isaac, Isaiah, Israel, King,
Master, Moses, Pearlie, Percy, Perlie, Purlie, Presley, Presly, Prince, Titus. These names are identified using
random samples of black men from the census years 1900 and 1920. See Cook, Logan, and Parman (2014) for
more details.
  57 There are two steps: 1) select names that have a count above the median of the distribution of names within

a race and have a within-name race frequency larger than its frequency within the same race; 2) select the
top twenty most frequent names within each race in this restricted set. Distinctively white names are Albert,
Arthur, Carl, Charles, Clarence, David, Edward, Frank, Fred, George, Harry, Jacob, John, Joseph, Louis, Paul,
Peter, Thomas, Walter, William.
  58 Note that we are able to link a higher percentage of individuals with distinctively black names, 13.6% (not

in tables), than the full population, 8.6%. This is most likely because multiple matches are dropped by our
algorithm and there are fewer such cases with distinctively black names. For individuals with distinctively
white names, we find a lower rate of links, 7.4% (not in tables), which is consistent with the fact that there are
more white people in the population, such that having a distinctively white name means more common names
and multiple matches, and therefore a higher likelihood of being dropped from the linked sample.



                                                       23
context. We investigate this phenomenon by examining the pattern of marriage and passing.

For this exercise, we use information on marital status and the relationship to the head of the

household.59 The sample size is slightly reduced relative to the main linked sample since

we lose observations with missing values in those two variables.

    Table 4 columns (1)-(2) examine individuals that were black in the base year and divide

the sample according to whether they were single, married to a black spouse, or married to

a white spouse in the base year. Then, for each subsample, we further distinguish whether

they are single, married to a black spouse, or married to a white spouse in the subsequent

census. Column (2) shows that for those who were single in both years, 15.1% passed for

white. For those who became married to a black woman, almost no one passed regardless

of their status in the base year (0.2% if single or married to a black woman in the base year,

0% if married to a white woman in the base year). In contrast, most of those who became

married to a white person passed, regardless of their status in the base year (98.8% if single

in the base year, 98.6% if married to a black woman in the base year, 91.1% if married to

a white woman in the base year). Note that we cannot distinguish between marrying a

white woman and marrying a black woman who has also passed for white. Thus, becoming

married to a white woman in the subsequent census year could mean that his original wife

passed for white or that he remarried a white woman.

    The comparison of rows D, E and F are particularly striking. Black men who are married

to a black woman in the base year and pass for white either leave their wives (row D) or

become married to a white woman (row F).

    In columns (3)-(4), we repeat the exercise for individuals who are classified as white in

the base year. The results illustrate a consistent pattern. Rows D - F show that very few white

men are married to black women in the base year. When one becomes married to a black

woman, he almost always passes for black (rows B, E and H) and none of those who become

married to a white woman pass for black (rows C, F and I). Recall that we cannot distinguish

between a white man changing his racial classification to black from reverse-passing by a
  59 For example, if the person is a "spouse" and "black", and the household head is "married", we then code

the household head as being married to a black spouse.



                                                    24
black man who has previously passed for white.

   These results are consistent with the difficulty of mixed race marriages. And because

a black (white) man cohabiting with a woman who is perceived by others as white (black)

often faced formal and informal sanctions, these results are also consistent with our inter-

pretation that the estimated pass rates are mostly driven by active decisions to pass rather

than enumerator errors.


5.3.4    Children

Table 5 investigates the relationship between passing and the number and race of children

in the household. It is analogous to Table 4. The relationship to the household head variable

allows us to identify individuals who are children of the household head. Thus, we are able

to observe the number of children for each household head and the race of each child. We

divide household heads according to whether they had no children, at least one child who

was categorized as black, and at least one child who was categorized as white in the base

year. The last two categories are not mutually exclusive. We then subdivide each group

according to the observed number and race of children in the following census year.

   Table 5 Columns (1) and (2) show the number of observations and rates of passing for

white amongst black household heads. Rows C, F and I show that regardless of the number

or race of children observed in the base year, nearly all individuals who had at least one

white child in the following census passed for white (97.8% to 100%). In contrast, Rows B,

E, and H show that regardless of the number or race of child in the base year, those who

had at least one black child in the following census passed for white at negligible rates (0 to

0.3%).

   For those who had no children or at least one black child in the base year census and no

children in the subsequent census, the rates of passing range between 10.1% to 15.8% (Rows

A and D). These findings are consistent with the fact that children needed to pass for white

with parents who passed, or be left behind. For those with a white child in the base year

census and no children in the following census, 63.9% passed for white (row G). However,



                                              25
we note that there are very few individuals with at least one white child in the base year

(rows G-I), which is also consistent with the fact that one needed to have the same race as

his children or separate from them.

   The descriptive statistics in rows D, E and F for individuals who had at least one black

child in the base year are particularly striking. It shows that for black male household heads

with at least one black child, passing for white results in either leaving your children (row

D) or also having your children pass for white (row F).

   In column (3) and (4), we document analogous patterns for white household heads. The

patterns are consistent.

   Two caveats should be kept in mind when interpreting the results in this section. First,

as before, we do not distinguish between a child who has always been classified as white

from a child who has passed from black to white. For example, some children identified as

white in rows G-I of columns (1)-(2) could be black children who have passed, ostensibly in

conjunction with their parents passing to white. Similarly, some of the white male house-

hold heads observed to change racial classification to black in columns (3) and (4) may be

black males who had passed to white, and then chose to reverse-pass. White children of

men who have passed for white may be former black children who passed together with

their father, or children from new marriages since the previous census interval. Second, we

cannot observe older children who have moved out of the household. None of these caveats

undermine the main takeaway that men who pass for white cannot live with black children.


5.3.5     Migration

There are two reasons to be interested in migration. First, since there were significant for-

mal and informal sanctions against passing for white, someone who passed would generally

need to geographically relocate to a place where no one knows him. Given residential seg-

regation, he is likely to move to a relatively "whiter" neighborhood.60 Second, our study

coincides with a period of tremendously high internal migration (e.g., Collins and Wana-
 60 See   studies such as Ananat (2011) for a discussion of residential segregation.



                                                         26
maker, 2015) and it is naturally interesting to examine whether the migration patterns for

individuals who pass for white differ from those who do not pass for white.61

    Using the 2SUP linked individuals, we identify those who moved counties within a state,

those who moved states, and those who moved out of the South.62 Table 6 column (1)

shows that 49.7% of those who passed for white moved counties within the same state.

Columns (2) and (4) show that 38.7% moved states, amongst which 11.9% left the South.

Column (3) shows that adding the rates of moving in columns (1) and (2) implies that 88.4%

of individuals who passed moved counties within or across states.

    Columns (5)-(8) show that the rates of migration for those who did not pass for white

are much lower. Column (5) shows that amongst those who did not pass, 22.7% moved

counties within a state. Columns (6) and (8) show that 16.5% moved states, amongst which

7.6% left the South. Column (7) shows that a total of 39.2% of those who did not pass

moved counties within or across states. The rates of moving for those who remained black

are approximately half of the rate of migration for those who passed for white. The large

differences are consistent with the necessity of moving in order to pass for white.63

    Next, we examine the patterns over time. We note that the twenty-year interval in row

(B) will naturally experience a higher rate of mobility since the longer interval provides

more time for individuals to move. Thus, we focus on the ten-year intervals in rows (C)-(F).

Columns (3) and (7) show that the rates of moving are comparable over time for both those

who pass and those who do not, with perhaps a slight uptick during 1920-30, which coin-

cides with the Great Migration.64 Consistent with the Great Migration being a period where
   61 Our study also coincides with high (mostly European) international migration into the United States. How-

ever, almost all black men in our sample are born in the United States due to the Act Prohibiting Importation
of Slaves of 1807 and neglible voluntary migration of black men from other countries during this period. We
investigate the relationship between international migration and passing for white in Section 5.3.7.
   62 The South comprises of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South

Carolina, Texas, Tennessee and Virginia.
   63 Note that our estimated cross-county migration rate of 39.2% for individuals who do not pass is comparable

to the 47% rate of migration across counties during 1850 to 1860 for white males found by Ferrie, Sutch, Carter,
and Bard (2003).
   64 See Carrington, Detragiache, and Vishwanath (1996), Collins and Wanamaker (2015) and Boustan (2009) for

examples of studies on the Great Migration. Collins and Wanamaker (2015) links African American males aged
0 to 40 and living in the South in the 1910 Census in the 1% public-use micro-data sample to their future selves
in 1930. In total, they link 5,465 men and find that 20.2% have moved out of the South by 1930.




                                                      27
many blacks left the South, Columns (4) and (8) show that there is an uptick in moving out of

the South during 1920-30. Interestingly, when we compare the uptick to other years, we find

that the relative increase is moderate for those who pass (13.3% versus 10.5 ­12.4%), while

it is much larger for those who do not pass (11.9% versus 4.3 ­ 7.6%). This is consistent with

the notion that it might have been easier for those who pass to live in the North. Because of

this, such individuals were always incentivized to move out of the South. In contrast, those

who remained black were less likely to move North outside of the Great Migration.

    Finally, we investigate whether those who pass are moving to communities with a higher

proportion of white residents. Unfortunately, the census data can only be disaggregated to

the county level. Thus, we compare the percentage of the county population that is white in

the county of residence in year t and the county of residence in year t + 10.65 We calculate the

fraction of individuals (males) that report as white in each county. To see if those who pass

for white move to "whiter" counties, we calculate the difference in the percentage white

of the county of residence during the current census year (when the individual has passed

for white) and the county of residence during the last census year (when the individual

reported as black). The historical evidence suggests that we should see an increase in the

share of white residents in counties for individuals who pass relative to those who do not

pass.66

    Figure 1a plots the probability density function (PDF) for those who pass for white and

those who do not, where the x-axis is the change in the percentage of the county of residence

that is white. The PDF for those who pass (illustrated by the thick solid blue line) is to the

right of the PDF for those who do not pass (illustrated by the dashed red line). This means

that individuals who pass for white are more likely to move to "whiter" counties than those

who remain black.
   65 The historical census also reports enumeration districts. However, district boundaries change across cen-

suses, while county boundaries are relatively stable. Moreover, we would be concerned that enumeration dis-
trict boundaries were changing in response to changes in the racial composition, as discussed in Card, Mas, and
Rothstein (2008). Thus, we choose to use counties as the level of comparison.
   66 Note that because there are many communities within a county and most counties have mixed populations,

we would not expect those who pass for white to move to 100% white counties even if segregation is fully
enforced at the community level.




                                                      28
    Figure 1b plots the analogous PDF for those who pass and remain white versus those

who reverse-pass to black. The figure shows that the relocation pattern of those who re-

verse pass to being black is a mirror image of the pattern for those who passed for white:

reverse passers (illustrated by the thick solid blue line) move to communities with a lower

percentage of whites than those who remain white (illustrated by the dashed red line).

    These patterns are consistent with the historical evidence that passing required reloca-

tion to a white community (and similarly, reverting to one's black identity requires relocat-

ing to a less white community).


5.3.6   Regional Differences

Next, we investigate the patterns of passing across regions, which could differ because of

the variation in the degree of de jure and de facto discrimination against blacks across regions.

Table 6 Panel II shows the rates of passing for the North (states that were part of the Union

during the Civil War), the South (states that were part of the Confederacy during the Civil

War), states that allowed slavery at the onset of the Civil War in 1860, and states where

98% of the black male population lived during 1880-1940.67 Row G examines individuals

according to their state of birth. Row H divides the individuals according to where they

lived in the base year of the linked interval (year t). This groups together individuals who

were born in a given state and still live there, as well as those who moved to the state prior

to the base year. Row I divides the sample according to where a linked individual lived in

the subsequent census ("year t + 10", or in the case of 1880-1920, "year t + 20").

    Row G column (5) shows that individuals born in the Northern states were much more

likely to pass, with an average pass rate of 23.8%. In contrast, 15.5% and 16% of those born

in the South and former slave states pass for white. Row H shows that the rates of passing
  67 Union states include Massachusetts, Connecticut, California, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Michigan, Min-
nesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont and
Wisconsin. Confederate states include Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Car-
olina, South Carolina, Texas, Tennessee and Virginia. Slave states include the Confederate states and Delaware,
Kentucky, Maryland and Missouri. 98% of the black male population lived in Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama,
South, Carolina, North Carolina, Louisiana, Texas, Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas, Florida, Washington, Ken-
tucky, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New York, Missouri, Ohio, Illinois, New Jersey, Oklahoma, Indiana, West Vir-
ginia, Michigan and Kansas.


                                                      29
were higher for individuals who lived in Northern states the census year before changing

race, where on average 21.2% of the linked sample passes for white. In contrast, 15.4% and

15.8% individuals who lived in the South and former slave states pass for white. Row I

shows that this regional difference is less salient for the state of residence after passing.

   We can also examine the rates of passing across more versus less segregated counties. For

this exercise, we use the disaggregated segregation measure from Logan and Parman (2017)

for the years 1880 and 1940, when the segregation measure is available.68 This measure

provides a nuanced and comprehensive measure of segregation using information on racial

similarity of next door neighbors. We estimate two bivariate regressions, where we regress

the segregation index in 1880 (1940) on the rates of passing in 1880-1900 (1930-1940). The

coefficients are 0.33 and 0.23, respectively. Both are statistically significant at the 1% level.

These imply that passing for white was positively associated with the degree of residential

racial segregation. These results are not presented in tables.


5.3.7    Descriptive Regressions

Base Year Characteristics In this section, we investigate whether the factors that influence

passing from historical accounts are important on average by examining the correlates of

passing for white. Table 7 presents several individual-level regressions. The outcome vari-

able is a dummy variable that equals one if a linked individual changes racial classification

from black in year t to white in t + 10. Explanatory variables are measured at the base year

t. All of the regressions in Table 7 control for age category dummy variables, base year and

region fixed effects. The standard errors for the regressions in this table are clustered at the

level of variation of the explanatory variable (see the bottom of the Table).

   First, we consider the desire to escape severe discrimination as a possible correlate of

passing with several proxies for discrimination. Table 7 column (1) examines a dummy

variable indicating that mixed marriages are legal in a given state and year. Because mis-

cegenation does not vary within states in a given year, we control for state fixed effects.
 68 We   use the index of dissimilarity by county, and restrict our examination to counties with at least fifty black
men.


                                                         30
Column (2) uses the Democratic vote share for a given county as a proxy for discrimination

in that county.69 To summarize the meaningful variation, we compute the first principal

component for all of the elections for U.S. president and the U.S. House of Representatives

that have taken place during the census base year and the preceding nine years. This re-

gression controls for county fixed effects. The estimate in column (1) shows that living in

states where miscegenation is legal is associated with 31.9 percentage-points less passing for

white. In column (2), we find that the Democratic vote share is positively associated with

passing for white. However, since the magnitude of a principal component is difficult to

interpret, we also present the standardized coefficient in italics. It shows that a one standard

deviation increase in the Democratic vote share is associated with a 0.046 standard deviation

increase in passing for white. The estimates are statistically significant at the 1% and 10%

levels. They are consistent with the notion that an individual is more likely to pass for white

in places with more discrimination.

    Next, we investigate the possibility that educated or high-skilled mixed race individuals

were more incentivized to pass as is suggested by Bodenhorn (2002) and Mill and Stein

(2016).70 We use several proxies. The first proxy is a principal component that captures

educational opportunities. The component is constructed from four variables: black-to-

white teacher salary, white-to-black pupil-teacher ratio, black-to-white term lengths and the

number of black universities.71 All of these schooling variables are such that a higher value

reflects better educational opportunities for the black population. The second proxy is the

white-to-black occupational income score ratio. A higher value is associated with fewer

economic opportunities for blacks, or that the composition of black workers is low skilled

relative to white workers. In the same regression, we include a dummy for whether the

individual is literate and his individual occupational income score. We follow Carruthers
  69 See   https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/8611.
  70 Mill and Stein (2016) documents that amongst mulatto males in 1910, more educated individuals were more

likely to pass for white in 1940.
   71 We use three measures of the quality of secondary schools for blacks relative to whites taken from Carruthers

and Wanamaker (2017): black-to-white teacher salary, white-to-black pupil-teacher ratio and black-to-white
term lengths. These variables are available at the county and year level for southern states. We add to this a
variable that we construct ourselves, the number of black universities in a given state and year.




                                                        31
and Wanamaker (2017) and control for state fixed effects.72

    Table 7 column (3) shows that conditional on whether a black man is literate and how

much he earned in the base year, he is more likely to pass for white if he is from a county with

better educational opportunities for the black population. At the same time, conditional on

the educational and income opportunities of his county, a man with a higher occupational

income score is more likely to pass for white. These results are consistent with the notion

that educated and higher earning mixed-race individuals may have had more to gain from

passing for white; or alternatively, they had more to lose from the introduction of Jim Crow.

    In column (4), we examine some possible constraints for passing. One narrative which

is common in most accounts of passing for white relates to the personal cost from being cut

off from one's family and community. All traces of African ancestry must be left behind

when an individual passes. He must necessarily relocate. His family must either move with

him and pass for white or be left behind (recall our earlier results on the patterns of passing,

marriage and children). The estimates in column (4) are consistent with this conventional

wisdom. We find that being married and having more children are negatively associated

with passing for white (as is having a distinctively black name). The regression controls for

county fixed effects and clusters the standard errors at the county-year level.

    In column (5), we examine the possibility that the demographic composition of one's

community may be associated with the decision to pass. We find that the black population

share is uncorrelated with passing for white. However, the share of immigrant population

and whether he lives in an urban area are both positively associated with passing. Dou-

bling the share of immigrants is associated with a 34.5 percentage-point higher probability

of passing for white. This is consistent with the notion that places with many immigrants or

that were urbanizing were places where it might be easier to pass for white (e.g., it is easier

for a new arrival to blend in) and also places with more opportunities and innovation. In

this case, innovation could also refer to social innovation, where people are willing to be

more daring and explore potentially risky or personally costly ideas.
  72 They argue that county fixed effects over-control. Note that our results are very similar if we alternatively

control for county fixed effects. They are available upon request.



                                                       32
    Column (6) shows that the correlation with immigration share is driven by immigrants

from Northern Europe, which we define as European countries that do not border the

Mediterranean. The latter result may simply be an artifact of the dominance of Northern

Europeans in the immigrant population during this period.73


Well-being After Passing for White              Table 8 examines the correlation between passing and

characteristics measured in year t + 10. We focus on outcomes that are measured at the in-

dividual level. Column (1) shows that an individual who has passed for white earned a

higher income, which is consistent with conventional wisdom that individuals passed for

better economic opportunities due at least in part to the high degree of income discrimi-

nation against blacks.74 Note that all regressions control for base year county of residence

and base year fixed effects. In addition, we always control for several individual base year

characteristics: occupational income score (to address the possibility that individuals who

pass for white may have higher earnings potential), whether he lives in an urban area, his

marital status, whether he is literate, and age category dummy variables (ages 25-34, 35-44,

and 45-54, with 15-24 as the omitted category).75

    Column (2) shows that an individual who passed is 48% more likely to move counties or

states than one who did not pass. This is consistent with our earlier findings on migration.

    Column (3) investigates whether moving was associated with a higher income for those

who pass. It is similar to the specification in column (1), with several additional right-hand-

side variables: a dummy variable for having moved counties within a state, a dummy vari-

able for having moved states, a dummy variable for moving from a rural to an urban area,

and each of these variables interacted with a dummy for whether the individual passed for

white. Note that because moving is partly an outcome of passing, these estimates should be

interpreted as a descriptive decomposition exercise. The uninteracted dummy variable for
  73 In examining the country of origin for foreign-born individuals in the census, we find that with the exception

of Italy, the countries with the largest numbers of individuals are all Northern European.
  74 The large positive association between earnings and passing for white is consistent with Mill and Stein

(2016), which documents a similar pattern for mulatto males who pass to become white between 1910 and 1940.
  75 The results are qualitatively similar if we examine the logarithm of the occupational income score as the

dependent variable. They are available upon request.



                                                        33
passing is positive, but smaller than in column (1). This means that individuals who pass

for white, but do not move, still experience an increase in income. The interactions with

moving state, county and rural-to-urban are large and positive. This means that the gains

from passing were much larger for those who passed and moved than those who passed

but did not move.

   Taken together, the correlational evidence in Table 8 columns (1)-(3) shows that those

who passed for white experienced material improvements in well-being after passing, and

much of this improvement was accompanied by geographic relocation.

   Column (4) investigates the heterogeneous effects of passing for white for those who

were classified as mulatto. We do this by adding the dummy variable indicating whether the

linked individual is classified as mulatto in the base year, and its interaction with whether

the individual passed for white by the following census. The uninteracted coefficient is 0.454

and statistically significant at the 1% level, which means that those classified as mulattos

who did not pass for white earned higher income than those classified as black who did

not pass for white. This is consistent with the view that lighter skinned individuals earned

more, as well as the view that behavior and success can influence the perception of race ­

i.e., a better dressed or educated individual is more likely to be categorized as mulatto by

the enumerator.76

   The interaction effect is -1.301 and statistically significant at the 1% level. This means

that mulatto individuals experienced lower income gains when they passed for white than

black individuals who passed for white. This could be because they started from a higher

level of income in the base year and thus had less to gain from passing for white. Never-

theless, the sum of the coefficient for passing, 3.178, the interaction effect, -1.301, and the

uninteracted coefficient for mulatto, 0.454, is positive. This means that passing for white

was still associated with large income gains for those who were classified as mulatto.

   Note that the regression results are very similar if we apply the weights discussed in

Appendix Section F. These result are available upon request.
 76 See   the Background section.




                                              34
6     Conclusion

The extent of passing from "black" to "white" in pre-Civil rights United States has been a

subject of heated debate amongst scholars and the public for the past one hundred years.

Our findings significantly increase the lower bound of the rates of passing relative to popu-

lation accounting exercises conducted by sociologists. Moreover, the patterns of passing are

consistent with historical evidence that the choice to change racial identity was a response to

economic and political incentives, and came at great personal costs. Passing for white was

positively associated with higher income. In order to pass for white, individuals needed

to relocate to whiter communities. Because miscegenation was illegal, passing required the

spouse to pass or be left behind. Similarly, children needed to pass with their parents or be

left behind.

     The results suggest that racial identity is partly a choice that is endogenous to many of

the variables that the economics literature has traditionally examined as outcomes of race.

As such, the relationship between race/ethnicity and economic and political outcomes is

likely to be much more complex than typically conceived. Understanding the extent and

magnitude of endogenous racial classification is important for many inquiries. This is true

for both the historical context and the modern one. For example, in a recent review article,

Charles and Guryan (2011) states: "An important task for future empirical work on discrim-

ination will be to more thoroughly explore changing racial classification and to examine the

theoretical issue of what determines racial identification".




References
A BRAMITZKY, R., L. P. B OUSTAN , AND K. E RIKSSON (2012): "Europe's Tired, Poor, Huddled
  Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration," American
  Economic Review, 102(5), 1832­56.

         (2014): "A Nation of Immigrants: Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age
    of Mass Migration," Journal of Political Economy, 122(3), 467­506.

A BRAMITZKY, R., L. P. B OUSTAN , K. E RIKSSON , J. J. F EIGENBAUM ,    AND   S. P ÉREZ (2019):


                                              35
  "Automated Linking of Historical Data," Working Paper 25825, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

A BRAMITZKY, R., R. M ILL , AND S. P ÉREZ (2020): "Linking Individuals Across Historical
  Sources: A Fully Automated Approach," Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and
  Interdisciplinary History, 53(2), 94­111.

A GER , P., L. B OUSTAN , AND K. E RIKSSON (2019): "The Intergenerational Effects of a Large
  Wealth Shock: White Southerners after the Civil War," Working Paper 25700, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

A KERLOF, G. A., AND R. E. K RANTON (2000): "Economics and Identity," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 115(3), 715­753.

A LBA , R. D., S. L INDEMAN , AND N. E. I NSOLERA (2016): "Is Race Really So Fluid? Re-
  visiting Saperstein and Penner's Empirical Claims," American Journal of Sociology, 122(1),
  247­262.

A NANAT, E. O. (2011): "The Wrong Side(s) of the Tracks: The Causal Effects of Racial Seg-
  regation on Urban Poverty and Inequality," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  3(2), 34­66.

A NTMAN , F., B. D UNCAN , AND B ARHAM (2015): "American Indian Casinos and the Rise in
  Native American Self-Identification," Working paper, Citeseer.

ATKIN , D., E. C OLSON -S IHRA , AND M. S HAYO (2019): "How Do We Choose Our Iden-
 tity? A Revealed Preference Approach Using Food Consumption," Working Paper 25693,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

A USTEN -S MITH , D., AND R. G. F RYER (2005): "An Economic Analysis of Acting White,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 551­583.

B AILEY, M., C. C OLE , M. H ENDERSON , AND C. M ASSEY (2017): "How Well Do Automated
  Methods Perform in Historical Samples? Evidence from New Ground Truth," Working
  Paper 24019, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ÉNABOU , R., AND J. T IROLE (2011): "Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets," The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 805­855.

B ISIN , A., E. PATACCHINI , T. V ERDIER , AND Y. Z ENOU (2016): "Bend it like Beckham: Eth-
   nic Identity and Integration," European Economic Review, 90, 146­164.

B ODENHORN , H. (2002): "The Mulatto Advantage: The Biological Consequences of Com-
  plexion in Rural Antebellum Virginia," Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 33(1), 21­46.

        (2015): The color factor: The economics of African-American well-being in the nineteenth-
  century South. Oxford University Press, USA.

B ODENHORN , H., AND C. S. R UEBECK (2003): "The Economics of Identity and the Endo-
  geneity of Race," Working Paper 9962, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                               36
B OTTICINI , M., AND Z. E CKSTEIN (2012): The Chosen Few: How Education Shaped Jewish His-
  tory, Princeton Economic History of the Western World. Princeton University Press.

B OUSTAN , L. P. (2009): "Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migration and Racial
  Wage Convergence in the North, 1940-970," The Journal of Economic History, 69(03), 755­
  782.

B RYC , K., E. Y. D URAND , J. M. M ACPHERSON , D. R EICH , AND J. L. M OUNTAIN (2015):
   "The Genetic Ancestry of African Americans, Latinos, and European Americans Across
   the United States," The American Journal of Human Genetics, 96(1), 37­53.

C ARD , D., AND A. B. K RUEGER (1992): "School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
  A Direct Assessment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 151­200.

C ARD , D., A. M AS , AND J. R OTHSTEIN (2008): "Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1), 177­218.

C ARRINGTON , W. J., E. D ETRAGIACHE , AND T. V ISHWANATH (1996): "Migration with En-
  dogenous Moving Costs," American Economic Review, 86(4), 909­30.

C ARRUTHERS , C. K., AND M. H. WANAMAKER (2013): "Closing the Gap? The Effect of
  Private Philanthropy on the Provision of African-American Schooling in the U.S. South,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 101(C), 53­67.

C ARRUTHERS , C. K., AND M. H. WANAMAKER (2017): "Separate and Unequal in the Labor
  Market: Human Capital and the Jim Crow Wage Gap," Journal of Labor Economics, 35(3),
  655­696.

C ASSAN , G. (2015): "Identity Based Policies and Identity Manipulation: Evidence from
  Colonial Punjab," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4), 103­31.

C ASSAN , G., D. K ENISTON , AND T. K LEINEBERG (2020): "A Division of Laborers: Identity
  and Efficiency in India," Working Paper.

C ASSAN , G., AND L. VANDEWALLE (2017): "Identities and Public Policies: Unintended Ef-
  fects of Political Reservations for Women in India," IHEID Working Papers, Graduate
  Institute of International and Development Studies Working Paper.

C HARLES , K. K., AND J. G URYAN (2011): "Studying Discrimination: Fundamental Chal-
  lenges and Recent Progress," Annual Review of Economics, 3(1), 479­511.

C OLLINS , W. J., AND R. A. M ARGO (2011): "Race and Home Ownership from the End of
  the Civil War to the Present," American Economic Review, 101(3), 355­59.

C OLLINS , W. J., AND M. H. WANAMAKER (2015): "The Great Migration in Black and White:
  New Evidence on the Selection and Sorting of Southern Migrants," The Journal of Economic
  History, 75(4), 947­992.

C OOK , L. D., T. D. L OGAN , AND J. M. PARMAN (2014): "Distinctively Black Names in the
  American Past," Explorations in Economic History, 53, 64­82.


                                           37
C ORNWELL , C., J. R IVERA , AND I. M. S CHMUTTE (2017): "Wage Discrimination When Iden-
  tity Is Subjective Evidence from Changes in Employer-Reported Race," Journal of Human
  Resources, 52(3), 719­755.

D AVIS , F. J. (2010): Who Is Black?: One Nation's Definition. Penn State Press.

D AWKINS , M. (2012): Clearly Invisible: Racial Passing and the Color of Cultural Identity. Baylor
  University Press.

E CKARD , E. W. (1947): "How Many Negroes "Pass"?," American Journal of Sociology, 52(6),
  498­500.

E LO , I. T., AND S. H. P RESTON (1997): "Racial and Ethnic Differences in Mortality at Older
   Ages," Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Health of Older Americans, pp. 10­42.

F EIGENBAUM , J. (2016): "Automated Census Record Linking: A Machine Learning Ap-
   proach," Working paper, Harvard University.

F ERRIE , J., R. S UTCH , S. C ARTER , AND R. B ARD (2003): Historical Statistics of the United
   States: Millennial Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.

F ERRIE , J. P. (1996): "A New Sample of Males Linked from the Public Use Microdata Sample
   of the 1850 U.S. Federal Census of Population to the 1860 U.S. Federal Census Manuscript
   Schedules," Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, 29(4),
   141­156.

F OUKA , V., S. M AZUMDER , AND M. TABELLINI (2018): "From Immigrants to Americans:
   Race and Assimilation during the Great Migration," Harvard Business School BGIE Unit
   Working Paper, (19-018).

F REEMAN , J. B., A. M. P ENNER , A. S APERSTEIN , M. S CHEUTZ , AND N. A MBADY (2011):
   "Looking the Part: Social Status Cues Shape Race Perception," PLOS ONE, 6(9), 1­10.

F RYER , R. G. (2007): "Guess Who's Been Coming to Dinner? Trends in Interracial Marriage
   over the 20th Century," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 71­90.

G ORDON , L. (1999): The Great Arizona Orphan Abduction. Harvard University Press.

G ROSS , A. (2009): What Blood Won't Tell: A History of Race on Trial in America. Harvard Uni-
  versity Press.

H AMMER , M. F., V. F. C HAMBERLAIN , V. F. K EARNEY, D. S TOVER , G. Z HANG , T. K ARAFET,
  B. WALSH , AND A. J. R EDD (2006): "Population Structure of Y Chromosome SNP Hap-
  logroups in the United States and Forensic Implications for Constructing Y Chromosome
  STR Databases," Forensic Science International, 164(1), 45­55.

H ART, H. (1921): Selective Migration as a Factor in Child Welfare in the United States: With
  Special Reference to Iowa, Iowa University Studies, 1st Series.

H OBBS , A. (2014): A Chosen Exile: A History of Racial Passing in American Life. Harvard Uni-
  versity Press.

                                               38
H OCHSCHILD , J. L., AND B. M. P OWELL (2008): "Racial Reorganization and the United
  States Census 1850­1930," Studies in American Political Development, 22(01), 59­96.

J ANSSEN , K. (2016): "Five Black Chicagoans Who Passed for White," Chicago Sun-Times.

J IA , R., AND T. P ERSSON (2019): "Individual vs. Social Motives in Identity Choice: Theory
   and Evidence from China," Working Paper 26008, National Bureau of Economic Research.

J OHNSON , C. (1925): Opportunity.

K EYSSAR , A. (2000): The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States.
  Basic Books.

K HANNA , N., AND C. J OHNSON (2010): "Passing As Black: Racial Identity Work Among
  Biracial Americans," Social Psychology Quarterly, 73(4), 380­397.

L AIT, A., AND B. R ANDELL (1996): "An Assessment of Name Matching Algorithms," Tech-
  nical Report Series-University of Newcastle Upon Tyne Computing Science.

L OGAN , T. D., AND J. M. PARMAN (2017): "The National Rise in Residential Segregation,"
  The Journal of Economic History, 77(1), 127­170.

L ONG , J., AND J. F ERRIE (2013a): "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great Britain
  and the United States since 1850," The American Economic Review, 103(4), 1109­1137.

        (2013b): "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great Britain and the United
  States Since 1850: Reply," The American Economic Review, 103(5), 2041­2049.

M ANCINI , O. (2002): "Vassar's First Black Graduate: She Passed for White.," Journal of Blacks
 in Higher Education.

M ARGO , R. A. (1990): Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History. Uni-
 versity of Chicago Press.

M EIGS , J. B., R. W. G RANT, R. P ICCOLO , L. L ÓPEZ , J. C. F LOREZ , B. P ORNEALA ,
  L. M ARCEAU , AND J. B. M C K INLAY (2014): "Association of African Genetic Ancestry
 with Fasting Glucose and HbA1c Levels in Non-Diabetic Individuals: The Boston Area
 Community Health (BACH) Prediabetes Study," Diabetologia, 57(9), 1850­1858.

M ILL , R., AND L. S TEIN (2016): "Race, Skin Color, and Economic Outcomes in Early
 Twentieth-Century America," Working paper, Arizona State University.

M ODALSLI , J. (2016): "Multigenerational Persistence: Evidence from 146 Years of Adminis-
 trative Data," Statistics Norway Working Paper 850.

        (2017): "Intergenerational Mobility in Norway, 1865­2011," The Scandinavian Journal
  of Economics, 119(1), 34­71.

N IX , E., AND N. Q IAN (2015): "The Fluidity of Race: "Passing" in the United States, 1880-
  1940," Working Paper 20828, National Bureau of Economic Research.

PACKARD , J. (2003): American Nightmare: The History of Jim Crow. St. Martin's Press.

                                               39
P ENNER , A. M., AND A. S APERSTEIN (2008): "How Social Status Shapes Race," Proceedings
   of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(50), 19628­19630.

P ERKINS , L. M. (1998): "The Racial Integration of the Seven Sister Colleges," The Journal of
   Blacks in Higher Education, (19), 104­108.

R OCKQUEMORE , K. A., AND D. L. B RUNSMA (2007): Beyond Black: Biracial Identity in Amer-
  ica. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

R UEBECK , C. S., S. L. AVERETT, AND H. N. B ODENHORN (2009): "Acting White or Act-
  ing Black: Mixed-Race Adolescents' Identity and Behavior," The B.E. Journal of Economic
  Analysis and Policy, 9(1), 1­44.

S ANDEFUR , G. D., AND T. M C K INNELL (1986): "American Indian Intermarriage," Social
   Science Research, 15(4), 347­371.

S APERSTEIN , A., AND A. M. P ENNER (2012): "Racial Fluidity and Inequality in the United
   States," American Journal of Sociology, 118(3), 676­727.

S HARFSTEIN , D. (2011): The Invisible Line: A Secret History of Race in America. Penguin Group
   United States.

S LOAN , N. (2013): "Stanford Historian Re-Examines Practice of Racial 'Passing'," Stanford
   Report.

S MEDLEY, A. (1993): Race in North America: Origin and Evolution of a Worldview. Westview
  Press.

S MITH , M. M. (2006): How Race Is Made: Slavery, Segregation, and the Senses. University of
  North Carolina Press.

S NAE , C. (2007): "A Comparison and Analysis of Name Matching Algorithms.," Enfor-
   matika, 19.

S OLLORS , W. (1999): Neither Black Nor White Yet Both: Thematic Explorations of Interracial
   Literature. Harvard University Press.

S TRMIC -PAWL , H. V., B. A. J ACKSON , AND S. G ARNER (2018): "Race Counts: Racial and
   Ethnic Data on the U.S. Census and the Implications for Tracking Inequality," Sociology of
   Race and Ethnicity, 4(1), 1­13.

S UNDSTROM , W. A. (1994): "The Color Line: Racial Norms and Discrimination in Urban
   Labor Markets, 1910­1950," The Journal of Economic History, 54(02), 382­396.

T HOMAS , R. (1995): "Thyra Johnston, 91, Symbol Of Racial Distinctions, Dies," The New
  York Times.

T USKEGEE I NSTITUTE (2010): "Lynchings: By State and Race, 1882-1968," .

V ILE , J. R. (2003): Encyclopedia of Constitutional Amendments, Proposed Amendments, and
   Amending Issues, 1789-2002. ABC-CLIO.


                                              40
W ILLIAMS , G. (1996): Life on the Color Line: The True Story of a White Boy Who Discovered He
 Was Black, National bestseller. Penguin Books.

W ILSON , C. (2016): "Color Lines: Racial Passing in America," Back Story.

W OODWARD , C. V. (2002): The Strange Career of Jim Crow. Oxford University Press.

W RIGHT, G. (2013): Sharing the Prize. Harvard University Press.




                                             41
         Table 1: Main Results ­ Black Passing for White

             2SUP                                 UP
              (1)                                 (2)

            Panel A: Rate of Passing in the Linked Sample
             16.6%                               26.8%

           Panel B: Number Passing in the Linked Sample
            30239                              79937

     Panel C: Percentage of the Population in the Linked Sample
              8.6%                              14.1%

                 Panel D. Reverse-Pass to Black (2SUP)
                                   % Reverse Pass (Blackt, Whitet+10,
 % Pass (Blackt, Whitet+10): 17%
                                             Blackt+20): 30%
Notes: In Panels A-C, the observations are the 10% sample of males
identified as black and under age 55 in the base year in the 1880-
1930 Censuses linked in two consecutive censuses. In Panel D, the
observations are linked individuals amongst the 10% sample of males
identified as black under age 55 in the 1880-1920 Censuses linked in
three consecutive censuses.




                                 42
                                                          Table 2: Race Transition Matrix

                (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                   (5)              (6)                 (7)
                                                           I. Passing Across All Racial Categories
                                                                                             Race in t+10
                                   Link %              Black               White                Chinese          Japanese        Native American
     A.        Black                9.3%               84.8%               15.0%                 0.1%             <0.01%              0.1%
     B.        White               20.0%               0.7%                99.1%                <0.01%            <0.01%             <0.01%
     C.       Chinese               7.3%               0.5%                 8.2%                 90.5%             0.4%               0.1%
     D.      Japanese               5.4%               0.2%                 7.0%                 0.2%              91.6%              0.4%
     E.   Native American          14.6%               2.2%                27.8%                 0.1%              0.1%               69.0%




43
                                                           II. Passing Across East Asian Categories

         Japanese or Korean Chinese or Korean         Chinese or
              to Chinese         to Japanese      Japanese to Korean
      F.         0.3%                0.4%                0.1%
     Notes : Observations in row A are the 10% sample of males identified as black and under age 55 in the base year in the 1920-1930 Censuses
     linked using 2SUP. Observations in row B are the 2% sample of males identified as white and under age 55 in the base year in the 1920-1930
     Censuses linked using 2SUP. Observations in rows C-E are the 100% population of males identified as Chinese, Japanese, or Native American
     (respectively) under the age of 55 from the 1920-1930 Censuses linked using 2SUP. Observations in Row F are the 100% population of males
     identified as Chinese, Japanese or Korean under the age of 55 from the 1920-1930 Censuses linked using 2SUP.
       Table 3: Mulattos and Individuals with Distinctively Black or White Names

                                         (1)              (2)                     (3)
                                       % Black         % Mulatto                % White
                                      Panel A: Mulatto
Mulatto in 1910, Race in 1920          54.2%             25.9%                   19.5%
Mulatto in 1920, Race in 1930          85.1%              NA                     14.3%

                                Panel B: Black and not Mulatto
Black in 1910, Race in 1920              74.0%              10.3%                15.7%
Black in 1920, Race in 1930              84.8%               NA                  15.2%

Panel C. All Black (including Mulattos), Distinctively Black or White Names, % Pass to White
Baseline (All names)                     16.6%
Distinctively black names                 7.4%
Distinctively white names                24.3%
Notes: Observations in Panels A and B are the 10% sample of males identified as either
mulatto or black and under age 55 in the base year in the 1910-1920 censuses (unless
stated otherwise) linked in two consecutive censuses using 2SUP. In Panels A and B,
columns (1)-(3) do not add up to 100% due to the presence of other racial categories. In
Panel B, distinctively black names are taken from Cook et. al. (2014): Abe, Abraham,
Alonzo, Ambrose, Booker, Elijah, Freeman, Isaac, Isaiah, Israel, King, Master, Moses,
Pearlie, Percy, Perlie, Purlie, Presley, Presly, Prince, Titus. Distinctively white names are
chosen by the authors using an analogous method (see text): Albert, Arthur, Carl, Charles,
Clarence, David, Edward, Frank, Fred, George, Harry, Jacob, John, Joseph, Louis, Paul,
Peter, Thomas, Walter, William.




                                              44
                        Table 4: Marital Status, the Race of the Spouse and Passing

                                                           Blackt                           Whitet
                                                   Obs.             Pass Rate       Obs.             Pass Rate
                t               t+10                (1)                (2)           (3)                (4)
  A.                           Single             73814              15.1%         267111              0.7%
  B.          Single      Married to Black        25551               0.2%          1151              98.8%
  C.                      Married to White         6419              98.8%         105539              0.0%
  D.                           Single             2306               35.7%            3               66.7%
            Married to
  E.                      Married to Black        37086               0.2%           15               86.7%
              Black
  F.                      Married to White         6523              98.6%           16                0.0%
  G.                           Single               15               66.7%          3391               4.8%
            Married to
  H.                      Married to Black          97                0.0%          1098              99.4%
             White
  I.                      Married to White          213              91.1%         175593              0.0%
Notes: Observations in columns (1) and (2) are the 10% sample of males identified as black and under age
55 in the base year in the 1880-1930 censuses linked using 2SUP, who have non-missing values for marital
status. Observations in columns (3) and (4) are the 2% sample of males identified as white and under age 55
in the base year in the 1880-1930 censuses linked using 2SUP. Additional restrictions regarding marital
status and the race of the spouse are stated in the row headings.




                         Table 5: The Racial Composition of Children and Passing

                                                                 Blackt                      Whitet
                                                          Obs.         Pass Rate      Obs.           Pass Rate
                          t           t+10                (1)              (2)        (3)               (4)
       A.                            No Kids          9532                10.1%      26780             0.5%
       B.              No Kids    >=1 Black Kid       5434                 0.3%       190             94.7%
       C.                        >= 1 White Kid       2299                98.5%      19093             0.0%
       D.                            No Kids          6785                15.8%        12              16.7%
                    >=1 Black
       E.                         >=1 Black Kid       24513                0.3%        12             91.7%
                       Kid
       F.                        >= 1 White Kid       3882                97.8%        24              0.0%
       G.                            No Kids              36              63.9%      19197             2.3%
                    >= 1 White
       H.                         >=1 Black Kid           104              0.0%       639              95.0%
                        Kid
       I.                        >= 1 White Kid           150             100.0%    129027             0.0%
Notes: Observations in columns (1) and (2) are the 10% sample of males identified as black and
under age 55 in the base year in the 1880-1930 censuses linked using 2SUP. Observations in
columns (3) and (4) are the 2% sample of males identified as white and under age 55 in the base
year in the 1880-1930 censuses linked using 2SUP. Additional restrictions regarding the number
and race of children are stated in the row headings.




                                                          45
                                                 Table 6: The Geography of Passing

                         (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                                  Panel I.
                                   Individuals who Pass                                     Individuals who do not Pass
                                                Move    Leave South                                          Move       Leave South
                        Move                                                Move
                                  Move State County or (Confederate                          Move State County or (Confederate
                       County                                              County
                                                State     States)                                            State        States)
     A. All Years      49.7%       38.7%        88.4%      11.9%           22.7%                16.5%        39.2%          7.6%
     B. 1880-1900      51.3%       40.8%        92.1%      11.9%           32.4%                18.9%        51.3%          5.0%
     C. 1900-1910      55.0%       35.3%        90.3%      10.5%           26.7%                13.4%        40.1%          4.3%
     D. 1910-1920      49.6%       36.1%        85.7%      12.4%           23.9%                16.4%        40.3%          7.6%
     E. 1920-1930      50.0%       41.7%        91.7%      13.3%           21.4%                20.5%        41.9%         11.9%
     F. 1930-1940      44.7%       39.9%        84.6%      11.4%           17.6%                14.3%        31.9%          7.1%

                                                         Panel II. Individuals who Pass, All Years
                                                                                                                         States
                                                                                  North        South       All Slave   Comprising




46
                                                               All States        (Union     (Confederate   States in   98% of the
                                                                                 States)       States)       1860         Black
                                                                                                                       Population
     G. By State of Birth                                        16.6%           23.8%          15.5%       16.0%        16.5%
     H. By State of Residence in Year t                          16.6%           21.2%          15.4%       15.8%        16.6%
     I. By State of Residence in Year t+10*                      16.6%           17.0%          15.8%       16.1%        16.3%
     Notes: Observations are the 10% sample of males identified as black and under age 55 in the 1880-1930 Censuses linked in
     two consecutive censuses using 2SUP. Panel I: Columns (1) and (5) report moving counties within a state; columns (2) and (6)
     report moving states; columns (3) and (7) are the sums of previous two columns; columns (4) and (8) report those who leave
     the South: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Texas, Tennessee and
     Virginia. In Panel II: column (5) includes Massachusetts, Connecticut, California, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Michigan,
     Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont and Wisconsin.
     Column (6) includes the same states as Panel I columns (4) and (8). Column (7) includes the states in column (6) and
     Delaware, Kentucky, Maryland and Missouri. Column (8) includes Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama, South, Carolina, North
     Carolina, Louisiana, Texas, Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas, Florida, Washington, Kentucky, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New York,
     Missouri, Ohio, Illinois, New Jersey, Oklahoma, Indiana, West Virginia, Michigan and Kansas. *State of residence is residence
     in t+20 for individuals linked over the 1880-1900 interval.
        Table 7: The Correlation between Passing and Base Year Characteristics

                                                             Dependent Variable: White in year t+10
                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)

Dep. Var. Mean                                   0.170         0.171         0.145         0.158          0.170         0.170
Miscegenation Legal                            -0.319***
                                                 (0.106)
Democratic PCA                                               0.00659*
                                                             (0.00350)
  Standardized Coef.                                          0.0462

Black Educational Opportunity PCA                                         0.0219***
                                                                          (0.00516)
  Standardized Coef.                                                        0.0403

Literacy (Read and Write)                                                  -0.00361
                                                                           (0.00566)
WTB Occupational Income Score                                              -0.00605
                                                                           (0.00805)
  Standardized Coef.                                                       -0.00589

Occupational Score (000's)                                               0.000946***
                                                                          (0.000350)
  Standardized Coef.                                                        0.0219
Married                                                                                 -0.0444***
                                                                                         (0.00763)
Number of Head's Children in Household                                                  -0.00639***
                                                                                         (0.000727)
Distinctively Black Name (Cook et al. 2014)                                             -0.0805***
                                                                                         (0.00850)
County Black Population Share                                                                           -0.00863      -0.00643
                                                                                                        (0.0239)      (0.0238)
County All Immigrant Share                                                                               0.345**
                                                                                                         (0.140)
County Mediterranean Immigrant Share                                                                                   -0.575
                                                                                                                       (0.509)
County Northern European Immigrant Share                                                                              0.454***
                                                                                                                       (0.163)
County Other Immigrant Share                                                                                            0.533
                                                                                                                       (0.395)


Urban                                                                                                  0.0143***     0.0143***
                                                                                                       (0.00521)     (0.00520)
Observations                                     77,402     56,465      19,983      44,299     77,402      77,402
R-squared                                         0.011      0.056       0.007       0.069      0.048       0.048
Region FE                                         State     County       State      County     County      County
Standard Errors Cluster                        State-Year County-Year County-Year Newey-West County-Year County-Year
Notes: Observations are the 10% sample of males identified as black and age 15-54 in the base year of the 1910-1930 censuses
linked in two consecutive censuses using 2SUP. In column (2), Democratic PCA is the first principal component all elections for
U.S. president, the U.S. Congress and the U.S. Senate that has taken place in the past ten years. Column (3) is restricted to
Southern states. The black education opportunity PCA is the first principal component of 4 variables: the # of black universities
in a state and year; black-to-white teacher salary, white-to-black pupil-teacher ra o and black-to-white term lengths in a county
and year. In column (6), Northern European countries comprise of all European countries that do not border the
Mediterranean. All regressions control for age category dummy variables (15-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54), year fixed effects and
region fixed effects as stated in the table. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              47
                   Table 8: The Correlation between Passing and Income

                                                      Dependent Variables

                                                        Moved County or
                                     Occ. Scoret+10       State t+10          Occ. Scoret+10    Occ. Scoret+10
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)

Dep. Var. Mean (Std. Dev.)            16.4 (9.76)           0.48 (0.5)          16.4 (9.76)       16.4 (9.76)

Whitet+10                              3.017***             0.476***            1.828***           3.178***
                                        (0.120)             (0.00354)             (0.306)           (0.127)

Mulattot x Whitet+10                                                                              -1.301***
                                                                                                    (0.376)

Mulattot                                                                                           0.454***
                                                                                                    (0.130)

Occupational Scoret                    0.122***             0.000221            0.119***           0.123***
                                       (0.00727)           (0.000200)           (0.00724)          (0.00726)
Urbant                                 1.408***            0.0433***            2.800***           1.400***
                                        (0.126)            (0.00561)             (0.128)            (0.125)
Marriedt                                  0.125            -0.0661***            0.190**             0.127
                                        (0.0932)            (0.00426)            (0.0926)          (0.0932)
Literacy t                             0.606***            -0.0419***           0.512***           0.597***
                                       (0.0840)             (0.00445)           (0.0828)           (0.0841)
Distinctively Black Namet               -0.0379             0.00247              -0.0827            -0.0265
                                        (0.210)             (0.0114)             (0.206)            (0.210)
Passedt+10 x Moved County t+10                                                  0.926***
                                                                                 (0.359)
Passedt+10 x Moved Statet+10                                                    1.016***
                                                                                 (0.361)

Passedt+10 x Rural to Urbant+10                                                 2.768***
                                                                                 (0.350)
Observations                             77,440              77,440               77,440            77,440
R-squared                                0.092               0.208                0.114             0.092

Notes: Observations are the 10% sample of males identified as black and age 15-54 in the base year in the
1910-1930 censuses linked in two consecutive censuses using 2SUP. All regressions control for age category
dummy variables (15-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54), year and base-year county of residence fixed effects, as well as
age-group dummy variables. Column (3) additionally controls for the uninteracted dummy variables for
moving counties, moving states and moving from rural to urban. Robust Newey-West standard errors are
presented in the parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      48
                Figure 1: Racial Composition of the County of Residence
                                    (a) Passing to white vs. remaining black




                       4
                       3
                   Frequency
                       2
                       1
                       0




                               -1          -.5             0             .5            1
                                                 Difference in % White

                                                   Pass           Don't Pass



                     (b) Reverse-passing to black vs. remaining passed for white
                       8
                       6
                   Frequency
                       4
                       2
                       0




                               -1          -.5             0             .5            1
                                                 Difference in % White

                                            Reverse Pass          Don't Reverse Pass



Notes: The y-axis is the PDF. The x-axis is the % white in the county of residence in the
current year minus the % white in the county of residence in the previous census year.




                                                       49
Online Appendix

A    Case Studies of Racial Passing: Anita Hemmings, Harry Mur-

     phy, and the Johnston Family

There are many cases of racial passing that are discussed in detail by historians and biogra-

phers. To help illustrate the environment and fix ideas, we provide three cases here: Anita

Hemmings, Harry Murphy, and Dr. Johnston and his family.

    Anita Hemmings, shown in Appendix Figure A.3 panel A, had parents who were both

identified as "black". She attended Vassar College as a "white" student, was discovered to

be black in 1897, but still graduated. She later married a black man. Both passed for white

and raised their children as white. Her daughter, Ellen Love, also attended Vassar as a white

woman (Mancini, 2002).

    Harry Murphy is an example of an individual who started passing for white due to

enumerator error, then decided to actively pass, and then reverse-passed to black. His photo

is in Appendix Figure A.3 Panel B. When he entered the Navy, an official checked the box for

"white" for his race. This allowed him to participate in the Navy's V-12 program for training

officers and take classes at Ole Miss in 1945 as a white student, where no one questioned

his identity. When the V-12 program ended, he transferred to Morehouse College in his

hometown of Atlanta, where he returned to living as a black man. He later moved to New

York City, where he may have lived as a white man again (Hobbs, 2014).

    Dr. Johnston and his wife Thyra Johnston were both born black. Dr. Johnston attended

the University of Chicago Medical School as one of two black students. Upon graduation,

Dr. Johnston failed to secure a radiology position in the few hospitals that would hire black

interns. However, when his race was not mentioned, he was able to obtain a position in a

Maine hospital. He and his family moved there and passed for white for a number of years.

In 1940, the Navy began to recruit Dr. Johnston but then ended the process upon hearing

reports that Dr. Johnston might be black, which led Dr. Johnston to reveal to his children

their background (Thomas, 1995). The photo of Dr. Johnston and his family is shown in

                                             1
Appendix Figure A.3.



B     U.S. Historical Censuses

B.1   Race Categories

Racial categories used in each Census (1880-1940) are reported in Appendix Table A.1. "Black"

and "Negro" are synonymous and interchangeably used by the Censuses. For the years that

"mulatto" is reported as a separate category, our study defines "black" to be any individual

in either the black or mulatto census categories. Below, we report the enumerator instruc-

tions for the relevant racial categories for this paper - black, white, and mulatto - for each

decade.

    · 1880: "It must not be assumed that, where nothing is written in this column, "white" is

      to be understood. The column is always to be filled. Be particularly careful in reporting

      the class mulatto. The word is here generic, and includes quadroons, octoroons, and

      all persons having any perceptible trace of African blood. Important scientific results

      depend upon the correct determination of this class in schedules 1 and 5."

    · 1900: No specific instructions given, apart from black being defined as "negro or of

      negro descent" when listing the categories. Enumerator instructions state "Under

      these words write "White" "Black" (negro or of negro descent), "Indian" "Chinese" or

      "Japanese," as the case may be."

    · 1910: "Write "w" for white; "B" for black; "Mu" for mulatto; "Ch" for Chinese; "JP"

      for Japanese; "In" for Indian. For all persons not falling within one of these classes,

      write "Ot" (for other), and write on the left-hand margin of the schedule the race of

      the person so indicated. For census purposes, the term 'black' (B) includes all persons

      who are evidently full-blooded negroes, while the term 'mulatto' (Mu) includes all

      other persons having some proportion or perceptible trace of negro blood."

    · 1920: "Write "w" for white; "B" for black; "Mu" for mulatto; "In" for Indian; "Ch" for

                                              2
  Chinese; "Jp" for Japanese; "Fil" for Filipino; "Hin" for Hindu; "Kor" for Korean. For all

  persons not falling within one of these classes, write "Ot" (for other), and write on the

  left-hand margin of the schedule the race of the person so indicated. For census pur-

  poses the term 'black' (B) includes all Negroes of full blood, while the term 'mulatto'

  (Mu) includes all Negroes having some proportion of white blood."

· 1930: Write "W" for white; "Neg" for Negro; "Mex" for Mexican; "In" for Indian; "Ch"

  for Chinese; "Jp" for Japanese; "Fil" for Filipino; "Hin" for Hindu; and "Kor" for Korean.

  For a person of any other race, write the race in full." Additional instructions are given

  for "Negro" and "Indian": "A person of mixed white and Negro blood should be

  returned as a Negro, no matter how small the percentage of Negro blood. Both black

  and mulatto persons are to be returned as Negroes, without distinction. A person of

  mixed Indian and Negro blood should be returned a Negro, unless the Indian blood

  predominates and the status as an Indian is generally accepted in the community. A

  person of mixed white and Indian blood should be returned as Indian, except where

  the percentage of Indian blood is very small, or where he is regarded as a white person

  by those in the community where he lives."

· 1940: "A person of mixed white and Negro blood should be returned as a Negro, no

  matter how small the percentage of Negro blood. Both black and mulatto persons

  are to be returned as Negroes, without distinction. A person of mixed Indian and

  Negro blood should be returned as a Negro, unless the Indian blood very definitely

  predominates and he is universally accepted in the community as an Indian. A person

  of mixed white and Indian blood should be returned as Indian, if enrolled on an Indian

  Agency or Reservation roll; or if not so enrolled, if the proportion of Indian blood is

  one-fourth or more, or if the person is regarded as an Indian in the community where

  he lives."




                                           3
C     Linking

C.1    2-Sided Linking for Reducing False Positives

This section motivates the two-sided linking algorithm (as opposed to the one-sided linking

typically used in past studies). The main concern for linking is Type I error (which in our

context means observing a race change by error). This difficulty is particularly important for

our study because there are many more white individuals than black individuals in the pop-

ulation. Thus, forward linking alone is likely to incorrectly link a black individual to a white

individual and cause us to overstate the number of individuals who pass.77 Additionally

requiring the linked individual in year t + 10 to have a unique perfect spelling link in year

t addresses this problem. The main conceptual advantage of 2SUP is that, by additionally

linking backwards, it accounts for the possibility that there may exist other individuals in

year t who are equally good or better links for the individual identified as a match by the

one-direction link.

    To identify a change in race, we need to trace individuals over time. The main diffi-

culty in linking individuals over time is that there are no unique individual identifiers in

the historical censuses to form the link.78 The most important variables for distinguishing

individuals are a person's first and last names. However, names are usually insufficient for

constructing unique identifiers because most names are common to more than one individ-

ual and there will be multiple potential links. We also use other "blocking" variables, such

as year of birth and place of birth, to restrict the sample.79 This mitigates, but cannot fully

resolve the fundamental problem of multiple potential matches.

    A standard practice in the economic history literature is to drop all observations for

which there are multiple potential links and keep only individuals from year t for whom a

link can be formed with one and only one individual in year t + 10 (e.g., Abramitzky, Mill,
  77 Note that in principle, we can also generate incorrect links between black individuals in year t to other black

individuals in year t + 10. But this will not lead us to overstate the number of passers.
  78 Social Security numbers were introduced in the United States in 1935 with the New Deal.
  79 We do not block on variables that can be affected by changing racial classification, such as migration or

marriage.




                                                         4
and Pérez, 2020; Feigenbaum, 2016; Long and Ferrie, 2013a). To maximize the accuracy of

the links, past studies often require perfect spelling matches of first and last names. When

we link forwards we do exactly this.80 We will call it the Unique Perfect link.81 We link

forwards from 1880 to 1900, from 1900 to 1910, and so on, up until 1940.

    However, one-direction Unique Perfect links do not rule out the possibility of false pos-

itive findings in our context ­ i.e., we identify someone as passing for white because we

incorrectly link a black individual to a white individual with the same name. Consider the

simple example illustrated in Appendix Figure A.4a, where in year t, there are three hypo-

thetical black males, Samuel, Elijah and Abe, and there are no white Samuels or Elijahs and

many white Abes. In year t + 10, there is one and only one black Samuel, and one and only

one white Elijah and Abe. The standard one-direction Unique Perfect linking algorithm will

link the black Samuelt to the black Samuelt+10 , the black Elijaht to the white Elijaht+10 and

the black Abet to the white Abet+10 . We will observe that one stayed black (Samuelt ) and

two passed for white (Elijaht and Abet ).

    Consider the possibility that while Elijah truly passed in our example, Abe did not. The

one and only one Abe in year t + 10 is actually the future self of one of the many white

Abes from year t (and the black Abe could have disappeared for reasons such as mortality,

enumerator error, or transcription error). One-direction linking cannot take into account the

possibility that there may be other individuals from year t who may be better matches with

the linked individual in year t + 10.

    This difficulty is particularly important for our study because there are many more white

individuals than black individuals in the population. Thus, the problem we just described

is likely to incorrectly link a black individual to a white individual and cause us to overstate

the number of individuals who pass.82 To address this, we additionally require the linked
  80 Because  we require perfect first and last name links, we will be unable to link an individual who changes
his name in order to pass. This will cause us to understate the true rate of passing, even when we compute pass
rates with weights. Note that the same logic applies to other blocking variables. For example, if individuals
who pass intentionally change their birth state, they will not be in the linked sample. This exclusion will lower
the rate of passing in the linked sample.
  81 To see the rates of passing in samples that link forward and allow for slight misspelling of the name, see Nix

and Qian (2015).
  82 Note that in principle, we can also generate incorrect links between black individuals in year t to other black




                                                         5
individual in year t + 10 to have a unique perfect spelling link in year t. For brevity, we call

this the 2-Sided Unique Perfect (2SUP) link.83

    Note that 2SUP is not equivalent to a one-sided link where the sample in the initial year

has already dropped all duplicates within a specified age band. 2SUP is more conservative

because it requires that the match be unique in both directions.

    The main advantage of 2SUP is that, by additionally linking backwards, it accounts for

the possibility that there may exist other individuals in year t who are equally good or better

links for the individual identified as a match by the one-direction link. To illustrate this, ex-

amine Appendix Figure A.4b. It shows that 2SUP will be similar to the one-direction linking

algorithm and identify Samuel and Elijah as links. It also shows that Abet+10 can be linked

to many individuals in year t and so the algorithm will drop Abe from the sample. Relative

to the one-direction link illustrated in Appendix Figure A.4a, imposing the additional back-

wards link has dropped the false link and reduced the number of individuals observed as

passing in this example from two to one. Since there are more whites than blacks in the pop-

ulation, the additional individuals dropped are more likely to be white. Thus, the restriction

imposed by the two-direction linking will, on average, reduce false positive passing in the

linked sample. Figure A.4b also shows that simple enumeration errors are unlikely to result

in false positive passing. If Abe is black in year t and never intends to pass for white in

t + 10, but is incorrectly enumerated as white, the white Abe in t + 10 will not have a unique

link when linking backwards, and Abe will drop out of the sample.

    For example, Abramitzky, Boustan, Eriksson, Feigenbaum, and Pérez (2019) finds that

there are approximately 10-15% of names that suffer from transcription error in the historical

censuses. Such errors will generally lead to the individual being dropped from the linked

sample. Enumeration error can only lead to false positive passing if in addition to mistakingly

reporting Abe as white in t + 10, there are no white (or other black) Abes in year t.
individuals in year t + 10. But this will not lead us to overstate the number of passers.
   83 Abramitzky, Boustan, Eriksson, Feigenbaum, and Pérez (2019) uses two-directional links to test the robust-

ness of their well-known study, Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2012). There are similarities between our
linking algorithm and the full population linking with restrictions to unique matches used to match historical
Norwegian data in Modalsli (2016) and Modalsli (2017).




                                                       6
    For computational feasibility, we use a randomly selected 10% sample of the black male

population in each base year t. The restriction only applies to the base year sample. We

always link to the full population of all males in the subsequent census, and again to the full

population of all males in the initial census when linking backwards. Thus, the restriction

should not affect the accuracy of the links.


C.2       2SUP Algorithm

This section describes the 2SUP algorithm in detail. See Appendix Figure A.5 for an illus-

tration.


C.2.1      Constructing the Using Sample

We begin with a 10% random sample of the black male population in year t and all males

in the following census in year t + 10. For each sample, we drop observations with missing

values for first or last names or age. We do not use information on the middle name.84 Then,

we create phonetically spelled names for all remaining individuals using Phonex.85 We take

each black male in year t and search through all males in year t + 10 to identify all Phonex

matches. Phonex matches are generous in that they are the most likely to contain the true

match absent serious spelling mistakes (Lait and Randell, 1996; Snae, 2007). The average

black male has 6,822 potential Phonex links. This step reduces the computation intensity of

the later step of looking for perfect spelling matches by limiting the number of individuals

in the other census that we search through.

    The next step is to restrict this sample. The first restriction we impose is to only keep

the links where the reported age of the individual in year t + 10 is within a six-year interval

of the predicted age of the individual from year t, e.g., keep if aget + 7                         aget + 10
  84 We  follow Feigenbaum (2016) in removing middle names/initials.
  85 Phonex first retains the first letter of the name.
                                                    Next, all vowels are dropped and the consonants are replaced
with a number, with consonants that sound the same (for example, c and k) assigned the same number. Lastly,
all but the first three numbers are dropped, so that all translations consist of a letter followed by three numbers.
   Another popular method in the literature is NYSIIS, which has been used by studies such as Ferrie (1996). The
main difference between Soundex and NYSIIS is that the latter preserves the position of vowels in its translation
of names - all vowels are replaced with the letter A - and more than 4 characters are retained. Snae (2007) shows
that compared to NYSIIS, Phonex yields twice the number of true matches without sacrificing accuracy.


                                                          7
aget + 13. The second restriction is to only keep links that have matching birth places (birth

states and birth countries for foreign-born individuals).86 In other words, we block on age

and the state of birth. At this point, there are twenty-four potential links for the average

black male in year t. We call this sample the "Using Sample" and everything we discuss

henceforth uses the Using Sample.


C.2.2    2SUP

To maximize accuracy in the links that are formed, we restrict links to those with perfect

spelling matches, which we measure using the Jaro-Winkler score (i.e., we require a score

of two), in the Using Sample.87 We only keep individuals in year t that have one and only

one perfect spelling match in year t + 10. All others are dropped. This forms the Unique

Perfect Sample. For the one-direction link, we closely follow existing studies, with the key

difference being that we do not require the race to be the same to form a link.

    We depart from the literature by requiring the linked individual in year t + 10 to have a

unique perfect spelling link in year t. In practice, we repeat the linking algorithm, starting

with the linked individuals from year t + 10 and for each, we search through the full popu-

lation of males in year t for possible links. We only keep individuals that have one and only

one perfect spelling match in year t. Thus, 2SUP links are individuals in year t that have a

unique forward link in year t + 10, and also a unique backwards link in year t.


C.3     Sensitivity Analysis

Appendix Table A.2 presents the results from several sensitivity checks motivated by the

literature on linking, and in particular, Bailey, Cole, Henderson, and Massey (2017). To

reduce computational intensity, we restrict our attention to black men born in three states

with a large black population: Alabama, Georgia and Louisiana. First, we implement the

baseline 2SUP algorithm as in the main analysis and find that we are able to link 8.1% of
  86 We manually correct misspelled birth states and countries so that there are no losses in observations due to

mistaken spellings.
  87 Note that we have also examined less restrictive spelling matches, where we allow for some misspellings.

The results are similar.


                                                       8
black males born in these states (column 1). For the linked sample, 13.5% pass for white

(column 2).

    Next, we investigate what happens if we include all black males in the base year instead

of restricting the sample to those under 55 years of age (as we will continue to do for the

remaining exercises). We find that both the percentage of the population linked and the rate

of passing in the linked sample are very similar to the baseline. Another check is to use the

100% sample instead of the 10% sample. This unsurprisingly produces similar results, given

that the 10% sample is randomly selected from the full population.

    A common problem in linking comes from age heaping in the historical data, where

many more individuals report ages that are products of five (relative to other ages). To

investigate whether our estimates for passing are biased by age heaping, we divide the data

into individuals whose age is a product of five and everyone else. Table A.2 rows D and E

show that the percentage of the population linked is slightly higher (8.4% vs 7.5%) and the

rate of passing in the linked sample is slightly lower (13.1% vs 14.4%) for individuals whose

ages are not products of five. But the difference is small.

    The main linked sample allows links to be formed within individuals who are within

within plus or minus three years of the predicted age. Here, we alternatively expand the

age interval to be within plus or minus five years of the predicted age, or shrink the interval

to be within plus or minus one year of the predicted age. Table A.2 rows F and G show that

the rates of passing are similar or higher (13.6% and 15%) with these alternative ways of

blocking on age.

    Next, we require the links to match on parents' birth states for years where the latter data

are available.88 The estimated rate of passing in Row H is similar to the baseline. One caveat

for this robustness check is that most individuals are born in the same states as their parents,

which limits the additional information of matching on parents' birth states. To address this,

we impose the added restriction that either the mother's or the father's birth state must be
  88 Parentalbirth state is reported in the censuses of 1880 and 1900-1930. Bailey, Cole, Henderson, and Massey
(2017) suggests using parents' birth states to validate links (that do not already block on these variables). This
is analogous to what we do.




                                                        9
different from the linked individual's birth state. Row I shows that the rate of passing is

13.6%, which is similar to the baseline. Interestingly, note that the rate of links declines

from 8% in Row H to 1% in Row I, which implies that 12.5% (0.01/0.08 = 0.125) of linked

individuals are born in different birth states from at least one parent. This is comparable to

our finding that 13.4% to 18.9% of black men who do not pass migrate across states prior to

the Great Migration (see Table 6 Panel I column 6).89

    Finally, in Row J, we follow the method from Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014)

and use a sample restricted to black males with unique name-birth state-predicted age in-

terval combinations. The rate of links should be higher for this subsample because there

should be fewer multiple matches, which are dropped by the 2SUP algorithm. Indeed, we

find a slightly higher link rate of 8.2%. Reassuringly, the rate of passing in this sample,

13.4%, is comparable to the baseline, 13.5%.


C.4    Alternative Linking Methods

This section provides a brief discussion of alternative linking algorithms presented in Ap-

pendix Table A.4. The rate of passing for white within the linked sample generated by 2SUP

is smaller than those generated by all of the alternative algorithms.


ABE Exact, ABE NYSII and ABE JW In earlier works, the linking was only conducted in

one direction, linking an individual forward in time from year t to t + 10. In a recent work-

ing paper, Abramitzky, Boustan, Eriksson, Feigenbaum, and Pérez (2019) additionally rec-

ommends two-sided linking and provides a Stata command for producing the results. We

follow the nomenclature from this paper to refer to the respective algorithms (e.g., ABE Ex-

act, ABE NYSII, ABE JW, and EM). The replications implement their code for data cleaning

and linking, which is publicly available at https://ranabr.people.stanford.edu/matching-

codes (March 2020 version).

    Each algorithm identifies a set of links going forward in time. The procedure is then
  89 Note that for individuals to have a different birth state from a parent, that parent must move from his or her

birth state prior to giving birth to the child. These migrating parents will be a subset of total migration.



                                                        10
repeated linking backwards in time. Only individuals with unique links forwards and back-

wards in time are ultimately identified as "linked". Conceptually, the two sided linking is

similar to 2SUP, which is consistent with the fact that we find broadly similar rates of link-

ing and rates of passing across methods in Table A.4. However, 2SUP produces the most

conservative (i.e., lowest) rates of passing.

   The only difference between ABE Exact and ABE NYSII is that one uses the usual spelling

while the other uses the NYSII standardized names as linking variables. In the base year,

only individuals with unique first name-last name-age-birthplace combinations are kept in

the sample. Then, the algorithm looks at individuals in the next census year and identifies

perfect matches on first and last names, birthplace and age. An individual is linked if there

is one and only one link. If there are multiple links, the individual from the base year is

dropped from the sample. If there are no links, the age window expands by one year in each

direct, i.e., ±1 years instead of a perfect match. A link is formed if there is one and only

one link. If there are multiple links, the individual from the base year is dropped from the

sample. If there are still no links, then the procedure is repeated by expanding the age to

within two years in each direction, i.e., ±2 years instead of ±1 years or a perfect match. ABE

Exact and ABE NYSIIS produces link rates of 13.4% and 16.4%. The rates of passing in the

linked samples are 19.4% and 21.2%.

   2SUP differs in requiring that the match be unique within ±3 years (without expanding

the age window in stages). This will cause 2SUP to have a lower rate of links (8.2% versus

13.4% and 16.4%) because there are cases where an individual has multiple links within the

±3 years (which will cause 2SUP to drop the individual), but have exactly one match within

a narrower age window (which will cause the link to be formed by ABE Exact and ABE

NYSII).

   ABE JW first conducts a crude linking exercise to restrict the sample. Individuals in

the base year are linked to those in the next census interval with the same birth place, the

same first letter for the first and last name, and where the reported age in the next census

is within ±5 years of the predicted age. A Jaro-Winkler (JW) score, which measures the



                                                11
string distance between two names, is calculated for the individual in the base year and all

possible matches in the following census of this restricted sample. For each potential link,

the JW score ranges from 0 (a perfect spelling match) to 1. The ABE JW algorithm restricts

the sample to potential links where the first and last names each have JW scores of 0.1 or

less. A link is identified if the individual in the base year has one and only one potential

link in the following census year. If there are multiple links, then the potential link with the

closest age is identified as a link if there is only one potential link with that closest age and

the next closest age distance is at least two years further away.90 ABE JW links 6.8% of the

sample. The rate of passing in the linked sample is 13.9%.

    This algorithm will produce a lower rate of links than 2SUP because there are individuals

with a perfect spelling match (i.e., JW score 0 for first name and for last name) and age match

±3 years (where 2SUP will identify as a link), but who also have two or more potential links

that have the same closest age and JW scores of less than 0.1. Conceptually, ABE JW is a

more conservative linking algorithm than 2SUP because it drops "perfect" links if there are

other possible individuals that could be noisily linked in terms of names. Table A.4 shows

that the link rate for ABE JW is 6.8%, lower than the 8.2% for 2SUP. The rate of passing for

white is slightly higher, 13.9% in the ABE JW sample versus 13.4% in the 2SUP sample.


EM Expectation Maximization (EM) was initially developed by computer scientists and

applied to linking historical data in Abramitzky, Mill, and Pérez (2020) and further discussed

in Abramitzky, Boustan, Eriksson, Feigenbaum, and Pérez (2019).91

    The algorithm begins by conducting the same crude linking exercise as ABE JW to re-

strict the sample, and also constructs JW scores for the names of the restricted samples the

same way. The EM algorithm combines the two measures of distances - distance between

names and age - to calculate a probability score that any potential link is the true link. A

link is formed when the potential link with the highest probability score has a score that is
  90 The authors discuss that this is more cautious than the slight variation of taking the link with the closest age

provided it is unique.
  91 We use the Stata and R-code shared by the authors at https://ranabr.people.stanford.edu/matching-codes

from March 2020.



                                                        12
both sufficiently high and also sufficiently distant from the next best link. The thresholds

for the probability score that the link with the highest score must exceed, and which the

second highest must fall below are arbitrary. The percent of the population that is linked

will decline as the first threshold increases and as the second threshold decreases. If no such

link satisfies both criteria, then the individual is dropped from the sample.

    The key advantage of EM over other algorithms is that it transforms the discretized

information from the quality of the matches of names and age into a continuous variable,

and it takes into account the possibility that enumerator error may cause the true link to not

have the highest probability score. The limitation of EM is that the choices of the thresholds

which are key to determining the links are arbitrary. For our replication exercise, we use

thresholds of 90 and 85, which is similar to Abramitzky, Mill, and Pérez (2020). EM links

6.3% of the sample. The rate of passing in the linked sample is 14.8%.


Ferrie and Long      This is the only algorithm in Table A.4 that is not two-sided. We replicate

it given its seminal importance in the literature of machine linking historical data. The well-

known paper, Long and Ferrie (2013b), conducts many linking algorithms. We implement

the one the authors describe as the most conservative in their appendix.92 It is very similar

to the one-direction Unique Perfect links presented in Table 1 of the paper. Links require

perfect spelling matches of first and last names, birth states and parental births states (when

available in the 1880, 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1930 Censuses). In addition, it requires a ±1 year

age match. Finally, it requires that all links are unique. A link is only formed if there is one

and only one individual in year t + 10 which is a potential link for the individual in the base

year t. This method links 9.9% of the sample. The rate of passing in the linked sample is

21.4%.93


Agreement Across Algorithms            Appendix Table A.5 presents the similarities of link prob-

abilities across algorithms. Row A shows that the percent of individuals in the population
  92 We base our code on the discussion on page 8 of the Online Appendix of Long and Ferrie (2013b).
  93 One machine-linking method we do not replicate is Feigenbaum (2016), which implements a training algo-
rithm that matches on race.


                                                    13
that are similarly linked or unlinked using 2SUP versus alternative algorithms range from

86.4% to 91.4%. Appendix Table A.5 Row B shows that amongst individuals in year t that

are linked by both 2SUP and the alternative algorithm, the share which is linked to the same

individual in year t + 10 ranges from 93.1% to 99.2%.



D    Name Similarity

Here we consider the possibility that black and white men are more likely to share similar

names than with other races. Specifically, the concern is that Chinese and Japanese men

have more differentiated names from white men, such that enumerators are less likely to

mistake them for white (as compared to mistaking a black man for a white man). To address

this, we compare black and Asian name similarity with white men. First, we calculate the

number of white men that have the same first and last name as a black man in the same

state of residence. We look at the state of residence because this is arguably the population

that is the most salient in the mind of the enumerator (e.g., a white enumerator in New York

may not care or know about the distribution of names in other states). Given the Census

instructions and the low literacy rates at the time, the first time an enumerator learns the

name of the individual is most likely in hearing it (rather than seeing it written down).

Thus, we use the Phonex soundings of the name for this exercise. When we do this, we find

that for the average black man, there are approximately 111 white men in the same state of

residence (averaged across all census years) with the same phonetic name. When we repeat

the exercise for other races, we find the following analogous numbers: 174.7 for white, 114

for Chinese, 35 for Japanese and 59 for Native Americans. These numbers show substantial

variation in name similarity with whites across races, with names for Native American and

Japanese men being less common with whites. However, the names of Chinese and black

men were similar in their commonality with white men.




                                             14
E      Passing for White by Age and Year

Appendix Table A.6 shows the rates of passing for each census interval. The rates of passing

are larger, 22.4% versus 15-18.1%, for the 1880-1900 interval. This is most likely because the

accumulation of the number of individuals who passed for white over twenty years is larger

than over ten years. The fact that it is not exactly twice the rates of passing for a ten-year

interval is likely to be partly due to reverse passing.94

      If we compare the four ten-year intervals in rows (B) to (E), we see that there is a slight

decline in the rates of passing from 18.1% to 15%. This could be due to changes in the incen-

tives or constraints for passing. It is also consistent with the notion that many individuals

who wished to pass when Jim Crow began chose to do so in the earlier census intervals and

remained white. Thus, they would not need to pass again and the rates of passing would

naturally stabilize at slightly lower rates.

      Next, we examine passing by age. The results show comparable rates and no distinct

pattern of passing across ages groups other than that adults are slightly more likely to pass

than children. This is consistent with the historical accounts that the decision to pass was

often made as a family and at different points in life. Note that the rate of links declines

for the older group (row K, age 45-54). This is consistent with the rise of mortality rates at

higher ages.



F      Weighted Extrapolations

The population weights take into account two factors: the share of individuals in the popu-

lation with the same set of characteristics and the share in the linked sample with the same

set of characteristics. We aggregate the individual observations in the linked sample into

cells according to observable characteristics, and then multiply the average rate of passing
    94 Linking
            over twenty years also results in a lower rate of links because the number of people who cannot be
linked due to mortality will be higher if we look over a twenty-year period than a ten-year period.




                                                     15
in each cell by the population weight.95 The weight is increasing in the share of the popula-

tion with similar characteristics, and decreasing in the share of the linked sample with sim-

ilar characteristics. The sample is aggregated along the following dimensions: age, literacy,

whether an individual lives in an urban area, marital status, whether he has a distinctively

black name, relationship to the household head, birth place, state of residence, household

size, and the census year.96 We use all permutations of these variables to group individuals

into mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive cells. The implied rate of passing for the

population with population weights is 16%.

    Alternatively, we can use probit weights in the spirit of Ager, Boustan, and Eriksson

(2019), which re-weight linked individuals with the probability that those with similar char-

acteristics are linked.97 Conceptually, the two weights are similar in correcting for the pos-

sibility that linked individuals are not representative of the population. Both weighting

schemes assume that individuals with similar observable characteristics will pass for white

at the same rate. The population rate of passing with probit weights is 16.8%, which is very

similar to the population-weighted rate of passing (16%), as well as the rate of passing in

the 2SUP sample (16.6%).

    One caveat for the weighted extrapolations is the interpretation for individuals with

characteristic combinations that are not shared with any linked individuals. To see this,

consider the population-weighted rates of passing, for which this problem is the most trans-

parent. In this case, all individuals with characteristic combinations where no one with the
  95 Our   approach is equivalent to multiplying each observation by a post-stratification weight (which is the
                                                                                             PopSharei |Xi
standard method used for adjusting survey data to be representative) given by 2SUPSampleShare                    , and
                                                                                                           i |Xi
then taking the average pass rate across post-stratification weighted individuals.
   96 Birth place refers to birth states for U.S.-born individuals and birth countries for foreign-born individuals.

Note that we do not use variables such as the number of children because we only observe the number of
children for the household head, when, in reality, many adults who are not household heads may also have
children. To maximize the amount of information used, we create dummy variables for all values of the variables
listed above. We interpret missing values as simply another value that the given variable can take. Thus,
observations that report missing values for these variables are not omitted.
   97 Following Ager, Boustan, and Eriksson (2019), we construct a weight for each observation: 1-Pi (Mi =1|Xi ) ×
                                                                                                    P (M =1|X )
                                                                                                      i   i     i
 q
1-q . The propensity of being matched Pi (Mi = 1|Xi ) is calculated using a probit of the probability of being
linked conditional on the covariates Xi , and q is the proportion of records linked. We use the same observable
characteristics for calculating this weight as for the population weights. Note that unlike for population weights,
we use linear and quadratic measures of household size for computational feasibility.




                                                         16
exact same combination is linked will be dropped from the calculation because there are no

linked individuals with which to calculate the cell-level rate of passing. Such individuals

account for 38% of the population. A straightforward way to address this is to add these

individuals back into the weighted extrapolations with the assumption that none of them

passed for white. This adjustment will mechanically lower the population rate of passing to

9.9% (0.16 × (1 - .38) = 0.099). The weighted estimates using probit weights mechanically

include individuals who do not share the exact characteristic combination with anyone who

is linked. However, to address the same conceptual concern, we make the following adjust-

ment. We compute the probit, assuming that for characteristic combinations with no one

linked, one individual is linked and he does not pass. Then, we calculate the weights and

apply them to estimate the rates of passing in the adjusted sample. The adjusted weighted

rate of passing is 6.8%.

   Appendix Table A.8 presents the adjusted population-weighted race-transition matrix.

The results are consistent with the incentives to change race and with the patterns seen in

the race-transition matrix (Table 2) using only the linked sample. Recall that the transition

matrix uses data for 1920 and later. Thus, the rates of passing from black to white will

slightly differ from the full sample results discussed earlier.98

   Interpreting these extrapolations assumes that selection (i.e., who decides to pass for

white) is based on observables. Thus, they should be interpreted as merely illustrative.




 98 The   transition matrix using the adjusted probit weights are very similar and available upon request.


                                                       17
                  Table A.1: Racial Categories in the U.S. Censuses, 1880-1940

                        1880           1900        1910         1920       1930            1940
       White              x              x           x            x          x               x
       Black              x              x           x            x          x               x
       Mulatto            x                          x            x
       Indian             x              x           x            x             x           x
       Chinese            x              x           x            x             x           x
       Japanese                          x           x            x             x           x
       Korean                                                     x             x           x
       Filipino                                                   x             x           x
       Mexican                                                                  x
       Hindu                                                     x              x           x
       Other                                         x           x              x           x


                                       Table A.2: Sensitivity Checks

                                                                       % Link          % Pass for White

                                                                        (1)                     (2)
                                                                                    2SUP
 A. Baseline 10%                                                       8.1%                  13.5%

 B. 100% Sample                                                        8.2%                  13.4%

 C.    Include if age > 55 in year t                                   7.8%                  13.5%

 D. Heaped Age (age is a multiple of 5 in base year)                   7.5%                  14.4%

 E.    Omit Heaped Age                                                 8.4%                  13.1%

 F.    +/- 5 year intervals                                            8.0%                  13.6%

 G. +/- 1 year intervals                                               7.8%                  15.0%

 H. Match on mothers' and fathers' birth states                        8.0%                  13.3%
       Match on mothers' and fathers' birth states, and birth
  I.                                                                   1.0%                  13.6%
       state different from father's or mother's.

  J.   Unique names (by birth state, +/-5 age interval)                8.2%                  13.4%

Notes: Observations are the 100% population of males identified as black and under age 55 in the
base year in the 1880-1930 Censuses linked in two consecutive censuses using 2SUP. Exceptions are
stated in the row titles. The sample is restricted to individuals born in Alabama, Georgia and
Louisiana in the base year. Parental birth states are available for 1880 and 1900-1930.



                                                    18
                                      Table A.3: Falsification Exercises

                                                    Individuals Who Pass Individuals Who Do Not Pass
                                                              (1)                      (2)
       A.       Literate to Illiterate                      3.0%                      5.1%
       B.       Illiterate to Literate                      32.9%                    31.4%
       C.       Difference in Avg. Children's Age            9.49                     9.52
Notes: Observations are the 10% sample of males identified as black in the 1880-1930 Censuses
linked with 2SUP. Row C restricts to the 1900-1930 Censuses linked with 2SUP, to children aged 0-
5 in the base year, and to households with 10 or fewer children.


                     Table A.4: Replications Using Alternative Linking Methods

                                                                     % Link        % Pass for White

                                                                       (1)               (2)

 A. Dahis, Nix and Qian (DNQ) - 2SUP                                  8.2%              13.4%
 B. Abramitsky, Boustan and Eriksson - Exact                         13.4%              19.4%
 C.         Abramitsky, Boustan and Eriksson - NYSIIS                16.4%              21.2%
 D. Abramitsky, Boustan and Eriksson - JW                             6.8%              13.9%
 E.         Expectation-Maximization                                  6.3%              14.8%

  F.        Long and Ferrie (2013)*                                   9.9%              21.4%
Notes: See Appendix Section D for detailed descriptions of each methodology. All replication
exercises are restricted to men born in the following robustness states: Alabama, Georgia,
and Louisiana. For these replication exercise we match 100% of the population in the base
decades to 100% of the population in the next decades and then report the link and pass
rates for black men.




                                                     19
                           Table A.5: Agreement in Links Across Linking Algorithms

                                                                               Alternative Algorithms
                                                                    ABE-Exact ABE-NYSII ABE-JW EM
                                                   Sample              (1)        (2)       (3)     (4)
          Linked or Not Linked with 2SUP Full Population in Year t
      A.
                 and Alt. Algorithm                                    91.4%      86.4%     91.1% 90.4%




20
                                           Men in Yea r t who are
      B. Linked to the Same Individual Linked by both 2SUP and
                   in Next Census              Alt. Algorithm          97.9%      93.1%     99.2% 95.0%
     Notes: Observations are the 100% population of males identified as black and under age 55 in the base year in
     the 1880-1930 Censuses linked in two consecutive censuses using 2SUP and the alternative algorithms stated
     in the column headings. The sample is restricted to individuals who are born in Alabama, Georgia and
     Louisiana in the base year.
Table A.6: Passing by Age and Census Interval

                    % Link         % Pass
                     (1)             (2)
A. 1880-1900        6.4%           22.4%
B. 1900-1910        8.4%           18.1%
C. 1910-1920        9.0%           16.6%
D. 1920-1930        9.4%           15.0%
E. 1930-1940        9.6%           15.0%

F. Age < 5          10.9%          15.4%
G. Age 5-14         9.2%           14.3%
H. Age 15-24        8.2%           17.4%
I. Age 25-34        8.5%           18.2%
J. Age 35-44        8.4%           18.1%
K. Age 45-54        7.3%           18.8%

Notes: Observations are the 10% sample of
males identified as black in the 1880-1930
Censuses linked using 2SUP.




                     21
                                                     Table A.7: Balance Statistics for 2SUP Sample

                                          Using Sample                         2SUP                             Not 2SUP                     2SUP- Not 2SUP

                                  Mean        SD         Obs.        Mean       SD       Obs.          Mean        SD         Obs.      Dif in Means      p-val
                                   (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)           (7)        (8)         (9)            (10)        (11)
     Age                          20.89      14.21    1,625,681      20.34     14.44    181,915        20.96      14.18    1,443,766         -0.62       <0.001
     Literacy                      0.54      0.50     1,423,591       0.54      0.50    163,685        0.54       0.50     1,259,906        <0.01        <0.001
     Occupational Score            8.90      9.61     1,129,609       8.42      9.68    131,845        8.96       9.60      997,764         -0.54        <0.001




22
     Head of Household             0.32      0.47     1,625,681       0.33      0.47    181,915        0.32       0.47     1,443,766         0.01        <0.001
     Single                        0.64      0.48     1,619,050       0.64      0.48    181,320        0.64       0.48     1,437,730        <0.01        <0.001
     Married                       0.33      0.47     1,619,050       0.34      0.47    181,320        0.33       0.47     1,437,730         0.01        <0.001
     Number of Children            1.94      2.30      516,374        2.19      2.42     59,208        1.91       2.28      457,166          0.28        <0.001
     North (Union States)          0.12      0.33     1,625,681       0.14      0.34    181,915        0.12       0.32     1,443,766         0.02        <0.001
     Distinctively Black Name      0.01      0.12     1,625,681       0.02      0.15    181,915        0.01       0.11     1,443,766         0.01        <0.001
     Lives in Birth State          0.70      0.46     1,625,681       0.74      0.44    181,915        0.70       0.46     1,443,766         0.05        <0.001

     Notes: Observations are the 10% sample of males identified as black and under age 55 in the base year in the 1880-1940 censuses. Additional restrictions are
     stated in the column headings.
Table A.8: Race Transition Matrix ­ Implied Rates of Passing for the Population, All Races,
Population Weights


                         Implied Rates of Passing for the Population
             (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                 Race in t+10
                                                                              Native
     Race in t (below)     Black        White       Chinese      Japanese    American
  A.       Black           91.4%         8.5%         0.1%        <0.01%      <0.01%
  B.      White            0.6%         99.3%       <0.01%        <0.01%      <0.01%
  C.     Chinese           0.1%          1.6%        98.2%          0.1%      <0.01%
  D.    Japanese          <0.01%         1.8%         0.0%         97.9%        0.1%
  E. Native American       1.1%         16.9%         0.1%        <0.01%       81.5%
  Notes : Results from this table are obtained by extrapolating the estimates from Table
  2 using population weights to the full population. See text.




                                            23
                                                 Figure A.1: Emancipated Slaves in 1863




24
     Source: "White and Colored Slaves" by C. C. Leigh (Harper's Weekly, January 30, 1864, p. 71).
                                                 Figure A.2: Emancipated Slaves in 1863
                                                                                               (c) Black Children Turned Away from White
                (a) Isaac and Rosa                              (b) Rebecca                    Schools




25
     Source: "White and Colored Slaves" by C. C. Leigh (Harper's Weekly, January 30, 1864, p. 71).
    Figure A.3: Illustrative Examples of Individuals who Passed from Black to White
                   (a) Anita Hemmings                (b) Harry S Murphy




                                  (c) Dr. Johnston and Family




Notes: A: Anita Hemmings passed in order to attend Vassar which she graduated from in
1897 (Perkins, 1998). B: Harry S. Murphy attended the University of Mississippi from 1945-
1946 as a white man. He later returned to life as a black man. When Ole Miss violently
resisted James Meredith's integration of the campus in 1962, Murphy stated "they're fighting
a battle they don't know they lost years ago" (Hobbs, 2014). C: Dr. Johnston and his family
passed for white in the 1920s and 1930s to practice medicine (Hobbs, 2014).




                                              26
Figure A.4: One-sided and 2-sided Unique (Perfect) Links
                     (a) Unique Perfect Link



  Year              Black                      White

  t+10     Samuel                     Elijah Abe



      t    Samuel Elijah Abe           Abe Abe Abe Abe

             (b) 2-Sided Unique Perfect (2SUP) Link



Year               Black                       White

t+10      Samuel                     Elijah Abe



  t       Samuel Elijah Abe           Abe      Abe Abe Abe




                               27
                Figure A.5: 2SUP Linking Algorithm

Black Male Population in t                      All Male Population in t+10

                       Keep: first and last name non-
                        missing, age non-missing.

Base Population in t                             Target Population in t+10
                            Link on Phonex names



          Avg. # potential links: 6,822. Population in sample: 98%.


   Keep if pot. matches are within +/- 3 years and have same birth place


                           "Using Sample"
         Avg. potential links: 24. Population in sample: 80%.

                          Keep if perfect spelling
                              match (JW2)

                         Keep if 1 potential match




                    Unique Perfect Sample
       Avg. potential links: 1. Population in sample: 14.1%.

                                        Link backwards to t. Repeat
                                                procedure


            2-Sided Unique Perfect (2SUP) Sample
      Avg. potential links: 1 FB. Population in sample: 8.6%.




                                     28
