                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 IS THE PUBLIC INVESTMENT MULTIPLIER HIGHER IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES?
                      AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION

                                      Alejandro Izquierdo
                                         Ruy E. Lama
                                      Juan Pablo Medina
                                         Jorge P. Puig
                                     Daniel Riera-Crichton
                                        Carlos A. Vegh
                                      Guillermo Vuletin

                                      Working Paper 26478
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26478


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We would like to thank Daniel Artana, Leopoldo Avellan, Andy Berg, Roberto Fattal, Juan
Hernandez, Julian Messina, Andrew Powell, Tomas Serebrisky, Luis Serven, Ernesto Stein,
Diego Vera-Cossio, and seminar participants at the Argentine Economic Association Annual
Meetings (Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Argentina), Central Bank of Argentina, George
Washington University, International Monetary Fund, Inter-American Development Bank,
Jornadas Internacionales de Finanzas Públicas (Universidad Nacional de Cordoba, Argentina),
LACEA Meetings (Ecuador), and World Bank for helpful comments and discussions. We are also
grateful to María Teresa Balestrini, José Andrée Camarena Fonseca, Diego Friedheim, Luis
Morano, Lucila Venturi Grosso, and Hongrui Zhang for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alejandro Izquierdo, Ruy E. Lama, Juan Pablo Medina, Jorge P. Puig, Daniel Riera-
Crichton, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is the Public Investment Multiplier Higher in Developing Countries? An Empirical Investigation
Alejandro Izquierdo, Ruy E. Lama, Juan Pablo Medina, Jorge P. Puig, Daniel Riera-Crichton,
Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin
NBER Working Paper No. 26478
November 2019
JEL No. E22,E32,E62

                                           ABSTRACT

Over the last decade, empirical studies analyzing macroeconomic conditions that may affect the
size of government spending multipliers have flourished. Yet, in spite of their obvious public
policy importance, little is known about public investment multipliers. In particular, the clear
theoretical implication that public investment multipliers should be higher (lower) the lower
(higher) is the initial stock of public capital has not, to the best of our knowledge, been tested.
This paper tackles this empirical challenge and finds robust evidence in favor of the above
hypothesis: countries with a low initial stock of public capital (as a proportion of GDP) have
significantly higher public investment multipliers than countries with a high initial stock of public
capital. This key finding seems robust to the sample (European countries, U.S. states, and
Argentine provinces) and identification method (Blanchard-Perotti, forecast errors, and
instrumental variables). Our results thus suggest that public investment in developing countries
would carry high returns.

Alejandro Izquierdo                               Daniel Riera-Crichton
Inter-American Development Bank                   The World Bank
1300 New York Ave, N. W.                          1818 H St NW
Washington, D. C., 20577                          Washington, DC 20433
alejandroi@iadb.org                               drieracr@bates.edu

Ruy E. Lama                                       Carlos A. Vegh
International Monetary Fund                       School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
700 19th Street, NW                               Johns Hopkins University
Washington, DC 20431                              1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
rlama@imf.org                                     Washington, DC 20036
                                                  and NBER
Juan Pablo Medina                                 cvegh1@jhu.edu
Universidad Adolfo Ibañez
Diagonal Las Torres 2640                          Guillermo Vuletin
Santiago                                          The World Bank
Chile                                             1818 H Street NW
jp.medina.guzman@gmail.com                        Washington, DC 20433
                                                  gvuletin@worldbank.org
Jorge P. Puig
FCE-Universidad Nacional de La Plata
Calle 6 #777
La Plata, 1900
Argentina
jorgeppuig@gmail.com
1        Introduction
Ever since the Global Financial Crisis, there has been an explosion of studies analyzing the
macroeconomic e¤ects of government spending. In particular ­ and inspired by familiar
macroeconomic theory ­ a growing literature has focused on how di¤erent macroeconomic
factors may a¤ect the size of government spending multipliers. For example, a consensus is
building around the idea that the size of the government spending multiplier depends on (i)
the state of the economy, with multipliers being larger in recessions than in expansions (e.g.,
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012 and 2013; Riera-Crichton, Vegh, and Vuletin, 2015); (ii)
the exchange rate regime, with multipliers being larger under ...xed regimes (e.g., Ilzetzki,
Mendoza, and Vegh, 2013); (iii) the degree of indebtness, with multipliers being larger when
debt is low (e.g., Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Vegh, 2013; Huidrom et al., 2019); (iv) the degree
of accommodation of monetary policy, with multipliers being larger when monetary policy
is loose and/or close to the zero lower bound (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011;
Coenen, Straub, and Trabandt, 2013); and (v) the degree of openness of the economy, with
multipliers being smaller in economies more open to trade (e.g., Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Vegh,
2013; Gonzalez-Garcia, Lemus, and Mrkaic, 2013).
        Interestingly, since most studies focus either on primary spending or government con-
sumption, there does not seem to be much evidence on multipliers for public investment.1
What do we know about public investment multipliers? Early theoretical work by Aschauer
(1989a, 1989b) and Baxter and King (1993) and more recent empirical evidence (e.g., Auer-
bach and Gorodnichenko, 2013; Leduc and Wilson, 2012; Eden and Kraay, 2014; Calderon,
Moral-Benito, and Serven, 2015; Furceri and Li, 2017) have found that the public investment
multiplier can be quite large, especially when compared to the government consumption mul-
tiplier.     The typical argument is that, unlike government consumption, public investment
directly improves the economy's productive capacity by increasing the marginal product of
private capital and labor. As time progresses, this generates positive e¤ects both on private
investment and private consumption.
        It is essential to learn more about the determinants of the size of the public investment
multiplier, especially in light of current concerns about how to raise economic growth, increase
    1
    Recall that, by de...nition, government spending is the sum of primary spending and interest payments
and, in turn, primary spending comprises current primary spending and public investment. Finally, current
primary spending comprises government consumption and transfers. When referring to di¤erent types of
government spending, we will use the terms public and government interchangeably.



                                                   2
productivity, and reinvigorate the role of the private sector which, in turn, has triggered a
major policy push around the world for more public investment/infrastructure. In particular,
there has been great interest in better understanding the e¤ect of lack of e¢ ciency on the size
of the public investment multiplier, broadly de...ned as cost overruns, implementation delays,
institutional weaknesses, and wasteful use of resources (including corruption). The evidence
clearly suggests that the output e¤ect of public investment falls when e¢ ciency is low (Leeper,
Walker, and Yang, 2010; Cavallo and Daude, 2011; Leduc and Wilson, 2012; Furceri and Li,
2017; Izquierdo, Pessino, and Vuletin, 2018).
       In this context, and motivated particularly by the large gaps in public investment and
infrastructure in the developing world, this paper asks a natural and relevant question: does
the size of the public investment multiplier depend on the initial stock of public capital? From
a theoretical point of view, the answer is simple. Standard neoclassical ...scal policy growth
models (like the classic contribution of Baxter and King, 1993) would predict that the lower
the initial stock of public capital, the larger the output e¤ects of increasing public investment.
Speci...cally, when the initial stock of public capital is low, the marginal productivity of an
additional unit of public investment is large which, aided also by additional private investment,
will lead to higher public investment multipliers. Conversely, when the initial stock of public
capital is high, the impact of additional public investment should be low. Hence, in the case
of developing countries (low stock of public capital), public investment multipliers should be
higher.     But does this basic theoretical result hold in practice?2           We tackle this empirical
challenge and ...nd, using di¤erent samples, levels of government, and identi...cation strategies,
that the initial stock of public capital indeed matters for the size of the public investment
multiplier (and in the direction suggested by the theory).
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 carries out the empirical analysis using a sample
of 31 European countries relying on Blanchard and Perotti'
                                                         s (2002) identi...cation strategy.
Section 3 focuses on U.S. states using government spending forecast errors to identify spending
innovations (as in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012 and 2013). Section 4 resorts to data
from Argentine provinces and an instrumental variables approach. Section 5 provides further
support for our ...ndings by comparing international evidence in 17 country-speci...c external
studies (for which we were able to ...nd public investment multiplier calculations) with our
calibrated estimates. Section 6 closes the paper with some ...nal thoughts about the relevance
of our empirical ...ndings.
   2
    Of course, economics is full of "obvious" theoretical results that do not hold in practice. An example,
and closely related to our question, is the so-called Lucas (1990) paradox: why does not capital    ight from
rich countries (with low marginal productivity of capital) to poor countries (with high marginal productivity
of capital)? Possible explanations are o¤ered by, among others, Tornell and Velasco (1992) and Alfaro et al.
(2008).


                                                     3
2        Empirical evidence from European countries
This section estimates three di¤erent types of government spending multipliers using un-
balanced non-interpolated quarterly data for the period 1987:Q1-2014:Q4 for 31 European
countries.3


2.1       Identi...cation strategy

In terms of the empirical strategy for the identi...cation of exogenous government spending
shocks, we follow the well-known Blanchard and Perotti (2002) methodology that imposes
timing restrictions by assuming that (i) government spending changes are allowed to contem-
poraneously a¤ect economic activity (i.e., within the quarter), and (ii) it takes the government
at least one quarter to respond to developments in the state of the economy.
        We estimate the e¤ect of innovations of government spending on economic growth using
the single-equation approach proposed by Jorda (2005) and Stock and Watson (2007), which
is based on linear local projections (LP). The use of LP provides several advantages over the
traditional structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) methodology.                               Speci...cally, LP (i) can
be estimated by single-regression techniques (least-squares dummy variables, LSDV, in our
case), (ii) are more robust to potential misspeci...cations, and (iii) can easily accommodate
highly non-linear and exible speci...cations that may be impractical in a multivariate SVAR
context (a feature that proves to be crucial in this paper).4
        In our basic linear speci...cation, the cumulative response of output growth at the horizon
h is estimated based on the following regression:

                                                                                                         2
             yi;t+h =   i;h   +   h   gi;t +   h (L)   yi;t   1   +   h (L)   gi;t   1   + %h T h +   h Th   +   i;t;h ;   (1)
    3
     As discussed in detail in Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Vegh (2013), relying on interpolated quarterly data cre-
ates serious problems associated with measurement errors. The list of countries comprises Belgium, Bulgaria,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain, France, Croatia, Italy, Cyprus, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Hungary, Malta, Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Slo-
vakia, Finland, Sweden, United Kingdom, Iceland, Norway, and Switzerland. See Appendix 1 for a detailed
description of data de...nitions, sources, and time coverage.
   4
     We should note that Jorda'    s LP method does not consistently dominate the standard SVAR method for
calculating impulse responses of endogenous variables with contemporaneous e¤ects. Since Jorda'       s LP does
not impose any restrictions linking the impulse responses at h and h + 1, estimates can display an erratic
behavior due to the loss of e¢ ciency. Additionally, as the horizon increases, one loses observations from
the end of the sample. Finally, the impulse responses sometimes display oscillations at longer horizons.
Comparing Jorda'   s LP to a standard SVAR and a dynamic simulation, Ramey (2016) ...nds that the results
are qualitatively similar for the ...rst 16 quarters. For longer horizons, however, Jorda's LP method tends to
produce statistically signi...cant oscillations not observed in the other two methods. For these reasons, and to
err on the safe side, we report estimates up to 8 quarters after public spending shocks. Similar results would
obtain if we reported estimates up to 12 quarters after ...scal and GDP shocks.




                                                              4
where subscripts i and t denote country and time (year-quarter), respectively;                              i   is the country
...xed e¤ect; T and T 2 are the linear and quadratic trends; y and g are, respectively, the
logarithms of real GDP and, depending on the case, real primary spending, real government
consumption, or real public investment;                  yi;t+h (   yi;t+h       yi;t   1)   represents the accumulated
output growth from t         1 to t + h; and            is the error   term.5 ;6    To report the usual government
multiplier, which measures the e¤ect of a $1 change in government spending on the level of
GDP, we multiply (as is typical in this literature) the coe¢ cients                            h   by the average ratio of
GDP to government spending.
       To allow for the size of the public investment multiplier to depend upon the ratio of the
initial stock of public capital to GDP, we modify our linear speci...cation (1) for the case of
public investment as follows:

                 yi;t+h =        i;h   +    1;h   gi;t +    2;h (   gi;t stocki;0 ) +
                                                                                                  2
                                +   h (L)    yi;t   1   +   h (L)   gii;t   1   + %h T h +     h Th   +   i;t;h ;         (2)

where the only di¤erence is the interaction term between the public investment shock and
stocki;0 (the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP, expressed in logarithms).
To avoid endogeneity problems, we use the ratio observed during the period 1980-1985 for
most European countries.7 ; 8 Since, by construction, stocki;0 is constant for each country, the
term associated with the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP is not included in
speci...cation (2) for control purposes because it is absorbed by the country ...xed e¤ect. We
now use this empirical methodology to estimate the ...scal multipliers, which will be reported,
as is common in the literature, with one-standard-error bands.


2.2      Primary spending versus public investment multipliers

Before turning to public investment multipliers, we ...rst estimate, as a useful benchmark, the
primary spending multiplier (as has been typically the case in the ...scal multiplier literature).
Panel A in Figure 1 shows that, on impact, the primary spending multiplier is 0:13 (t = 4:5)
   5
     We include linear and quadratic trends as in Owyang, Ramey, and Zubairy (2013) and Riera-Crichton,
Vegh, and Vuletin (2015). In all of our regression analyses, we use robust Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard
errors to correct for potential heteroskedasticity, autocorrelation in the lags, and error correlation across panels.
We use four lags (i.e., L = 4). Our results for the case of eight and twelve lags remain almost the same as
in the four-quarter lag speci...cation. Figures showing the multipliers for the eight- and twelve-quarter lags
estimations are not shown for the sake of brevity.
   6
     For the purposes of this paper, and as is common in the literature, we will use data on current primary
spending as a proxy for public consumption.
   7
     See Apendix 1 for a detailed description of data de...nitions, sources, and time coverage.
   8
     If the initial stock of public capital over GDP ratio is allowed to change over time for estimation purposes
(e.g., by using the ratio in t 1), similar results are obtained. Results are not shown for the sake of brevity.


                                                             5
and becomes larger with longer time horizons until reaching 0:25 (t = 1:3) after two years
of the spending shock.       These low multipliers are in line with previous studies focusing on
industrial countries (e.g., Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012; Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi,
2015).
       We now focus on the mechanisms involved by evaluating the response of aggregate compo-
nents of GDP. These low multipliers are driven by the tepid response of private consumption
(Panel B in Figure 1) and no response of private investment (Panel C). In fact, private in-
vestment does not respond to a primary spending shock at any time horizon.                       It is worth
noting that the results for government consumption multipliers (not shown for the sake of
brevity) are virtually identical to those for primary spending multipliers.9

                                               F IGU RE 1

       We now turn to public investment multipliers. Panels D, E, and F in Figure 1 are anal-
ogous to Panels A, B, and C, respectively, but for public investment multipliers (rather than
primary spending multipliers). The public investment multiplier grows over time, reaching
larger and more lasting e¤ects.          Panel D in Figure 1 shows that, on impact, the public
investment multiplier is 0:15 (t = 2:5), which is virtually identical to the primary spending
multiplier shown in Panel A (0:13). However, the public investment multiplier becomes larger
with longer time horizons until reaching 0:80 (t = 3:3) after two years of the public investment
shock. In fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the multiplier equals one. More-
over, this medium-term multiplier is more than 3 times as large as the one associated with a
primary spending shock (i.e., 0:80 in Panel D compared to 0:25 in Panel A). This reects the
stronger response of both private consumption (Panel E) and private investment (Panel F).
As expected, the public investment multiplier involves positive spillovers of productive public
capital on private capital.       When public capital is productive, public investment increases
the marginal productivity of private capital and labor which, in turn, creates the incentives
for expanding private investment.          In other words, a public investment shock generates a
crowding-in e¤ect of private investment.


2.3      Does the initial stock of public capital matter?

As discussed above, theory tells us that the size of the public investment multiplier should
depend upon the initial stock of public capital. Speci...cally, the public investment multiplier
should depend negatively on the ratio of public capital to GDP. We now test this hypothesis.
   9
     This is not surprising since current primary spending represents about 93 percent of primary spending for
this group of European countries.


                                                      6
   Interestingly, and importantly for identi...cation considerations, Figure 2 shows the large
variability of the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP across the European
countries in the sample (with a coe¢ cient of variation of 0.55).          While the median ratio
is 0.63, the ratio is about 0.25 for some countries (including Hungary, Latvia, Malta, and
Greece) but reaches values above one for other countries (Romania, Luxembourg, Cyprus,
and Denmark).
                                            F IGU RE 2

   Turning now to the estimates of the multiplier, Figure 3 shows that the size of the initial
stock of public capital certainly matters. Speci...cally, Figure 3 shows the results of estimating
regression (2) and evaluating the size of the public investment multiplier for a high ratio (95th
percentile or 1.33 ratio) and a low ratio (5th percentile or 0.16 ratio) of the initial stock of
public capital to GDP. Panels A, B, and C in Figure 3 show the multipliers associated with
a public investment shock ­ evaluated at the high ratio ­ on GDP, private consumption,
and private investment, respectively.       Panels D, E, and F show the same multipliers but
evaluated at the low ratio. On impact, the multipliers are quite similar (and small in size)
regardless of the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP (0:25 in Panel A and
0:18 in Panel D). As the horizon becomes larger, however, the di¤erence between the two
multipliers grows markedly. For the case of the high ratio, the size of the multiplier remains
small and statistically weak, reaching 0:15 (t = 0:2) after two years of the public investment
shock. In sharp contrast, when starting with a low ratio, the multiplier becomes larger with
longer time horizons until reaching 2:15 (t = 2:1) after two years of the public investment
shock.   In fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that this multiplier is larger than one
statistically speaking. This reects the stronger response of both private investment (Panel
F) and private consumption (Panel E).

                                            F IGU RE 3

   Focusing on the e¤ect after two years of the public investment shock, Figure 4 illustrates
the crucial role played by the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP on the size of
the public investment multiplier by plotting the latter as a function of the former. While the
multiplier is statistically zero at high levels of the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to
GDP ratio (i.e., higher than 1), it becomes statistically signi...cant and increasingly positive
with lower ratios.    Moreover, for su¢ ciently low levels of the ratio (i.e., lower than 0.25),
the public investment multiplier becomes larger than one. In other words, the increase (fall)
of GDP associated with increasing (reducing) public investment by $1 tends to be zero for


                                                  7
high levels of the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP and becomes larger as the
initial ratio decreases.
                                           F IGU RE 4

   These ...ndings have important policy implications given that the ratio of the initial stock of
public capital to GDP varies greatly across countries (and over time) and thus so will the size
of the public investment multipliers. As an illustration, Figure 5 shows the implied public
investment multipliers for our European sample for the ratio of the initial stock of public
capital to GDP ratio prevailing in 1990 (Panel A) and 2014 (Panel B). Interestingly, between
1990 and 2014, the public investment multiplier fell the most in Southern economies and new
members from the Eastern bloc. This came about because of important rises in the stock of
public capital, following e¤orts to increase the stock of infrastructure and other productive
investments in least-favored regions as a result of the European Regional Development Fund
(ERDF) and the Cohesion Fund (CF).

                                           F IGU RE 5


2.4    An out-of-sample application

We now conduct an out-of-sample exercise (which, as such, should be taken with a grain of
salt) with the purpose of helping contextualize our ...ndings for two countries for which we will
also estimate the public investment multipliers in subsequent sections (relying on alternative
identi...cation strategies and datasets). Using the ratio of the initial stock of public capital
to GDP for the U.S., the estimated public investment multipliers for 1960 and 2015 are,
respectively, 0.4 (and statistically zero) and 0.85 (and statistically not di¤erent from one).
This reects the steady fall in the ratio of public capital to GDP between 1960 (ratio of 1.04)
and 2015 (0.64).
   In the case of Argentina, the estimated public investment multipliers for 1960 and 2015
are 1.9 (and statistically larger than one) and 1.4 (and statistically equal to one), respectively.
Why?     Because of the almost doubling of the ratio of public capital to GDP from 0.20 in
1960 to 0.35 in 2015. In other words, both countries used to have a much larger di¤erence
in their public investment multipliers (with the U.S. having a statistically zero multiplier
and Argentina having an statistically larger than one multiplier) due to the fact that the
ratio of public capital to GDP was more than ...ve times as high in the U.S. as in Argentina.
Interestingly, as this ratio tended to "converge"(the previous 5-fold di¤erence shrank to about
2-fold), both countries have also tended to "converge" in the size of their public investment
multipliers (in both cases statistically positive and equal to one). As will be shown below,

                                                8
these ...ndings will be strongly supported when relying on alternative identi...cation strategies
and datasets for U.S. states and Argentine provinces.


2.5    The role of spending e¢ ciency

As discussed in the Introduction, there is a recent and growing literature showing that ef-
...ciency, broadly de...ned as including, among others, cost overruns, implementation delays,
institutional weakness, corruption, and wasteful use of resources ­ also seems to matter. In
particular, the e¤ect of public investment on output falls when e¢ ciency is low (Leeper,
Walker, and Yang, 2010; Cavallo and Daude, 2011; Leduc and Wilson, 2012; Furceri and Li,
2017; Izquierdo, Pessino, and Vuletin, 2018).                   This subsection shows that while e¢ ciency
matters, it does not a¤ect our novel insight regarding the initial stock of public capital.10
    For this purpose, we extend our non-linear speci...cation (2) to control for the role of
spending e¢ ciency as follows:

          yi;t+h =       i;h   +    1;h   gi;t +    2;h (   gi;t stocki;0 ) +        3;h (   gi;t e¢ ciency i ) +
                                                                                         2
                       +   h (L)     yi;t   1   +   h (L)   gii;t   1   + %h T h +    h Th   +   i;t;h ;            (3)

where the only di¤erence is, with respect to speci...cation (2), the interaction term between
the public investment shock and e¢ ciency i , which proxies for spending e¢ ciency in each
country. In particular, and as detailed in data Appendix 1, e¢ ciency is obtained as the ...rst
principal component of a wide set of indicators (36 to be speci...c) of institutional quality as
well as indicators of the quality of infrastructure, education, and health.11 These indicators
are taken from the Global Competitiveness report, published by the World Economic Forum
and covering 142 countries for the period 2004-2014.12 Each quality indicator varies between
1 (worst) and 7 (best).            The variable e¢ ciency is computed as the average of the above-
mentioned ...rst principal component for each country.                        It e¤ectively varies, for the global
sample, between 2.5 and 6 and, for the European sample used here, between 3.5 and 6.
    Panel A in Figure 6 shows that, like in previous studies, e¢ ciency arguments matter.
  10
     Berg et al. (2019) analyze the role of public investment e¢ ciency in a neoclassical growth model, and show
that, in developing countries, the public investment multiplier might be high because the e¤ect of having a high
marginal product of public capital (re    ecting the scarcity of public investment) may o¤set the low e¢ ciency
associated with expanding public infrastructure.
  11
     The ...rst principal component explains about 65 percent of the underlying comovement of the 36 selected
indicators. Several combinations of these 36 indicators have been used as robustness checks. Results remain
virtually unchanged and are not reported for the sake of brevity.
  12
     This report covers 110 variables, of which two thirds come from the Executive Opinion Survey, and the
remaining third comes from publicly available sources such as the United Nations. The Executive Opinion
Survey is a survey of a representative sample of business leaders in their respective countries. The number of
respondent has increased every year and is currently just over 13,500 in 142 countries.


                                                            9
While for low levels of e¢ ciency, the size of the public investment multiplier tends to be
zero (statistically speaking), the size of the multiplier becomes larger for higher levels of
e¢ ciency. More importantly for the purposes of our contribution, Panel B in Figure 6 shows
that our novel insight regarding the role of the initial stock of public capital in determining
the size of the public investment multiplier remains virtually una¤ected after controlling for
e¢ ciency.13 ; 14
                                                  F IGU RE 6


3        Empirical evidence for U.S. states
This section estimates state government multipliers using balanced annual data for the period
1987-2016 for U.S. states.15 ; 16 It is worth noting that primary government spending by U.S.
states represents, on average, about 40 percent of general primary spending, thus playing a
substantial role in the ...scal policy landscape.


3.1      Identi...cation strategy

In terms of the empirical strategy for the identi...cation of exogenous government spending
shocks, we follow the so-called government spending forecast error approach, which uses the
di¤erence between actual (i.e., ex-post) and anticipated (i.e., ex-ante) series in government
spending as a proxy for innovations in government spending. As discussed in detail in Auer-
bach and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2013), this approach provides a convenient way to identify
    13
      It is worth noting that, using a global sample of 128 countries, we cannot reject the null that the correlation
between variables stocki;0 and e¢ ciency i is statistically zero.
   14
      In terms of the importance of macroeconomic factors potentially a¤ecting the size of the spending multiplier
discussed in the Introduction, it is worth noting that, using a global sample, stocki;0 is not statistically
correlated with (i) exchange rate regimes (from Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogo¤, 2017), (ii) trade openness
(de...ned as imports plus exports over GDP from WDI), (iii) capital account openness (from Chinn and Ito,
2006), (iv) real PPP GDP per capita (from PWT), (v) public debt over GDP (from WDI and Kose et al.,
2017), (vi) external debt over GDP (from WEO and Huidrom et al., 2019), and (vii) cyclicality of government
spending (from Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin, 2013).           For variables (i) to (iv) we use, in line with stocki;0 ,
the average for the period 1980-1985. For variables (v), (vi), and (vii) the coverage is 1990-1995, 1990-
1995, and 1960-1985, respectively. Due to data availability, the number of countries covered varies between
95 and 133 depending on the variable under consideration. The same is true (that these variables are not
related to stocki;0 ) when solely focusing on our European sample. Moreover, when replicating ...gures (for
all these macroeconomic variables) similar to that of Panel B in Figure 6, the e¤ect of the initial stock of
public capital remains virtually unchanged in all cases. In other words, there is robust evidence that these
other macroeconomic determinants are not, empirically speaking, behind the role of the initial stock of public
capital. Results are not shown for the sake of brevity.
   15
      As is typical in the public ...nance literature that focuses on ...scal issues in U.S. states, we exclude the
state of Hawaii due to its highly unusual ...scal structure and Alaska because of its extreme dependence on oil
revenue (e.g., Sorensen, Wu, and Yosha, 2001).
   16
      See Appendix 2 for a detailed description of data de...nitions and sources.




                                                         10
unanticipated government spending, which enables a proper estimation of government spend-
ing multipliers.
    In our basic linear speci...cation, the response of output growth is estimated based on the
following regression:

              yi;t =    i   +   ln GF E
                                    i;t + (L) yi;t          1   + (L) gi;t   1   + %T + T 2 +       i;t ;     (4)

where subscripts i and t denote state and year, respectively;                    i   is the state ...xed e¤ect; T
and   T2   are the linear and quadratic trends; y and g are the logarithms of real state GDP
and real state government spending; GF E
                                     i;t               (Gactual
                                                         i;t          Ganticipated
                                                                       i;t         )=Yi;t represents the state
government spending forecast error; that is, the di¤erence between actual (i.e., at time t) and
anticipated (i.e., at time t forecasted at time t           1) state government spending computed from
yearly reports issued by the National Association of State Budget O¢ cers (NASBO); and
is the error term.17 ; 18 ; 19 Depending on the multiplier being estimated, real state government
spending and state government spending forecast error will be based on primary spending,
government consumption, or public investment. Given that government spending shocks are
already divided by GDP,          represents the usual government multiplier.
    To allow the size of the public investment multiplier to depend upon the ratio of the initial
stock of public capital to GDP, we modify our linear speci...cation (4) as follows:

                       yi;t =      i   +   1   ln GF E
                                                   i;t +        2   ln GF E
                                                                        i;t stocki;0 +
                                  + (L) yi;t     1   + (L) gi;t      1   + %T + T 2 +       i;t ;             (5)

where the only di¤erence is the interaction term between the public investment shock and
stocki;0 (the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP in each state, expressed in
logarithms). To avoid possible endogeneity problems, we use the average ratio observed in
each state during the period 1980-1985.20 ; 21 Since, by construction, stocki;0 is constant for
  17
     NASBO reports publish itemized state consolidated as well as anticipated public spending, by category
of spending. To extract the innovation in the state public spending variable, we subtract the consolidated
amount for each year, normally reported a year later, from the amount anticipated and normally reported the
previous year. See, for example, Poterba (1994) who also uses this strategy for identi...cation of ...scal shocks
in U.S. states.
  18
     In all of our regression analyses, we use robust Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors to correct for
potential heteroskedasticity, autocorrelation in the lags, and error correlation across panels.
  19
     We use one lag (i.e., L = 1). Our results for the case of two lags remain almost the same as in the one-year
lag speci...cation. Figures showing the multipliers for the two-year lags estimations are not shown for the sake
of brevity.
  20
     See Appendix 1 for a detailed description of data de...nitions and sources.
  21
     If the ratio of the initial stock of capital to GDP is allowed to change over time for estimation purposes
(e.g., by using the ratio in t 1), similar results are obtained. Results are not shown for the sake of brevity.



                                                       11
each state, the term associated with the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP
is not included in speci...cation (5) for control purposes because it is absorbed by the state
...xed e¤ect. Unfortunately, there are no long-enough time series for private consumption and
private investment at the state level to test the mechanisms involved.


3.2      Empirical results

Figure 7 shows that the multiplier for state primary spending is quite low; speci...cally 0:08
(t = 1:3). This ...nding is in line with, for example, Clemens and Miran (2012) who also ...nd
state government spending multipliers statistically indistinguishable from zero. As was the
case in the European sample of Section 2.2, it is worth noting that the size of the government
consumption multipliers (not shown for the sake of brevity) are virtually identical to that of
primary spending multipliers.22
       We now turn to public investment multipliers. The public investment multiplier is much
larger 0:98 (t = 3:0). In fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the multiplier is
equal to one. This result is in line with Coenen et al. (2012) who, relying on di¤erent DSGE
models ­including European Commission QUEST, International Monetary Fund GIMF, and
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (both FRB-US and SIGMA) ­ ...nd
a multiplier of about one as well.           Interestingly enough, if one used the average stock of
public capital to GDP for the U.S. for the period covered in this analysis (i.e., 1987-2016),
but relying on the empirical strategy and ...ndings of the previous section (i.e., conducting an
out-of-sample exercise based on the results of Section 2.3), the estimated public investment
multiplier would be 0:85 (t = 2:4), very similar to that found here by using state data and
the government spending forecast error approach.23

                                                 F IGU RE 7

       We now test whether the initial stock of public capital actually matters for the size of the
public investment multiplier. Interestingly, and important for identi...cation considerations,
Figure 8 shows the large variability of the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP
across U.S. states, with a coe¢ cient of variation of 0.43.


                                                 F IGU RE 8
  22
     This is not surprising considering that current primary spending typically represents about 92 percent of
primary spending for U.S. states.
  23
     Moreover, as in the case of the public investment multiplier estimated in this section for the U.S. states
(0:98, t = 3:1), we cannot reject the null hypothesis that this out-of-sample public investment multiplier (0:85,
t = 2:4) equals one.


                                                       12
       When evaluating the role of the ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP using
speci...cation (5), Figure 7 shows that the public investment multiplier associated with a high
ratio, 0:51 (t = 2:12), is less than half the size of that associated with a low ratio, 1:36
(t = 4:2).24 In fact, while we cannot reject the null that the former multiplier is lower than
one, we cannot reject the null that the latter multiplier is larger than one.
       Figure 9 shows (like Figure 4 for the European sample of countries) the public investment
multiplier as a function of the ratio of the initial public capital to GDP. While the multiplier
is virtually zero at high levels of this ratio (i.e., higher than 1.9), it becomes statistically
signi...cant and increasingly positive with lower ratios.         Moreover, for su¢ ciently low levels
of this ratio (i.e., lower than 0.5), the public investment multiplier becomes larger than one.
In other words, the increase (fall) of GDP associated with increasing (reducing) state public
investment by $1 tends to be zero for high levels of the ratio of initial stock of public capital
to GDP in each state and becomes larger as this ratio decreases.

                                              F IGU RE 9

       These ...ndings have important policy implications given that the ratio of the initial stock of
public capital to GDP varies across U.S. states (and over time) and thus so will the size of the
public investment multipliers. Figure 5 shows the implied public investment multipliers for
U.S. states given the stock of public capital over GDP ratio prevalent, as an example, in mid-
1980s (Panel A) and in 2012 (Panel B). Interestingly, in all but one U.S. state (Wyoming),
the stock of public capital over GDP ratio fell, on average, more than 30 percent (from ratios
averaging 1.02 in the mid-1980s to about 0.68 in 2012). As a result, the public investment
multipliers have increased across the board.

                                              F IGU RE 10

       In sum, this empirical evidence for U.S. states relying on the government spending forecast
error approach also supports the importance of the initial stock of public capital in determin-
ing the size of the public investment multiplier.           Moreover, the speci...c size of the public
investment multiplier (as well as its evolution over time) obtained in this section matches
quite well that of the previous section (when conducting an out-of-sample exercise for the
U.S.). These results provide further support for our empirical ...ndings.
  24
    As in Section 2.3 for the European sample, we use the 5th percentile and 95th percentile to identify low
and high initial stocks of public capital over GDP ratios in U.S. states, respectively.




                                                    13
4         Empirical evidence for Argentine provinces
This section estimates provincial government spending multipliers using balanced annual data
for the period 1964-2014 for the 23 Argentine provinces.25 ; 26 Primary spending conducted by
provinces represents, on average, about 50 percent of general primary spending, thus playing
a substantial role in the ...scal policy landscape.


4.1        Identi...cation strategy

In terms of the empirical strategy for the identi...cation of exogenous government spending
shocks, we follow an instrumental variables approach. Given our identi...cation strategy, we
...rst propose instrument(s) for primary spending and, then, for its components (government
consumption and public investment).


4.1.1        Instrumenting primary spending

To estimate the primary spending multiplier ­ and, as will become clear below, given the
nature of our instrumental variable approach ­our basic linear speci...cation is given by

                               pc             pc     pc
                              yi;t =   i   + gi;t + yi;t    1   + %T + T 2 +    i;t ;                           (6)

where subscripts i and t denote province and year, respectively;                        i   is the provincial ...xed
e¤ect; T and T 2 are the linear and quadratic trends; y pc and g pc are the logarithms of real
provincial GDP per capita and real provincial primary spending per capita, respectively; and
    is the error term.27 ; 28 To report the usual government spending multiplier, which measures
the e¤ect of a $1 change in government spending on the level of GDP, we multiply (as is
typical in this literature), regression coe¢ cients associated with the spending shock by the
average ratio of GDP to provincial government spending.
         To identify exogenous provincial primary spending per capita shocks, we follow an in-
strumental variables approach using provincial over-representation in the Argentine National
Chamber of Deputies (de...ned as the di¤erence between the actual number of provincial leg-
    25
     As is typical in the public ...nance literature when it comes to the ...scal analysis of Argentine provinces,
we exclude the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires because of the availability of only short times-series and a
special treatment in terms of the Argentine federal ...scal transfer system (e.g., Porto and Sanguinetti, 2001;
Vegh and Vuletin, 2015).
  26
     See Appendix 1 for a detailed description of data de...nitions and sources.
  27
     In all of our regression analyses, we use robust Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors to correct for
potential heteroskedasticity, autocorrelation in the lags, and error correlation across panels.
  28
     To address possible spurious correlation concerns, we use Im, Pesaran, and Shin (2003) to tests for unit
roots or stationarity in panel datasets. We reject the null hypothesis that all the panels contain a unit root.



                                                       14
islators per capita and that based on proportional representation) as an instrument.                        The
rationale behind this instrument relies on three key factors.                 First, as is typical in many
federal countries, a large share (about two-thirds in the case of Argentina) of provincial pri-
mary spending is ...nanced with federal ...scal transfers.29               Indeed, Panel A in Figure 11
shows, even after controlling for provincial ...xed e¤ects and linear and quadratic trends, a
strong positive association between federal ...scal transfers per capita and provincial primary
spending per capita (at a 1 percent level of signi...cance).                Second, and based on several
well-established political economy arguments (e.g. Holcombe and Zardkoohi, 1981; Atlas et
al., 1995 and 1997; Porto and Sanguinetti, 2001; Knight, 2008), national legislators of over-
represented jurisdictions tend to receive larger federal ...scal transfers per capita because of
their bargaining power and incentives associated with greater legislative representation. In
most countries, this over-representation originates, by construction, from the Senate Cham-
ber. Interestingly, as discussed in Porto and Sanguinetti (2001) and Vegh and Vuletin (2015),
in the case of Argentina such over-representation is dominated by the e¤ect derived from the
National Chamber of Deputies.30            Panel B in Figure 11 strongly supports these arguments
by showing a tight positive association, even after controlling for provincial ...xed e¤ects and
linear and quadratic trends, between the so-called provincial e¤ective distortion in the Cham-
ber of Deputies (measure obtained from Vegh and Vuletin, 2015) and federal ...scal transfers
per capita (at a 1 percent level of signi...cance). Vegh and Vuletin (2015) de...ne provincial
e¤ective distortion in the Chamber of Deputies as the ratio between (i) absolute distortion in
the Chamber of Deputies (de...ned as the number of national deputies per province including
the provisions established in each constitutional reform and that based on the principle of
proportional representation) and (ii) the respective provincial population in the year of each
   29
      These transfers are essentially unconditional (i.e., they are not a direct function of provincial spending).
About two-thirds of these transfers are ruled by a tax-sharing law dating back to 1935 (which is modi...ed
by the National Congress every ten years or so) and one-third are discretionary in nature (typically used in
exchange for the support of provincial legislators in the National Congress for laws and reforms pushed by the
federal government). See Porto and Sanguinetti (2001) and Vegh and Vuletin (2015) for details on the ...scal
federalism structure in Argentina.
   30
      This occurs because of two main arguments. First, and against the principle of "one person, one vote,"
several Constitutional amendments notoriously bolstered the over-representation in the National Chamber of
Deputies. Peron'   s Constitutional reform of 1949 established a minimum of 2 deputies per province, regardless
of the population. The military regime Constitutional reform of 1972 added one deputy per province (indepen-
dently of the number of seats based on strict proportional representation). The military regime Constitutional
reform of 1983 abolished the 1949 and 1972 Constitutional reforms and increased to 5 the minimum number
of deputies per province. Consequently, for example, in the year 2000, a vote for the Chamber of Deputies
in the province of Tierra del Fuego (the least populated province with about 0.2 percent of total population)
was equivalent to about 10 votes in the province of Buenos Aires (the most populated province with about
40 percent of total population). Second, and as discussed in Porto and Sanguinetti (2001), since political
power has been less concentrated in the Chamber of Deputies compared to the Senate Chamber, the Chamber
of Deputies has represented the strongest constraint to passing laws, allowing Deputies to obtain much more
bargaining power.


                                                       15
constitutional reform.31 ; 32 Third, and as discussed in Vegh and Vuletin (2015) on the basis
of historical documentation, constitutional amendments regarding the number of legislators
per province were driven by governance and political considerations and were not enacted in
response to macroeconomic developments.                             Therefore, provincial over-representation in the
Argentine National Chamber of Deputies o¤ers an exogenous variation in provincial primary
spending per capita (through its crucial e¤ect on federal ...scal transfers per capita for each
province). Indeed, Panel C in Figure 11 shows a strong positive association, even after con-
trolling for provincial ...xed e¤ects and linear and quadratic trends, between the provincial
e¤ective distortion in the Chamber of Deputies (i.e., the proposed instrument) and provin-
cial primary spending per capita (i.e., the instrumented variable), at a 1 percent level of
signi...cance.33
                                                        F IGU RE 11


4.1.2    Instrumenting government consumption and public investment

To estimate the provincial government consumption and provincial public investment multi-
pliers, we modify our linear speci...cation (6) as follows:

                        pc
                       yi;t =    i   +   c
                                             gcpc
                                               i;t +
                                                             i
                                                                 gipc     pc
                                                                   i;t + yi;t   1   + %T + T 2 +      i;t ;                    (7)

where gcpc and gipc are the logarithms of real provincial government consumption per capita
                                                                                        pc
and real provincial public investment per capita, respectively. Since by construction, gi;t
gcpc      pc                         pc
  i;t + gii;t , one could think of gci;t =             i;t
                                                                  pc
                                                                 gi;t and gipc
                                                                            i;t = (1      i;t )
                                                                                                   pc
                                                                                                  gi;t , where   i;t   and 1    i;t

measure the proportion of primary spending per capita in province i in year t allocated to
government consumption and public investment, respectively.                                       Taking this into account,
we instrument real provincial government consumption per capita and real provincial public
investment per capita using (i) the provincial e¤ective distortion in the Chamber of Deputies
to instrument for g pc (as discussed before) and (ii) the provincial population dependency
ratio (de...ned as the population share under 15 years old and older than 65 years old over the
population between 15 and 65 years old) to instrument for                                (and, of course, 1              as well).
  31
     As discussed in Vegh and Vuletin (2015), dividing the absolute distortion in the Chamber of Deputies in
each constitutional reform by the respective population in the year of each constitutional reform controls for
the fact that, for a given level of absolute distortion, provinces with smaller population bene...t on a per capita
basis by a larger margin than more populous provinces.
  32
     Since constitutional amendments a¤ected the degree of over-representation in the Chamber of Deputies
three times (i.e., 1949, 1972, and 1983), the e¤ective distortion measure in the Chamber of Deputies only
changes two times in the period under analysis.
  33
     Indeed, when estimating the two-stage least- squares regression, and based on Stock and Yogo (2005), we
reject the null hypothesis that the e¤ective distortion in the Chamber of Deputies is a weak instrument for
provincial primary spending per capita.


                                                                     16
More precisely, we instrument gcpc and gipc using (i) the provincial e¤ective distortion in the
Chamber of Deputies, (ii) the provincial population dependency ratio, and (iii) the interaction
term between provincial e¤ective distortion in the Chamber of Deputies and the provincial
population dependency ratio.                     What is the rationale for using the provincial population
dependency ratio to instrument the composition of provincial primary spending, in particular,
between government consumption and public investment? Several studies have found that
larger levels of population dependency increase both current primary spending, especially
health spending and social security for the population over 65 years old, and education and
health for the young population (e.g., Hagemann and Nicoletti, 1989; Poterba 1997 and
1998, Visco, 2001; Sanz and Velazquez, 2007; Cattaneo and Wolter, 2009; Sorensen, 2013).
Therefore, higher population dependency ratios should, in principle, be associated with larger
current primary spending and lower public investment shares out of primary spending. Panels
A and B in Figure 12 show that this is, indeed, the case for Argentine provinces, even after
controlling for provincial ...xed e¤ects and linear and quadratic trends (at a 1 percent level
of signi...cance).       Moreover, Panels D and E show that this strong regularity also holds
for a global sample of countries, also after controlling for country ...xed e¤ects and linear
and quadratic trends (at a 1 percent level of signi...cance).34 For exogeneity considerations,
it proves important to note that the population dependency ratio is calculated based on
age demographic variables and not on labor related variables (such as labor force or its
participation rate) which, in turn, reduces the response of the population dependency ratio
to short-run macroeconomic uctuations. Moreover, Panels C and D in Figure 12 con...rm
that there is no statistical relationship between the population dependency ratio and real
GDP growth in Argentine provinces or at a global level, respectively.                          In other words, the
population dependency ratio proves to be a plausible exogenous instrument to explain the
composition of primary spending, in particular, between government consumption and public
investment.35
                                                         F IGU RE 12

       To allow the size of the public investment multiplier to depend upon the ratio of the initial
stock of public capital to GDP, we modify our linear speci...cation (7) as follows:

             pc
            yi;t =   i   +   c
                                 gcpc
                                   i;t +
                                           i
                                               gipc
                                                 i;t +
                                                         i
                                                             gipc              pc
                                                               i;t stocki;0 + yi;t   1   + %T + T 2 +   i;t ;   (8)
  34
      Because of the inclusion of country ...xed e¤ects and linear and quadratic trends, we only consider countries
with at least 40 years of data. Due to this restriction, 43 countries are included in Panels D and E.
   35
      Indeed, when estimating the two-stage least squares regression, and based on the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald
f statistic, we reject the null hypothesis that the proposed instruments are a weak instrument for provincial
government consumption per capita and provincial public investment per capita.



                                                                17
where the only di¤erence is the interaction term between the public investment shock and
stocki;0 (the initial stock of public capital over GDP in each province).                   Since there is no
data for the stock of public capital in each Argentine province, we construct a proxy based on
newly collected data, from di¤erent historical archives, on the kilometers of paved highways
in each province.36 In particular, we use the ratio of actual kilometers of paved highways to
predicted kilometers of paved highways based on provincial GDP (for a balanced panel for
the entire period under analysis). When this ratio is larger (smaller) than one, it indicates
that the province-year observation under consideration has an endowment of paved highways
that is larger (smaller) than that predicted based on its GDP. To avoid possible endogene-
ity problems, we use this proxy for the stock of public capital over GDP observed in each
province in 1964.37       Since by construction stocki;0 is constant for each province, stocki;0 is
not included in speci...cation (2) for control purposes because it is absorbed by the provincial
...xed e¤ect. Unfortunately, there are no long-enough time series for private consumption and
private investment at the provincial level to explore the mechanisms involved.


4.2      Empirical results

Figure 13 shows that the provincial primary spending multiplier is lower than one; that is,
0:56 (t = 2:5).      This small provincial primary spending multiplier is in line with existing
evidence for Argentina on the e¤ects of central government ...scal shocks on GDP based on
SVAR techniques (see Avramovich, Basso, and Resk, 2006; Anos-Casero, Cerdeiro, and Trezzi,
2010; and Puig, 2014). As in the case of the European sample of Section 2.2 and U.S. states
of Section 3.2, it is worth noting that the ...ndings for government consumption multipliers
(not shown for the sake of brevity) are similar to those of primary spending multipliers.38
       We now turn to public investment multipliers. The public investment multiplier is rather
large, 1:60 (t = 2:0).       In fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the multiplier is
equal to one.      This result is in line with the e¤ects of central government ...scal shocks on
Argentina's GDP based on SVAR techniques (Puig, 2014). Interestingly enough, if one used
our proxy for the average stock of public capital over GDP for Argentina for the period covered
in this analysis (i.e., 1964-2014), but relied on the ...ndings of Section 2.3 (i.e., conducted an
out-of-sample exercise based on the ...ndings of such section), the estimated public investment
multiplier would be of 1:71 (t = 2:4), which is quite similar to the one found using provincial
  36
     See Appendix 1 for a detailed description of data de...nitions and sources.
  37
     If this proxy for the initial stock of public capital over GDP is allowed to change over time for estimation
purposes (e.g., by using the value of such a measure in t 1), similar results are obtained. Results are not
shown for the sake of brevity.
  38
     This is not surprising considering that current primary spending typically represents about 90 percent of
primary spending for Argentine provinces.


                                                       18
data and an instrumental variables approach.39

                                                F IGU RE 13

       We now test whether our proxy for the initial stock of public capital over GDP actually
matters for the determination of the size of the public investment multiplier. Interestingly,
and highly important for identi...cation purposes, Figure 14 shows the large variability of our
proxy for the initial stock of public capital over GDP across Argentine provinces, with a
coe¢ cient of variation of 0.69. While the average ratio is about 0.50, the ratio is below 0.20
for some provinces (including Tierra del Fuego, Formosa, and Misiones) and reaches values of
1.15 for some other provinces (including Mendoza, Santa Fe, Cordoba, and Buenos Aires).


                                                F IGU RE 14

       Using speci...cation (8), Figure 13 shows that the public investment multiplier associated
with our proxy for a high initial stock of public capital over GDP, 0:23 (t = 0:85), is much
smaller than that associated with our proxy for a low initial stock of public capital over GDP,
2:03 (t = 2:3).40     In fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the former multiplier is
statistically zero and we cannot reject the null that the latter multiplier is larger than one.
       Like Figure 4 for the European sample and Figure 9 for U.S. states, Figure 15 shows the
crucial e¤ect of our proxy for the initial stock of public capital over GDP on the size of the
provincial public investment multiplier. While the multiplier is virtually zero for high levels of
this ratio (i.e., higher than 1.20), it becomes statistically signi...cant and increasingly positive
with lower initial ratios.       Moreover, for su¢ ciently low levels of this ratio (i.e., lower than
0.30), the public investment multiplier becomes larger than one. In other words, the increase
(fall) of GDP associated with increasing (reducing) provincial public investment by $1 tends
to be zero for high levels of the initial stock of public capital over GDP in each province and
becomes larger as the initial ratio decreases.

                                                F IGU RE 15

       These ...ndings have important policy implications given that our proxy for the initial stock
  39
     Moreover, as in the case of the public investment multiplier estimated in this section for the Argentine
provinces (1:6, t = 2:0), we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the out-of-sample public investment multiplier
(1:71, t = 2:4) equals one statistically speaking.
  40
     As in Sections 2.3 and 3.2 for the European and United States states samples, respectively, we use the 5th
and 95th percentiles to identify low and high initial stocks of public capital over GDP ratios, respectively, in
Argentine provinces.



                                                       19
of public capital over GDP ratio varies greatly across Argentine provinces (and over time)
and thus so will the size of the public investment multipliers. Figure 16 shows the implied
public investment multipliers for Argentine provinces given our proxy for the stock of public
capital over GDP ratio in, for example, the years 1964 (Panel A), 1990 (Panel B), and 2014
(Panel C). Interestingly, the province of Buenos Aires (which accounts for about 40 percent
of Argentina's GDP) and which has increased its GDP almost 3-fold since 1964 has barely
increased its stock of paved highways (with less than a 10 percent increase from 4,300 km in
1964 to about 4,700 km in 2014).      For this reason, its public investment multiplier almost
doubled from 0.80 in 1964 to 1.50 in 2014. In contrast, other provinces, including the province
of La Rioja, have increased their stock of paved highways by about 5-fold from 392 km in
1964 to about 1,900 km in 2014. As a result, its public investment multiplier fell from 1.62
in 1964 to virtually zero in 2014.
                                         F IGU RE 16

    In sum, this empirical evidence for Argentine provinces using an instrumental variables
approach also supports the importance of the initial stock of public capital over GDP in deter-
mining the size of the public investment multiplier. Moreover, the speci...c size of the public
investment multiplier (as well as its evolution over time) obtained in this section matches quite
well that of Section 2.3 (when conducting an out-of-sample exercise for Argentina). These
results thus provide further support for our empirical ...ndings.


5    External studies as additional evidence
Sections 2, 3, and 4 provided strong empirical evidence based on European countries, U.S.
states, and Argentine provinces and relying on alternative identi...cation strategies including
Blanchard-Perotti time identi...cation, forecast errors, and instrumental variables approaches,
respectively, in favor of the importance of the initial stock of public capital over GDP in
determining the size of the public investment multiplier.
    We now resort to external evidence. In particular, we compile values for public investment
multipliers from 17 country studies (mostly studies conducted by researchers working in ...-
nance ministries, central banks, international ...nancial institutions, and other non-government
entities). We compare these ...ndings to those obtained with our non-linear estimates of Sec-
tion 2 (i.e., based on a sample of 31 European countries).
    Panel A in Figure 17 shows, for each of the 17 countries, the estimate reported in solid
grey bars vis-à-vis the respective ...gure based on our non-linear estimates of Section 2 in



                                               20
dotted-...lled bars, given the relevant ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP.41
Countries are ordered in increasing order based on the size of the public investment multiplier
from the external source. While the match is, naturally, not perfect, it is truly remarkable.
In fact, Panel B in Figure 17 shows the same evidence presented as a regression. Two points
are worth making. First, the R2 is very high (i.e., 0.82), which is consistent with the visual
impression of Panel A. Second, we cannot reject the null that the coe¢ cient relating both
metrics equals one.
                                            F IGU RE 17


6         Final thoughts
This paper has empirically analyzed an overlooked dimension of public investment multipliers:
how does the initial stock of public capital (measured as the ratio of the initial stock of capital
to GDP) a¤ect their size? Basic neoclassical theory would tell us that the higher (lower) this
initial ratio, and hence the lower (higher) the marginal productivity of public capital, the lower
(higher) should be the public investment multiplier. This is a critical dimension, particularly
for developing countries, where there are large gaps in public investment/infrastructure. An
empirical con...rmation of this theoretical presumption should provide further impetus to major
existing plans to improve and build infrastructure in developing countries.
         Our answer to the above question is clear and unequivocal: public investment multipliers
do indeed depend on the initial stock of public capital. We provide strong evidence based
on di¤erent samples (European countries, U.S. states, and Argentina provinces) and using
very di¤erent strategies to identify exogenous public investment shocks (Blanchard-Perotti,
forecast errors, and instrumental variables).       In all cases, we consistently ...nd that public
investment multipliers in low initial public capital countries are signi...cantly higher than in
high initial public capital countries. Further, out-of-sample estimations based on one of our
empirical models match remarkably well the public investment multiplier estimates provided
in 17 independent country studies.
    41
         See Appendix 2 for details.




                                                  21
References
Alesina, A., C. Favero, and F. Giavazzi, "The Output E¤ect of Fiscal Consolidation Plans,"
Journal of International Economics 96 (2015), S19-S42.
   Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and V. Volosovych, "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to
Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation," Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2008),
347-368.
   Anos-Casero, P., D. Cerdeiro, and R. Trezzi, "Estimating the Fiscal Multiplier in Ar-
gentina," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 5220 (2010).
   Aschauer, D., "Is Public Expenditure Productive?" Journal of Monetary Economics 23
(1989a), 177-200.
   Aschauer, D., "Does Public Capital Crowd Out Private Capital?" Journal of Monetary
Economics 24 (1989b), 171-188.
   Atlas, C., T. Gilligan, R. Hendershott, and M. Zupan, "Slicing the Federal Government
Net Spending Pie: Who Wins, Who Loses and Why," American Economic Review 85 (1995),
624-629.
   Atlas, C., and R. Hendershott, "Optimal E¤ort Allocation by U.S. Senators: The Role of
Constituency Size," Public Choice 92 (1997), 221-229.
   Auerbach, A., and Y. Gorodnichenko, "Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy,"
American Economic Journal 4 (2012), 1-27.
   Auerbach, A., and Y. Gorodnichenko, "Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion,"in
A. Alesina and F. Giavazzi, eds., Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis (Illinois: University
of Chicago Press, 2013), 63-98.
   Avramovich, B., M. Basso, and E. Rezk, "Dynamic E¤ects of Fiscal Shocks Upon Di-
verse Macroeconomic Variables: A Structural VAR Analysis for Argentina," CEPAL XVIII
Seminario Regional de Política Fiscal (2006).
   Baxter, M., and R. King, "Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium," American Economic
Review 83 (1993), 315-334.
   Berg, A., E. Bu¢ e, C. Pattillo, R. Portillo, A. Presbitero, and L.F. Zanna, "Some Miscon-
ceptions About Public Investment E¢ ciency and Growth," Economica 86 (2019), 409-430.
   Blanchard, O., and R. Perotti, "An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic E¤ects of
Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output," Quarterly Journal of Economics
117 (2002), 1329-1368.
   Calderon, C., E. Moral-Benito, and L. Serven, "Is Infrastructure Capital Productive? A
Dynamic Heterogeneous Approach," Journal of Applied Econometrics 30 (2015), 177-198.



                                                22
   Cattaneo, M., and S. Wolter, "Are the Elderly a Threat to Educational Expenditures?"
European Journal of Political Economy 25 (2009), 225-236.
   Cavallo, E., and C. Daude, "Public Investment in Developing Countries: A Blessing or a
Curse?" Journal of Comparative Economics 39 (2011), 65-81.
   Chinn, M.D. and H. Ito, "What Matters for Financial Development? Capital controls,
Institutions, and Interactions," Journal of Development Economics 81 (2006), 163-192.
   Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo, "When is the Government Spending Mul-
tiplier Large?" Journal of Political Economy 119 (2011), 78-121.
   Clemens, J., and S. Miran, "Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational Government Spend-
ing," American Economic Journal 4 (2012), 46-68.
   Coenen, G., R. Straub, and M. Trabandt, " Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
37 (2013), 367-386.
   Coenen, G., C. Erceg, C. Freedman, D. Furceri, M. Kumhof, R. Lalonde, D. Laxton,
J. Lindé, A. Mourougane, D. Muir, S. Mursula, C. De Resende, J. Roberts, W. Roeger,
S. Snudde, M. Trabandt, and J. Veld, "E¤ects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (2012), 22-68.
   Driscoll, J., and A. Kraay, "Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spatially De-
pendent Panel Data," Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (1998), 549-560.
   Eden, M., and A. Kraay, "Crowding In and the Returns to Government Investment in
Low-Income Countries," The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 678 (2014).
   Frankel, J., C. Vegh, and G. Vuletin, "On Graduation from Fiscal Procyclicality," Journal
of Development Economics 100, 32-47.
   Furceri, D., and B. Li, "The Macroeconomic (and Distributional) E¤ects of Public Invest-
ment in Developing Economies," IMF Working Paper 17/217 (2017).
   Gonzalez-Garcia, J., A. Lemus, and M. Mrkaic, "Fiscal Multipliers in the ECCU," IMF
Working Paper 13/117 (2013).
   Hagemann, R., and G. Nicoletti, "Ageing Populations: Economic E¤ects and Implications
for Public Finance," OECD Economics Department Working Papers 61 (1989).
   Holcombe, R., and A. Zardkoohi, "The Determinants of Federal Grants," Southern Eco-
nomic Journal 48 (1981), 393-399.
   Ilzetzki, E., E. Mendoza, and C. Vegh, "How Big (Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?"Journal
of Monetary Economics 60 (2013), 239-254.
   Ilzetzki, E., C.M. Reinhart, and K. Rogo¤, "Exchange Arrangements Entering the 21st
Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?" NBER Working Paper No. 23134 (2017).
   Im, K., M. Pesaran, and Y. Shin, "Testing for Unit Roots in Heterogeneous Panels,"


                                            23
Journal of Econometrics 115 (2003), 53-74.
   Izquierdo, A., C. Pessino, and G. Vuletin, Smart Spending for Better Lives, IDB Flagship
Development in the Americas (2018).
   Jorda, O., "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections," Amer-
ican Economic Review 95 (2005), 161-182.
   Knight, B., "Legislative Representation, Bargaining Power and the Distribution of Federal
Funds: Evidence from the U.S. Congress," Economic Journal 118 (2008), 1785-1803.
   Huidrom, R., A. Kose, J. Lim, and F. Ohnsorge, "Why Do Fiscal Multipliers Depend on
Fiscal Positions?" Journal of Monetary Economics (2019), forthcoming.
   Kose, A., S. Kurlat, F. Ohnsorge, and N. Sugawara, "A Cross-Country Database of Fiscal
Space," The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8157 (2017).
   Leeper, E., T. Walker, and S. Yang, "Government Investment and Fiscal Stimulus," Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics 57 (2010), 1000-1012.
   Leduc, S., and D. Wilson, "Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and
Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment," NBER Working Papers 18042
(2012).
   Lucas, R., "Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?"American Economic
Review 80 (1990), 92-96.
   Owyang, M., V. Ramey, and S. Zubairy, "Are Government Spending Multipliers Greater
during Periods of Slack? Evidence from 20th Century Historical Data," NBER Working
Papers 18769 (2013).
   Porto, A., Disparidades Regionales y Federalismo Fiscal (La Plata: EDULP, 2004).
   Porto, A., and P. Sanguinetti, "Political Determinants of Intergovernmental Grants: Evi-
dence from Argentina," Economics and Politics 13 (2001), 237-256.
   Poterba, J., "State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The E¤ects of Budgetary Institutions and
Politics," Journal of Political Economy 102 (1994), 799-821.
   Poterba, J., "Demographic Structure and the Political Economy of Public Education,"
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 16 (1997), 48-66.
   Poterba, J., "Demographic Change, Intergenerational Linkages, and Public Education,"
American Economic Review 88 (1998), 315-320.
   Puig, J., "Multiplicador del Gasto Público en Argentina," Económica 60 (2014), 188-210.
   Ramey, V., "Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation," Handbook of Macroeco-
nomics, Volume 2A (2016), 71-162.
   Riera-Crichton, D., C. Vegh, and G. Vuletin, "Procyclical and Countercyclical Fiscal
Multipliers: Evidence from OECD Countries," Journal of International Money and Finance


                                             24
52 (2015), 15-31.
   Sanz, I., and F. Velazquez, "The Role of Ageing in the Growth of Government and Social
Welfare Spending in the OECD," European Journal of Political Economy 23 (2007), 917-931.
   Sorensen, R., "Does Aging A¤ect Preferences for Welfare Spending? A Study of Peoples'
Spending Preferences in 22 Countries, 1985-2006," European Journal of Political Economy 29
(2013), 259-271.
   Sorensen, B., L. Wu, and O. Yosha, "Output Fluctuations and Fiscal Policy: U.S. State
and Local Governments 1978-1994," European Economic Review 45 (2001), 1271-1310.
   Stock, J., and M. Watson, "Why Has U.S. Ination Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal
of Money, Banking and Credit 39 (2007), 1-33.
   Stock, J., and M. Yogo, "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression"in J. Stock
and D.W.K. Andrews, eds., Identi...cation and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in
Honor of Thomas J. Rothenberg (Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 80-109
   Tornell, A., and A. Velasco, "The Tragedy of the Commons and Economic Growth: Why
Does Capital Flow from Poor to Rich Countries?" Journal of Political Economy 100 (1992),
1208-1231.
   Vegh, C., and G. Vuletin, "Unsticking the Flypaper E¤ect in an Uncertain World,"Journal
of Public Economics 131 (2015), 142-155.
   Visco, I., "Paying for Pensions: How Important is Economic Growth?" PSL Quarterly
Review 54 (2001), 73-102.
   Zegeye, A., "U.S. Public Infrastructure and Its Contribution to Private Sector Productiv-
ity," BLS Working Paper 329 (2000).




                                            25
Appendix 1. Data de...nitions and sources

European sample

Government spending and macroeconomic variables cover 31 European countries with quar-
terly data starting in the following year-quarter for each country: Austria (1999:Q1), Bel-
gium (1995:Q1), Bulgaria (1999:Q1), Croatia (2012:Q1), Cyprus (1995:Q1), Czech Repub-
lic (1999:Q1), Denmark (1999:Q1), Estonia (1999:Q1), Finland (1998:Q1), France (1991:Q1),
Germany (1995:Q1), Greece (1999:Q1), Hungary (1999:Q1), Iceland (2004:Q1), Ireland (1999:Q1),
Italy (1999:Q1), Latvia (1999:Q1), Lithuania (1999:Q1), Luxembourg (2000:Q1), M5alta
(2000:Q1), Netherlands (1999:Q1), Norway (1996:Q1), Poland (2002:Q1), Portugal (1999:Q1),
Romania (199:Q1), Slovakia (1999:Q1), Slovenia (1999:Q1), Spain (1995:Q1), Sweden King-
dom (1993:Q1), Switzerland (1990:Q1), and United Kingdom (1987:Q1).
   The source for government ...nance and national accounts statistics is Eurostat.
   The ratio of public stock of capital to GDP is from IMF-FAD (general government capital
stock) at annual frequency. The ratio of the initial stock of public capital to GDP is computed
in all countries as the average for the years 1980-1985, with the exception of Croatia, Czech
Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, and Slovenia for which the average is computed
over the period 1990-1995.
   The variable e¢ ciency is obtained as the ...rst principal component of a wide set of in-
dicators (36 to be speci...c) of institutional quality as well as indicators for the quality of
infrastructure, education, and health. These indicators are taken from the Global Compet-
itiveness report, which is published by the World Economic Forum and covers 142 countries
for the period 2004-2014.
   The following indicators are used for overall institutional quality: property rights, intel-
lectual property protection, diversion of public funds, public trust in politicians, irregular
payments and bribes, judicial independence, favoritism in decisions of government o¢ cials,
wastefulness of government spending, burden of government regulation, e¢ ciency of legal
framework in settling disputes, e¢ ciency of legal framework in challenging regulations, trans-
parency of government policymaking, business costs of terrorism, business costs of crime and
violence, organized crime, reliability of police services, ethical behavior of ...rms, strength of
auditing and reporting standards, e¢ cacy of corporate boards, protection of minority share-
holders'interests, strength of investor protection, and government procurement of advanced
tech products.
   The following indicators are used for infrastructure quality: quality of overall infrastruc-
ture, quality of roads, quality of railroad infrastructure, quality of port infrastructure, quality


                                                26
of air transport infrastructure, and quality of electricity supply.
   The following indicators are used for education and health quality: quality of primary
education, quality of the education system, quality of math and science education, quality
of management schools, quality of scienti...c research institutions, business impact of malaria,
business impact of tuberculosis, and business impact of HIV/AIDS.


U.S. states

Total State Expenditures (estimated and actual) ­Capital Inclusive. National Association of
Budget O¢ cers, State Expenditure Report.
   Total capital expenditures (estimated and actual) ­ Capital inclusive. National Associa-
tion of Budget O¢ cers, State Expenditure Report.
   Real gross domestic product. Bureau of Economic Activity. Regional Accounts.
   Total, private and public stock of capital. Zegeye (2000). The shares of the stock of public
capita over GDP per state for 2012 are obtained using the shares of consumption expenditure
from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and the U.S. ...scal data provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau in the 2012 Census of Government. These shares are then applied to the total
stock of public capital in the U.S. obtained from the Investment and Capital Stock Dataset
from the Fiscal A¤airs Department at the IMF. The same is true for the estimate for the
period 1980-1985.


Argentine provinces

The total subnational public expenditure, as well as its components (consumption and in-
vestment), and total transfers from federal government to the provinces come from Porto
(2004) for the period 1964-2000. For the period 2001-2014, information from the Ministry of
Economy and Public Finance of the Republic was used.
   The subnational Geographical Gross Product comes from Porto (2004) for the period 1964-
2000.   For the period 2001-2014, data are from the Center for Production Studies (CEP),
which reports to the Argentina Ministry of Industry. The years not registered by the CEP for
this period were completed with data from the Provincial Statistics O¢ ces of each province
and information from the Secretariat of Economic Policy and Development Planning, which
depends on the Ministry of Economy and Public Finance of the Argentine Republic.
   The provincial population comes from Porto (2004) for the period 1964-2000 and from the
National Institute of Statistics and Census (INDEC) for the period 2001-2014.
   E¤ective distortion in Chamber of Deputies is from Vegh and Vuletin (2015).



                                               27
   Kilometers of paved highways in each province. From 1964 to 2001, the data are from
historical archives from (i) Anuarios Estadísticos del Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Cen-
sos (INDEC), (ii) Censos Nacionales Económicos del INDEC, and (iii) Dirección de Vialidad
Nacional y de O...cinas de Estadisticas Provinciales. From 2001 to 2014, the data are from
Observatorio Nacional de Datos de Transporte - Centro Tecnológico de Transporte, Tránsito
y Seguridad Vial de la Universidad Tecnológica Nacional.


Appendix 2. External studies and own calibrations
Table 1 compares the public investment multiplier for each of the 17 country-speci...c external
studies with the one estimated based on our non-linear arguments of Section 2. All references
for this appendix are listed in the note to Table 1. As in Section 2, we use IMF-FAD (general
government capital stock) at annual frequency to compute the public stock of capital over
GDP ratio for these 17 countries.




                                              28
                         Table 1. Public investment multiplier for each of the 17 countryspecific external studies  
                                  and the one estimated based on our nonlinear arguments of Section 2. 




    References: Elkhdari, M., M. Souissi, and M. Jewell, "Empirical Estimation of Fiscal Multipliers in MENA OilExporting Countries with an Application to Algeria," IMF 
    Working  Paper  18/124  (2018).  Puig,  J.,  "Multiplicador  del  Gasto  Público  en  Argentina,"  Económica  60  (2014),  188210.  Hunt,  B.,  P.  Tumbarello,  and  E.  Takáts, 
    "Australia:  Selected  Issues,"  IMF  Country  Report  09/249  (2009).  Chuling,  B.,  K.  Kalonji,  M.  Sow,  M.  Macdonald,  D.  Tchakoté,  and  J.  Jellema,  "Cameroon:  Selected 
    Issues," IMF Country Report 18/256 (2018). Rincón, H., D. Rodríguez, J. Toro, and S. Téllez, "FISCO: Modelo Fiscal para Colombia," Ensayos sobre Política Económica 
    35 (2017), 161187. Ambrisko, R., J. Babecký, J. Rysánek, and V. Valenta, "Assessing the Impact of Fiscal Measures on the Czech Economy," Economic Modelling 44 
    (2015),  350357.  Veld,  J.,  "Public  Investment  Stimulus  in  Surplus  Countries  and  their  Euro  Area  Spillovers,"  European  Commission  Economic  Brief  16  (2016),  16. 
    Renzi,  M.  and  P.  Padoan,  "Economic  and  Financial  Document    April,"  Ministerio  dell'Economia  e  delle  Finnanze  (2016).  Brückner,  M.,  and  A.  Tuladhar,  "Public 
    Investment as a Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from Japan's Regional Spending During the 1990s," IMF Working Paper 10/110 (2010). Eskesen, L. and E. Lueth, "Republic 
    of  Korea:  Selected  Issues,"  IMF  Country  Report  09/263  (2009).  David,  M.,  "Fiscal  Policy  Effectiveness  in  a  Small  Open  Economy:  Estimates  of  Tax  and  Spending 
    Multipliers  in  Paraguay,"  IMF  Working  Paper  17/63  (2017).  Central  Reserve  Bank  of  Peru,  "Inflation  Report   June:  Recent  Trends  and  Macroeconomic  Forecasts 
    20122014,"  (2012).  Espinoza,  R.A.  and  A.  Senhadji,  "How  Strong  Are  Fiscal  Multipliers  in  the  GCC?  An  Empirical  Investigation,"  IMF  Working  Paper  11/61  (2011). 
    Pereira, A. and R. Flores de Frutos, "Public Capital Accumulation and Private Sector Performance," Journal of Urban Economics 46 (1999), 300322. Diop, N. and N. 
    Ben Abdallah, "The Dynamic Effects of Countercyclical Fiscal Stimulus on Output in Tunisia," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5087 (2009). Coenen, G., C. 
    Erceg, C. Freedman, D. Furceri, M. Kumhof, R. Lalonde, D. Laxton, J. Lindé, A. Mourougane, D. Muir, S. Mursula, C. De Resende, J. Roberts, W. Roeger, S. Snudde, M. 
    Trabandt, and J. Veld, "Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (2012), 2268. 
 

                                                    
 

             Figure 1. Primary spending and public investment multipliers: Evidence from European countries 
                                                             
                                                                                                                         

           Panel A. Effect of primary spending on GDP                                     Panel D. Effect of public investment on GDP 




                                                                                                                         

                 Panel B. Effect of primary spending                                                 Panel E. Effect of public  
                      on private consumption                                                   investment on private consumption 




                                                                                                                         

                 Panel C. Effect of primary spending                                                 Panel F. Effect of public  
                       on private investment                                                    investment on private investment 




    Notes: Country fixed effect panel regression with linear and quadratic trends, standard errors are DriscollKraay standard errors and bootstrapped.
 




        Figure 2. Ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP in European countries 
         




                                                                                     
     

 

                    
 

                            Figure 3. Public investment multiplier: Evidence from European countries 
            (Evaluated at high, 95th percentile, and low, 5th percentile, initial stock of public capital over GDP ratios) 
                                                                                                                               

                 Panel A. Effect on GDP, evaluated                                                  Panel D. Effect on GDP, evaluated  
        at high ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP                            at low ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP 




                                                                                                                               

        Panel B. Effect on private consumption, evaluated                                   Panel E. Effect on private consumption, evaluated  
        at high ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP                               at ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP 




                                                                                                                               

         Panel C. Effect on private investment, evaluated                                   Panel F. Effect on private investment, evaluated  
        at high ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP                            at low ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP 




    Notes: Country fixed effect panel regression with linear and quadratic trends, standard errors are DriscollKraay standard errors and bootstrapped.
 
 

    Figure 4. Public investment multiplier after two years of the spending shock 
    evaluated at different ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP:  
    Evidence from European countries 
     
     




                                                                                                             
    Notes: Country fixed effect panel regression with linear and quadratic trends, standard errors are Driscoll
    Kraay standard errors and bootstrapped. 
 

 

                    
 

    Figure 5. Public investment multiplier after two years of the spending shock: Evidence from European countries
                                                                 
                        Panel A. Evaluated at ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP of 1990 




                                                               
                      Panel B. Evaluated at ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP of 2014 




     
 

                                
 

    Figure 6. Public investment multiplier after two years of the spending shock: 
    Evidence from European countries 
     
    Panel A. Evaluated at different levels of efficiency 




                                                                                   
                                             
     Panel B. Evaluated at different ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP 
                                             




                                                                                                             
                                                           
    Notes: Country fixed effect panel regression with linear and quadratic trends, standard errors are Driscoll
    Kraay standard errors and bootstrapped.
 

 

 

 

 
 

                            Figure 7. Primary spending and public investment multipliers: 
                                          Evidence from United State states 
                                                           




    Note:  The  5th  percentile  and  95th  percentile  is  used  to  identify  low  and  high  ratio  of  initial  stock  of  public  capital  to  GDP  in 
    United  State  states,  respectively.  State  fixed  effect  panel  regression  with  linear  and  quadratic  trends,  standard  errors  are 
    DriscollKraay standard errors and bootstrapped. 
 

 

                      Figure 8. Ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP in U.S. states 




                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                
 
    Figure 9. Public investment multiplier evaluated at different ratios 
    of initial stock of public capital to GDP: 
    Evidence from United State states 
                                           




                                                                                                         
    Notes: State fixed effect panel regression with linear and quadratic trends, standard errors are 
    DriscollKraay standard errors and bootstrapped.
 

              
 

           Figure 10. Public investment multiplier after two years of the spending shock: 
                                  Evidence from United State states 
                                                    
        Panel A. Evaluated at the average ratio of stock of public capital to GDP of 19801985 




                                                   
          Panel B. Evaluated at the average ratio of stock of public capital to GDP of 2012 




     
 

 

                       
 

       Figure 11. Key empirical factors behind the use of provincial overrepresentation in  
       the Chamber of Deputies as instrument for provincial primary spending per capita 
                                                                          

                          Panel A. Partial correlation between federal fiscal transfers  
                            per capita and provincial primary spending per capita  




                                                                                    
                       Panel B. Partial correlation between effective distortion in the  
                        Chamber of Deputies and federal fiscal transfers per capita 




                                                                                    
                       Panel C. Partial correlation between effective distortion in the  
                      Chamber of Deputies and provincial primary spending per capita 




                                                                                                                      
    Notes:  Each  original  variable  is  controlled  for  provincial  fixed  effect  and  linear  and  quadratic  trends.  Therefore,  partial 
    correlation graphs use respective residuals. Tstatsitics are in brackets.  
 
      Figure 12. Key empirical factors behind the use of provincial population dependency ratio as instrument for  
      the proportion of provincial primary spending allocated to public investment and government consumption 
                                                                                                                                  

       Panel A. Partial correlation between provincial                                         Panel D. Partial correlation between country  
       population dependency ratio and proportion of                                          population dependency ratio and proportion of  
           provincial primary spending allocated                                                   country primary spending allocated  
                 to public investment (1)                                                               to public investment (1) 




                                                                                                                                  

       Panel B. Partial correlation between provincial                                         Panel E. Partial correlation between country  
       population dependency ratio and proportion of                                          population dependency ratio and proportion of  
           provincial primary spending allocated                                                   country primary spending allocated  
                  to public consumption                                                                  to public consumption  




    Panel C. Partial correlation between provincial             Panel F. Partial correlation between  
population dependency ratio and provincial GDP growth  population dependency ratio and provincial GDP growth 




Notes: Each original variable is controlled for provincial (Panels A, B, and C) or country (Panels D, E, and F) fixed effect and linear and quadratic trends. Therefore, 
partial correlation graphs use respective residuals. Tstatsitics are in brackets.  
 

                       Figure 13. Primary spending and public investment multipliers: 
                                    Evidence from Argentinean provinces 
                                                      




    Note: The 5th percentile and 95th percentile is used to identify low and high ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP in 
    Argentinean provinces, respectively. Provincial fixed effect panel regression with linear and quadratic trends, standard errors 
    are DriscollKraay standard errors and bootstrapped.
 

           Figure 14. Ratio of initial stock of public capital to GDP in Argentinean provinces 
            




                                                                                                                        
           
 
    Figure 15. Public investment multiplier evaluated at different ratios of initial stock of public capital to GDP: 
    Evidence from Argentinean provinces 




    Notes: State fixed effect panel regression with linear and quadratic trends, standard errors are DriscollKraay standard errors and bootstrapped.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                         
 

 

 

    Figure 16. Investment multiplier for Argentinean provinces 
     
    Panel A. For the year 1964                          Panel B. For the year 1990    Panel C. For the year 2014 




                                                                                                                     
     
 

 

 

 

 
 

     Figure 17. Comparison of our public investment multiplier based on a nonlinear strategy 
             with public investment multiplier from external sources for 17 countries. 
                                                   
                           Panel A. Visàvis comparison for each country 




                                                                                         
                                                   
         Panel B. Regression between our public investment multiplier based on a nonlinear  
                   strategy and public investment multiplier from external sources 




                                                                                          
    Notes: See Appendix 2 for details.  
 

 
