                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


       DOES THE LACK OF FINANCIAL STABILITY IMPAIR THE TRANSMISSION
                           OF MONETARY POLICY?

                                           Viral V. Acharya
                                          Björn Imbierowicz
                                            Sascha Steffen
                                          Daniel Teichmann

                                         Working Paper 26479
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26479

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2019


The views expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Tobias Berg,
Martin Brown, Matteo Crosignani, John Driscoll, Falko Fecht, André Güttler, Ralph de Haas,
Hendrik Hakenes, Florian Heider, Neeltje van Horen, Stephan Jank, Martin Kanz, David Lando,
David Marques-Ibanez, David Martinez-Miera, Emanuel Mönch, Steven Ongena, Andrea Polo, Lasse
Heje Pedersen, Adriano Rampini, Asani Sarkar, Morton Sørensen, Daniel Streitz, Harald Uhlig, and
participants in the 2014 European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the 2014 ECB workshop
on "Non-standard monetary policy measures," the 2014 Bank Workshop in Münster, the 2015 FIRS
meetings, the 2015 Bocconi/Carefin Conference, the 2015 Summer Research Conference in Finance
at ISB, the 2015 FED conference on "Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the
Post-Crisis Period," the 2015 Financial Management Association, the Bundesbank/CEPR
Conference "One year after the European Banking Union take-off," the China International
Conference in Finance, the 1st IWH-FIN-FIRE Workshop on "Challenges to Financial Stability,"
the 2nd Conference on "Bank performance, financial stability and the real economy," the 4th
MoFiR workshop on banking, and seminar participants at the Bank of England, Copenhagen Business
School, Erasmus University Rotterdam, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Frankfurt
School of Finance and Management, Tilburg University, the University of Mannheim and University
of Ulm for valuable comments and suggestions. Imbierowicz gratefully acknowledges support from
the Center for Financial Frictions (FRIC), grant no. DNRF102.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Viral V. Acharya, Björn Imbierowicz, Sascha Steffen, and Daniel Teichmann. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does the Lack of Financial Stability Impair the Transmission of Monetary Policy?
Viral V. Acharya, Björn Imbierowicz, Sascha Steffen, and Daniel Teichmann
NBER Working Paper No. 26479
November 2019
JEL No. E43,E58,G01,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the transmission of central bank liquidity to bank deposits and loan spreads in
Europe over the period from January 2006 to June 2010. We find evidence consistent with an
impaired transmission channel due to bank risk. Central bank liquidity does not translate into
lower loan spreads for high-risk banks for maturities beyond one year, even as it lowers deposit
spreads for both high-risk and low-risk banks. This adversely affects the balance sheets of high-
risk bank borrowers, leading to lower payouts, capital expenditures and employment. Overall, our
results suggest that banks' capital constraints at the time of an easing of monetary policy pose a
challenge to the effectiveness of the bank-lending channel and the central bank's lender-of-last-
resort function.

Viral V. Acharya                                Sascha Steffen
Stern School of Business                        Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
New York University                             Germany
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65                  s.steffen@fs.de
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR                                        Daniel Teichmann
and also NBER                                   Goethe University Frankfurt
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu                          House of Finance
                                                Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
Björn Imbierowicz                               Frankfurt 60323
Deutsche Bundesbank                             Germany
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14                      Daniel.teichmann@hotmail.com
Germany
bjorn.imbierowicz@gmail.com
        [...] it is nonetheless useful to recall again the limits of monetary policy. Monetary
        policy transmission may be hampered at times where banks, in particular, but also
        non-financial sectors need to repair their balance sheets. At times of uncertainty
        and lack of confidence, liquidity may be hoarded rather than be put to use for
        investment. These are cases where standard monetary policy may be "pushing on
        a string" (in the words of John Maynard Keynes). These are also impediments that
        need to be fundamentally addressed by regulators and government entities, via the
        strengthening of financial balance sheets [...]
        (Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, May 2013)


1. Introduction

Monetary policy impacts the supply of bank credit, implying a bank-lending or risk-taking

channel of monetary policy.1 The key mechanism behind the bank-lending channel is agency

costs between banks and their financiers. The empirical approach in this literature, however,

usually ignores that banks fund their lending activities to a large extent with short-term

wholesale deposits and that monetary policy also affects deposit rates.2 However, the

connection between monetary policy and deposit rates is important as an impaired transmission

channel might originate in the funding market, for example, because some banks are

undercapitalized and face regulatory and economic constraints, even if monetary policy is

expansive. However, we know very little about how monetary policy affects the market for

corporate deposits. For example, does monetary policy transmit equally to deposit and loan

rates? Can the transmission of monetary policy still be impaired even if central banks provide

unlimited short-term liquidity to banks, effectively guaranteeing also (uninsured) wholesale

deposits? And, what are the implications for customers of banks, both lenders (i.e. depositors)

and borrowers? These are the main questions we try to address in this paper, thereby providing

evidence on the effectiveness of the bank-lending channel and on central banks as lenders of

last resort.



1
  Researchers argue that (1) monetary policy affects loan supply by banks (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989, 1995;
Kashyap and Stein, 2000); (2) the reduction in loan supply is due to weak bank balance-sheet strength (Bernanke
and Blinder, 1988; Bernanke, 2007; Jiménez et al., 2012); and (3) a low monetary policy rate increases risk-taking
by banks (Jiménez et al., 2014; Ioannidou et al., 2015; Dell'Ariccia et al., 2017).
2
  An important exception is Drechsler et al. (2017) who argue that the deposit channel of monetary policy can
explain a large part of the bank balance-sheet channel.

                                                        2
       Our setting is the introduction of the full allotment of liquidity by the ECB in October

2008 as a response to the deepening of the global financial crisis. Prior to that date, the ECB

issued liquidity to banks in a competitive tender to meet an aggregate liquidity target. Liquidity

was allocated to the banking sector such that each bank could meet its reserve requirements.

After the default of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the interbank markets became

severely stressed (Afonso, Kovner and Schoar, 2011) preventing an efficient allocation of

liquidity among banks. On October 8, 2008, the ECB began to fulfill all liquidity requests by

individual banks at the prevailing main refinancing (MRO) rate in exchange for collateral via

its main refinancing operations, which eventually provided substantial excess liquidity to the

banking system.

       We construct a novel data set of deposit and loan transactions of the same banks during

the January 2, 2006 to June 30, 2010 period and investigate the impact of "aggregate" central

bank liquidity (i.e., the total liquidity in the banking system provided by the ECB) on spreads

of newly issued deposits and loans before and after the introduction of the full-allotment

liquidity concept, exploiting cross-sectional differences in the health of these European banks.

As the introductory quote suggests, during financial crises, the transmission of monetary policy

might be impaired due to the weak balance sheets of some banks. To the best of our knowledge,

we are the first to analyze where the transmission channel is impaired--the funding or the loan

market. This is important for understanding the role of central banks in addressing liquidity

versus solvency problems during crises, as well as for the design of crisis-time monetary policy

interventions.

       We focus on deposit contracts in the first part of the paper and analyze how central bank

liquidity affects corporate deposit spreads for high- versus low-risk banks. There are two main

identification challenges: central bank liquidity might be endogenous and driven by current

market conditions; in addition, deposit spreads, as well as amounts, might be driven by demand

and supply effects in the market for corporate deposits. We address this in two ways. First, we

                                                3
explore the sensitivity of our results to the inclusion of controls and fixed effects and argue that

our main coefficients remain almost unaffected. We then use a three-equation system to isolate

a deposit demand function using instruments to shift both central bank liquidity provision and

corporate deposit supply.

       Our first main result is that an increase in central bank liquidity is associated with a

significant decrease in bank deposit spreads during the financial crisis. This effect is

economically large in magnitude. During the financial crisis, a one standard deviation increase

in liquidity reduces deposit spreads by about 3 bps before, and 8 bps after the introduction of

the full-allotment policy. Differentiating by bank risk, which we measure using banks' credit

default swaps spreads, we find that the deposit spreads of low-risk banks--but not of high-risk

banks--decrease in response to larger amounts of liquidity prior to the beginning of the full

allotment period. Thereafter, both high- and low-risk banks similarly reduce deposit spreads

when central bank liquidity increases.

       We next trace out supply and demand functions for corporate deposits from our data

during the full-allotment period and show that, holding everything else constant, firms supply

more deposits when banks offer higher spreads. In other words, the deposit supply function is

upward sloping. Banks' demand for deposits is downward sloping, i.e. if the provision of

deposits is higher, then the marginal utility of deposits is lower, which reduces deposit spreads.

The slope coefficient of the supply function is lower, suggesting that the supply of deposits is

relatively inelastic with respect to deposit spreads. Importantly, we show that an increase in

central bank liquidity shifts the deposit demand curve inwards and that both high- and low-risk

banks pay less for corporate deposits, with all else equal.

       Taken together, the deposit spread differential suggests that an increase in central bank

liquidity before the introduction of the full-allotment policy was insufficient to reduce the

funding risks of high- and low-risk banks. High-risk banks needed to pay substantially higher

deposit spreads to compensate depositors and attract funds. Interbank markets were

                                                 4
dysfunctional prior to the full allotment period and low-risk banks in particular hoarded

liquidity (Afonso, Kovner, and Schoar, 2011). The ECB then stepped in as lender of last resort

(LOLR), meeting all banks' liquidity requests in full. At the same time, it extended the list of

assets accepted as eligible collateral for refinancing operations. Substituting for the loss of

private funding, the ECB eventually reduced the funding pressure of high-risk banks.

       We then investigate how the ECB interventions as a LOLR translate into banks' loan-

lending decisions using the same set of banks that we observe in the deposit market. We do not

find (in contrast to the deposit market) a differential impact of ECB liquidity on loan spreads

for low- versus high-risk banks prior to the introduction of the full-allotment policy; the loan

spreads do not respond to central bank liquidity changes for either high- or low-risk banks.

After the introduction, however, the loan spreads of low-risk banks decrease, while they remain

unchanged for high-risk banks when the ECB increased its liquidity provision. A one standard

deviation increase in ECB liquidity decreases the loan spreads of low-risk banks by about

27 bps relative to high-risk banks during the full-allotment period, which is economically

meaningful given an average loan spread of about 306 bps. In addition, we investigate the pass-

through of monetary policy during the full-allotment policy for different loan maturities. Our

results suggest that the transmission channel is impaired, particularly for loans beyond a

maturity of one year.

       We then focus on borrowers that borrow from the same group of either low- or high-

risk banks before and after the full-allotment period (intensive margin). To investigate the

differential effect of central bank liquidity for high-risk versus low-risk banks, we use a

Heckman regression model, thereby addressing concerns that firms self-select into loan-lending

relationships with these banks. We also match borrowers of low- and high-risk banks in the

full-allotment period using propensity score matching models. We find consistent results.

       An interesting question might be why borrowers do not switch when high-risk banks

demand higher loan spreads relative to low-risk banks. We show that high-risk banks charge

                                               5
higher loan spreads particularly to bank-dependent borrowers, which are typically small- and

medium-sized firms as well as firms without a public debt rating. This is consistent with

evidence in Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) and Kashyap,

Lamont and Stein (1994), who use similar proxies for borrowers' financial constraints and

reliance on external funding.

       Finally, we investigate the real consequences for borrowers of high- versus low-risk

banks due to the ECB's liquidity framework. While the borrowers of high-risk banks increase

their credit lines relative to their term-loan borrowing following the ECB's liquidity provision,

these firms also invest less, have lower capital expenditures and reduce the number of

employees.

       To summarize, we find evidence that the transmission channel of monetary policy in the

euro area is impaired in the loan market but not the deposit market even after the introduction

of the ECB's full-allotment policy. This evidence shows that banking sector balance-sheet

weakness limited the role of the ECB as LOLR during financial crises and is associated with

negative real effects of bank-dependent borrowers of high-risk banks.

       It is noteworthy that high-risk banks that charge higher loan spreads to bank-dependent

customers might benefit from an increase in central bank liquidity. As the ECB effectively

provided unlimited liquidity at a low interest rate, banks lowered deposit rates and refinanced

their loans at lower funding costs. Not passing on these lower funding costs to borrowers

increased the margins of high-risk banks--and thus their net worth--relaxing both regulatory

and economic constraints. Hence, an increase in central bank liquidity essentially amounted to

a "stealth recapitalization" of high-risk banks consistent with theoretical models e.g. in

Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016). An alternative view is that high-risk banks are reaching for

yield. We discuss this view and implications in Section 8 of this paper.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related

literature and contributions of our paper. We then describe the institutional setting (Section 3)

                                               6
and data (Section 4). We next discuss the effect of central bank liquidity on deposit rates in

Section 5 and on loan spreads in Section 6. In Section 7, we discuss the implications for the

real sector and conclude in Section 8.

2. Related literature

We review the related literature and discuss our contributions to the literature in this section.

Many researchers have investigated the pass-through of monetary policy on bank loan supply

through the bank-lending channel and its associated real effects (Kashyap and Stein, 1994; Peek

and Rosengren, 2015). In this literature, banks with different balance sheets (e.g. based on

leverage, liquidity or asset size) respond differently to monetary policy shocks (Kashyap and

Stein, 1995; 2000; Kishan and Opiela, 2000; Campello, 2002; Gambacorta and Mistrulli, 2004;

Jiménez et al., 2012; Gomez et al., 2016). These researchers, however, do not consider how

bank deposit and loan markets interact. Moreover, an important dimension of the pass-through

is not only the quantity but also the pricing of deposits and loans as weak banks have incentives

to increase their margins to relax regulatory and economic constraints.

       Importantly, this literature highlights that banks with weak balance sheets are more

responsive to monetary policy because of agency problems between banks and their financiers.

Consequently, and studying a period outside of financial crises, Jiménez et al. (2012) conjecture

that an expansive monetary policy during crises might be prudent as weak banks react stronger

to tightening of monetary policy during normal times. That is, this literature suggests a

symmetric effect of contractionary and expansionary monetary policy with respect to the

responsiveness of banks to these measures. Our results, however, suggest the opposite: weak

banks do not respond to expansionary monetary policy measures in the loan markets but strong,

well-capitalized banks do. The key difference in our paper is that aforementioned agency costs

are attenuated during the full-allotment period when the ECB provides unlimited liquidity to

all banks (weak and strong), thus effectively providing insurance also to short-term wholesale

depositors. But even during this period, weak banks still charge higher loan spreads compared

                                               7
to strong banks. In other words, while the effect in the previous literature originates mainly in

funding liquidity problems of weak banks, we show that the main driver of higher loan spreads

of weak relative to strong banks is rooted in their solvency conditions. Thus, as far as the

transmission by weak bank balance sheets to the real sector is concerned, monetary policy

easing might be "pushing on a string" as long as financial sector stability is not restored.

        Comparing the credit default swap (CDS) spreads of banks during the February 2002

to December 2008 period (which is the sample period in Jiménez et al. (2012)) to our sample

period of January 2006 to June 2010 is compelling. We find that weak banks had an average

CDS spread of only 17 bps during the sample period analyzed in Jiménez et al. (2012). Strong

banks in our sample period, on the other hand, had an average CDS spread of 23 bps. That is,

the absolute level of risk appears to be important. During the global financial crisis, bank health

substantially deteriorated due to high leverage and poor-quality assets. In turn, solvency risks

spilled over into short-term funding markets. Consequently, monetary policy transmission and

central bank liquidity allocation in short-term funding markets were impaired until the ECB

stepped in as LOLR and provided abundant liquidity for high- and low-risk banks. The ECB

thus successfully reduced tensions in the money market. However, this intervention was not

adequate for the loan market, likely due to bank solvency concerns: high-risk banks kept loan

interest rates, ceteris paribus, higher than low-risk banks, consistent with the theoretical

predictions in Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016).

       Our paper also relates to the literature that more broadly shows that bank loan supply

declines during financial crises when the banking system is weak (Peek and Rosengren, 1995,

Ivashina and Scharfstein, 2010, Popov and van Horen, 2015). In a recent paper, Heider et al.

(2019) demonstrate a special role of deposits for bank loan supply when policy rates become

negative. We add to this literature by documenting empirically that large liquidity injections by

central banks do not reduce financial frictions of bank-dependent firms if the banking sector is



                                                8
undercapitalized. Moreover, we show that short-term liquidity provisions do not improve long-

term lending, even among well-capitalized banks.

3. Institutional setting

In order to understand the effect of central bank liquidity on deposit and loan spreads, it is

useful to briefly review the standard instruments of monetary policy in the eurozone (e.g., open

market operations, standing facilities, and minimum reserve requirements), and to highlight the

ECB's major policy changes.

       In contrast to the United States, where open market operations are primarily conducted

by buying Treasury bonds, the ECB uses its main refinancing operations (MRO) to provide

liquidity to financial institutions in exchange for collateral (repurchase agreements) in fixed-

rate or variable-rate tenders. These operations are usually conducted on a weekly basis and have

a maturity from one week up to three months. By increasing or reducing interest rates in MROs,

as well as changing the size of the allotment, the ECB can affect both market interest rates and

liquidity. The ECB follows a liquidity-neutral allotment concept (i.e., liquidity provision is

based on its assessment of the liquidity needs of the banking system in the eurozone).

       The ECB can provide and absorb overnight liquidity using its standing facilities. Banks

can use the deposit facility to make unlimited overnight deposits at an interest rate that is usually

(at least before the financial crisis started) 1% below the MRO rate. Banks can use the marginal

lending facility to obtain overnight liquidity that is usually 1% above the MRO rate. The

available collateral restricts the amount a bank can borrow. The standing facilities thus provide

a corridor for overnight interest rates.

       Monetary policy also includes minimum reserve requirements, which require banks to

hold deposits on accounts in the Eurosystem that reflect the amount of the banks' customer

deposits. The ECB uses minimum reserve requirements to smooth short-term interest rates by

averaging positions over a specific period. The minimum reserves are remunerated at the MRO

rate. Excess reserves, however, are transferred to the deposit facility. That is, banks usually

                                                 9
hold only the minimum reserves at the ECB if money markets are able to redistribute liquidity

from banks with a liquidity surplus to banks with a liquidity deficit. In the pre-crisis period,

there was no need to hold excess reserves at the ECB, as liquidity was readily available in the

money markets, and central bank liquidity was determined by reserve requirements. The recent

financial crisis, however, had a profound impact on European money markets. Banks became

increasingly reluctant to lend to each other, which led to further segmentation of this market,

particularly in cross-border transactions. The three-month EURIBOR-OIS swap spread, the

difference between the euro interbank offered rate and overnight indexed swaps, increased to

more than 200 bps during the August 2007 to October 2008 period, emphasizing the stress in

money markets in the eurozone.

       The ECB was not able to sustain its liquidity-neutral allotment concept during the

financial crisis because it became increasingly difficult to forecast the liquidity needs of the

banking system. The ECB therefore changed its liquidity provision framework on October 8,

2008 to fully satisfy bank demand for liquidity at a fixed interest rate (fixed-rate full-allotment),

effectively also guaranteeing (uninsured) wholesale depositors. This shift in liquidity provision

substantially increased the aggregate liquidity in the banking system, which is reflected in a

sharp increase of funds in the deposit facility. The fixed-rate full-allotment procedure will

continue at least until the end of the last reserve maintenance period of 2019.

4. Data

4.1. Sample selection

To investigate the effect of central bank liquidity on deposit spreads, we employ a unique and

proprietary data set including corporate deposits from a European trading platform that ranks

among the three largest platforms by volume in Europe. The deposits are sizable. The average

deposit amount on a specific day with each bank over a one-year period corresponds to about




                                                 10
15% of a bank's end of year short-term liabilities.3 Prior to trading, banks and firms agree on

the procedures and execution of trades and sign a framework agreement. This agreement applies

to all future trades on the platform. Firms can offer any deposit amount with any maturity. All

banks using the platform observe this offer and can bid for the deposit during a pre-specified

time period, which is usually limited to two minutes and is initially set by each firm. Until the

end of this period, a firm can select a bid based on its preferences. Banks do not observe other

banks' bids but can adjust their offer during the bidding period. This implies that banks adjust

their pricing during the bidding process only idiosyncratically, not in response to other banks'

bids. Interest rates are quoted on an actual/360-day count convention and transactions are

settled on the same day. Appendix A3 shows an example of a deposit auction and how the bids

are quoted. Our sample covers the January 2, 2006 to June 30, 2010 period.

        Our sample includes executed deposit transactions with a maximum maturity of seven

days that are between non-financial firms and banks during the January 2006 to June 2010

period. The maximum maturity is in line with the Eurosystem's regular open market operations

as described above. We do not have specific information on individual firms on the platform

but have a unique platform-specific identifier for each firm that allows us to distinguish between

depositors. Bank competition is measured at the deposit platform level using the Herfindahl­

Hirschman Index (HHI) and data from the previous week. The final sample includes 40,638

euro-denominated deposit transactions from 145 European firms to 43 European banks with

access to the ECB facilities.

        Our loan-level data are based on the universe of loan facilities in the LPC DealScan

database during the January 2006 to June 2010 period. We drop all loans where we cannot

match the borrower to the Chava­Roberts (DealScan-Compustat) link file. We collect annual

financial statement information for all non-financial firms from Compustat and merge it (with


3
  The number is calculated as the average of the daily outstanding deposit amount of each bank on the platform
using all trading days (including zeros). This average is divided by the bank's end of year current liabilities as
reported on the balance sheet.

                                                       11
a one-year lag) to each loan contract and require that loan spread, maturity, amount,

performance pricing and secured versus unsecured status are available for all loans. We select

the lead bank for each loan following Ivashina (2009) and exclude loans from banks that do not

operate on the deposit trading platform during our sample period. Overall, our final loan sample

includes 2,632 firm-bank loan facilities from 38 banks to 566 firms.4

         To measure the amount of Central Bank Liquidity available in the banking system, we

use the natural logarithm of the sum of the banks' daily current account and deposit facility

holdings with the ECB, centered by their mean value in 2006 (the so-called "adjusted liquidity

in the banking sector").5 Annual bank characteristics are collected from Bankscope and

matched (with a one-year lag) to each deposit and loan transaction. To measure bank risk, we

use five-year CDS spreads from credit market analysis (CMA). Using an iterative procedure

explained in more detail in Online Appendix A, we ensure that high-risk banks (High Bank

Risk) have, on average, at least twice the spread of low-risk banks in each week.6 In this

procedure, we use (on a weekly basis) the minimum CDS spread of banks rated A1 or below

as threshold and classify banks with a higher spread as high-risk banks. To ensure that low- and

high-risk banks are sufficiently different, we then iteratively decrease this threshold in steps of

0.5bps until the ratio of the average spread of low- and high-risk banks is at least two in each

week.




4
  Appendix A2 includes a table showing how many loan observations are dropped during our matching procedure.
We also provide a comparison of our sample with the overall sample of European firms. We find that loan spreads
are, on average, not significantly different between both samples. Our sample firms are larger both in terms of
total assets and loan facility size, have more leverage and lower interest coverage, and also have more tangible
assets as they are arguably more mature firms.
5
  We also use other measures for central bank liquidity. A description of these measures for central bank liquidity
in the banking sector is provided in Online Appendix A. We also perform all our analyses with these other
measures but do not report them for brevity. All results remain robust.
6
  In addition to bank CDS spreads, we also use banks' Moody's long-term issuer credit rating as a measure of
credit risk. Importantly, using either method, banks change their risk classification very infrequently. In unreported
robustness checks, we exclude all banks that migrate between risk classes during the full-allotment period and re-
run our regressions. In a different test, we use CDS spreads before the start of the financial crisis (August 9, 2007)
to distinguish between high- and low-risk banks. The results remain unchanged. We report the results in Online
Appendix E.

                                                         12
4.2. Descriptive statistics

Panel A of Figure 1 shows the time series of weekly central bank liquidity, Panel B the

percentage excess amount of central bank liquidity above the reserve requirement (Excess

Liquidity Ratio). Prior to the financial crisis, the ECB allotted liquidity to banks such that these

were able to fulfill their reserve requirements with very limited excess holdings. This is intuitive

given the low interest rate earned in the deposit facility, which, during normal times, gives

banks incentives to lend out excess liquidity in the interbank market. After the start of the

financial crisis, the ECB started a "frontloading" policy and allocated funds to the market in

excess of the benchmark liquidity in the early maintenance period and again absorbed these

gradually over this period (Eisenschmidt, Hirsch, and Linzert, 2009).

                                               [Figure 1 here]

       Figure 1 shows an increase in both amount and volatility of liquidity. The start of the

full allotment of liquidity at a fixed rate resulted in a strong increase in aggregate central bank

liquidity. On June 25, 2009, the ECB announced it would provide additional liquidity via long-

term refinancing operations (LTRO) with a maturity of one year, which induced another surge

in aggregate liquidity.

       Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for our main variables during the pre-financial crisis

period, the crisis period until full allotment, and the full-allotment period. All data are deflated

with 2006 as the base year. During the financial crisis, central bank liquidity increased from

35 billion to 183 billion in the full-allotment period.

                                               [Table 1 here]

       The average deposit has a maturity of 1.86 days (Average Duration), with an annual

Deposit Rate of 226.7 bps and an Average Notional Deposit Amount of a transaction of

71 million (Table 1 reports the log amount to facilitate interpretation of the regression

coefficients). The average deposit amount appears to be quite inelastic during our sample

period. The Deposit Spread is defined as the deposit interest rate of a transaction minus the

                                                13
risk-free interest rate; we use the marginal deposit facility of the ECB as the excess reserves

that the banks built up were arguably the next best alternative for banks compared to corporate

deposits. The average Deposit Spread is 51.41 bps. We use the ECB main refinancing rate and

the ECB lending facility interest rate as alternative risk-free interest rates and show that all

results are insensitive to the benchmark interest rate.

        Deposit rates and spreads decrease sharply between the pre-full-allotment and the full-

allotment period. Loan spreads (AISD), on average, are 183 bps. The spreads increased

substantially during the financial crisis. Loan maturities (Maturity in Months) and loan amounts

(Facility Size), on the other hand, substantially shortened. The average loan matures in

54 months and is 799 million in size during our sample period.7

4.3. Interest rates

Panel A of Figure 2 depicts the development of the deposit facility, the marginal lending facility

(MRO), and the short-term corporate deposit rates over the 2006 to mid-2010 period. Prior to

the financial crisis, the deposit rate was anchored to the MRO. The figure shows that a

functioning interbank market, together with tender operations with limited allotment, allowed

banks to actively manage their liquidity, as well as the ECB to steer corporate deposit rates

close to the MRO.

                                                    [Figure 2 here]

        Although deposit rates became more volatile at the onset of the financial crisis, the

corporate deposit rate remained close to the main refinancing rate. However, with the

introduction of the ECB's full-allotment policy, the deposit rate dropped sharply, moving more

closely to the ECB deposit facility interest rate as a direct effect of excess liquidity in the

banking system. Panel B of Figure 2 shows the strong negative relation between corporate

deposit spreads and aggregate liquidity. Overall, Figure 2 provides the first evidence that



7
 The total daily volume on the deposit platform is 3,080 million and the average daily volume of loans is 5,370
million, calculated using all trading days and including days with no observations as zeros.

                                                      14
monetary policy expansion lowers short-term corporate deposit spreads in financial crises--an

effect difficult to identify in normal times.

         Panel A of Figure 3 shows the average CDS spread differential between high- and low-

risk banks. CDS spreads strongly increased at the start of the financial crisis for high- and low-

risk banks and remained at elevated levels, especially for high-risk banks, until June 2010. Prior

to (after) the full allotment period around two thirds (half) of our sample banks are classified

as low-risk banks. Panel B shows that deposit spreads decrease during the full-allotment period,

particularly for the low-risk banks. Panel C shows that low-risk banks charge lower loan spreads

than high-risk banks in the full-allotment period, which suggests that the transmission of

monetary policy to the loan market might be impaired.

                                                       [Figure 3 here]


5. Monetary policy and corporate deposits

5.1. Transmission of central bank liquidity to corporate deposit spreads

We first investigate how aggregate central bank liquidity affects corporate deposits using the

following regression model:


    -./0 = - + /3 + /0 + ./A BC + -./0                                                                        (1)


         where the dependent variable is the average corporate deposit spread paid by bank j to

firm i in week tw (i.e. our data is at the bank-firm-week level) and the main inference variable

is the contemporaneous weekly Central Bank Liquidity measure. Y is a set of bank and deposit

characteristics that might determine deposit spreads. Among our bank characteristics are bank

total assets as well as different proxies for bank size, capitalization, profitability, asset quality

and liquidity.8 These variables enter our regression with a one-year lag. We also include the



8
  These include a leverage ratio (as a proxy for capital adequacy), liquid assets over short-term funding, total
deposits over total assets and net loans over customer deposits (as proxies for liquidity), net interest margin, cost-
income-ratio and return on assets (as proxies for profitability), and non-performing loans over total loans (as a
proxy for asset quality). We also include the natural logarithm of banks' total assets, asset growth, off-balance-

                                                         15
weekly notional deposit amount (Log(Notional Deposit Amount)) and a Herfindahl­Hirschman

Index (HHI), calculated as the sum of the squared market share of each bank over the last week

using deposit volume as a measure of bank competition. Market risk is measured using the

three-month EURIBOR-EONIA swap spread. We include a firm fixed effect (ai) to observe the

time-series effect of ECB liquidity on deposit spreads. As the average level of deposit spreads

(and ECB liquidity) vary substantially over time, we also include a time (year-month) fixed

effect (/3 ) such that the effect of ECB liquidity on deposit spreads is not moderated by the

time effect. We analyze deposit transactions for the January 2, 2006 to June 30, 2010 period

(column (1) of Table 2) and differentiate (in columns (2) to (4) of Table 2) between the pre-

financial crisis period (January 2, 2006 to August 8, 2007), the financial crisis until full-

allotment period (August 9, 2007 to October 7, 2008), and the full-allotment period (October 8,

2008 to June 30, 2010). Standard errors are clustered at the bank and week level using the

methods in Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2011) and Thompson (2011). We estimate

equation (1) using OLS; Table 2 reports the results.

                                                 [Table 2 here]

         The results in column (1) of Table 2 show that an increase in central bank liquidity

results in lower corporate deposit spreads, but only during the financial crisis period (columns

(2)­(4)). A one standard deviation increase in central bank liquidity reduces deposit spreads by

about 3 bps in the financial crisis until the full-allotment period and by about 8 bps in the full-

allotment period.9 The coefficient of Log(Notional Deposit Amount) is negative and significant,

particularly during the financial crisis period, i.e. if the weekly provision of deposits is higher,

then the deposit spread is lower. The remaining control variables remain unreported for brevity

but a full set of results is documented in Online Appendix C.



sheet exposure over total assets, and net derivatives exposure over total assets as additional control variables. The
variables are defined in Appendix A1.
9
  The numbers are calculated by multiplying the coefficient with one standard deviation of central bank liquidity.
The latter is 0.129 in the crisis period until full allotment and 0.275 in the full-allotment policy period.

                                                         16
5.2. Transmission of monetary policy to high- versus low-risk banks

The results in the previous subsection are consistent with the interpretation that the ECB

reduced the funding risk of banks during the financial crisis: a higher amount of central bank

liquidity decreases corporate deposit spreads. In this subsection, we analyze possible

differences in the transmission of central bank liquidity in the cross section for low- versus

high-risk banks and augment equation (1) to estimate individual s for low- and high-risk

banks.


     -./0 = -. + ./3 + -/3 + .  × /0 +  HIJKA LM 

                                               +-./0       (2)


         We interact Risk, an indicator variable representing either High Bank Risk or Low Bank

Risk, with Central Bank Liquidity, to investigate the effect of central bank liquidity during the

financial crisis. In different specifications, we further include firm x year-month fixed effects

(-/3 ), bank x year-month fixed effects (./3 ), and bank x firm fixed effects (aOP ). The model is

estimated via OLS.

         Our empirical approach provides an unbiased estimate of the effect of central bank

liquidity on deposit spreads only if central bank liquidity is exogenously determined, which

might be a strong assumption. Central bank liquidity might respond to the availability of

interbank, corporate or retail deposits for banks. Moreover, other unobserved factors that

differentially affect deposit spreads of high- versus low-risk banks might be correlated with the

ECB's supply of liquidity. For example, the ECB might increase liquidity in a situation in which

we observe a flight-to-quality from depositors who shift deposits from high- to low-risk

banks.10 Similarly, high-risk banks might have high-risk customers whose credit quality further

deteriorates when economic conditions worsen, adversely affecting the risk of their respective


10
 Strong banks might even bid strategically in central bank tenders (Fecht, Nyborg, and Rocholl, 2011; Cassola,
Hortacsu, and Kastl, 2013) and deliberately under-provide lending to weaker banks (Acharya, Gromb, and
Yorulmazer, 2012).

                                                     17
bank; the latter, in turn, might need to increase deposit spreads even further to obtain funding.

In these situations, our coefficients might be biased.

        In a first step, we sequentially add control variables and fixed effects and compare the

coefficient of our endogenous variable (Central Bank Liquidity × Risk) across different

specifications. Panel A of Table 3 reports the result for the crisis until the full-allotment period.

                                               [Table 3 here]

        Column (1) shows the results without any control variables or fixed effects. We add

bank risk x time (year-month) fixed effects in column (2) to control for specific shocks to high-

and low-risk banks in a given month that affect both central bank liquidity provision as well as

deposit spreads and further include firm fixed effects, as firms might differentially price

deposits for high- and low-risk banks. We add bank x time (year-month) fixed effects in column

(3) to account for the fact that shocks might occur not (only) at the bank-risk but also at the

bank level. In column (4), we add firm x time (year-month) and firm x bank fixed effects, which

proxy for the supply of deposits by firms and a possible match of firms with banks.11

        The coefficient of Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk is negative and

economically and statistically significant and even somewhat increases in magnitude across all

specifications. The coefficient of Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk is insignificantly

different from zero across all specifications. A Wald test under the null hypothesis that these

coefficients are equivalent is rejected at the 1% significance level. In other words, we observe

a differential effect of central bank liquidity on deposit spreads of high- versus low-risk banks

in the financial crisis before the full-allotment period.

        In Panel B of Table 3 we repeat these tests for observations during the full-allotment

period. In the specification without any control variables, we show that central bank liquidity

reduces deposit spreads for both high- and low-risk banks (and the coefficients are



11
  We provide a formal test of matching of firms with banks in individual deposit auctions (i.e. on a transaction
level) in Online Appendix D3.

                                                      18
insignificantly different). This result extends to all specifications. Notably, central bank

liquidity alone explains about 22% of the variation in corporate deposit spreads. We then add

our different fixed effects as described above. The change of the coefficient of our interaction

terms is small across specifications and the adjusted R2 already increases to 0.83 when

saturating the model. That is, any effect of unobservable factors that we cannot control for has

to be large per (remaining) R2 to reduce the coefficient to zero (Altonji et al., 2005; Oster,

2019).

         What explains the differential transmission of aggregate liquidity on deposit spreads

before the ECB implemented the full-allotment framework, and what changed afterwards? At

the beginning of the financial crisis, credit market shocks transmitted into funding markets that

became increasingly stressed. Banks started hoarding liquidity as a precautionary measure to

ensure the availability of liquidity for day-to-day operations (Heider et al., 2015). Aggregate

liquidity, in turn, was insufficiently distributed in the interbank market. At that time, the ECB

only allocated enough aggregate liquidity for banks to fulfill their reserve requirements. Our

deposit spread differential evidence suggests that central bank liquidity during this phase was

insufficient to reduce funding risk of both low- and high-risk banks.12 High-risk banks needed

to pay substantially higher deposit spreads to compensate depositors and attract funds. The

differential effect of ECB liquidity on deposit spreads dissipated after the ECB stepped in as a

LOLR and introduced its full-allotment policy, allotting liquidity as requested by European

banks in full.13

5.3. Tracing out corporate deposit demand

Our approach so far does not allow us to clearly isolate the effect of central bank liquidity on




12
   The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) even reports that borrowing from a central bank might have been
a stigma elevating funding problems of high-risk banks even further.
13
   Our results do not imply a reduction in market discipline due to ECB liquidity provision. In unreported tests, we
show that the deposit spread differential between high- and low-risk bank does not change when liquidity
increases. Overall, the evidence shown in this paper suggests that the deposit market is not characterized by market
discipline and that bank risk is not priced in corporate deposits.

                                                        19
banks' demand for corporate deposits. We next use a system of three equations to trace out the

deposit demand curve, which requires instruments that shift central bank liquidity as well

instruments that shift the corporate supply of deposits that are orthogonal to banks' demand for

deposits. In all specifications, the unit of observations is a bank-firm-week. All specifications

use the same set of control variables as in column (4) of Table 3, and we add shifters for central

bank liquidity and firms' supply of deposits to estimate the coefficients of the deposit demand

equation. We describe the provision of central bank liquidity in equation (3):

                    -./0 = -. + ./A + -/A + /0
                                                                                              (3)
                 +/0 + . /A BC + -./0



       End of Reserve Maintenance Period is our instrument to shift central bank liquidity.

During the full-allotment period, the ECB provides the amount of liquidity as requested by

banks. Banks know the start and end date of each maintenance period and a bank's reserve

requirement is determined as an average over this period, which is usually one month.

Furthermore, at the height of a financial crisis, banks either demand liquidity or, if they have

already fulfilled their reserve requirements, hoard liquidity (Acharya and Merrouche, 2013).

The identifying assumption is that demand for central bank liquidity at the end of the

maintenance period is determined by a bank's reserve requirement, which is unrelated to

deposit spreads. In other words, End of Reserve Maintenance Period is defined as the week in

which the maintenance period ends.

        X is a vector of funding sources: interbank lending, retail and corporate deposits.

Similar to central bank liquidity, we use the log of the notional amounts, centered around their

2006 means. We obtain the data from the ECB website for interbank and retail deposits and use

the weekly total volume of deposits traded on the platform as our measure for corporate




                                               20
deposits.14 The ECB provides aggregate data on retail and interbank funds on a monthly basis.

         Equation (4) estimates firms' supply of deposits:


()-./0 = -. + ./A + -/A + .  × ` /0


         +/c + -./0 + . /A BC + -./0                                                                         (4)


where Excess Cash is a continuous measure of firms' aggregate quarterly excess cash holdings.

Ideally, we need an exogenous shock to a firm's cash holdings (e.g. a tax refund). We do not

know the identities of firms or their industries in our sample. We thus require a time-varying

shock to aggregate cash holdings to firms that is orthogonal to banks' demand for deposits. As

an alternative identification strategy, we incorporate excess cash holdings as an instrument. The

identifying assumption is that firms' aggregate excess cash holdings, which are measured

quarterly across all EU firms using variation across time, industries and countries, are

orthogonal to banks' demand for deposits. We derive this measure formally in Appendix 4.15

         With equation (5), we identify banks' demand for corporate deposits:


             -./0

                               = -. + ./A + -/A + .  ×  ` /0


                                  `                                                                          (5)
                               + (  )-./0 + . /A BC + -./0



The instruments that shift central bank liquidity and the supply of deposits allow us to estimate

the parameters of the demand curve. We estimate a system of equations via GMM with

observations in the full-allotment period similar to Röller and Waverman (2001) to impose

more structure on our data. We thereby account for simultaneity between deposit spreads,


14
   In unreported robustness tests, we also use the volume of corporate deposits from the ECB. The results are
very comparable.
15
   We also construct an indicator variable that is 1 if excess cash exceeds a long-run mean. As a third instrument,
we use an indicator variable Fourth Quarter of the Year that is 1 in the last three months of each year. Firms might
be more likely to deposit additional funds during periods that include several public holidays instead of, for
example, keeping them as cash for operational purposes. All tests using the different instruments give similar
results. We also estimate the system of equations using transaction-level data and a dummy variable for Friday as
an instrument. We provide all results in Online Appendix D4.

                                                        21
deposit amount and central bank liquidity and are able to trace out the deposit demand function.

This approach is more efficient than 2SLS (e.g. Cornwell et al., 1992; or Ashenfelter and Rouse,

1998). However, others have voiced concern with this approach given potential finite-sample

problems of GMM (e.g. Tauchen, 1986; Kocherlakota, 1990; or Hansen et al., 1996). We thus

compare the coefficients from this model with the OLS estimates from Table 3 when

interpreting our results.

                                              [Table 4 here]

       Column (1) of Table 4 shows the results from equation (3). The coefficient of the

instrument is negative and significant. ECB liquidity is lower at the end of the maintenance

period, suggesting that banks have, on average, already fulfilled their reserve requirements in

the last week of the maintenance period and require less central bank liquidity. Central bank

liquidity is negatively related to interbank lending, but positively related to retail and corporate

deposits. A possible explanation is the stress in interbank markets as well as the flight of retail

and corporate customers to (supposedly safe) liquidity, after numerous interventions in the

banking sector.

       Column (2) shows the results from equation (4) and provides coefficient estimates of

the supply curve for corporate deposits during the full-allotment period. The coefficient of our

instrument (Excess Cash) is, as expected, positive and significant. Firms have more cash to

deposit in quarters where firms, on average, hold more excess cash. Consistent with our results

in column (1), central bank liquidity (for both high- and low-risk banks) is positively correlated

with the supply of corporate deposits. The coefficient of Deposit Spread is also positive and

significant showing that--holding everything else constant--firms supply more deposits if

banks are willing to pay higher spreads. In other words, liquidity-constrained banks can access

more corporate deposit funding by offering higher spreads. This is an important result as it

highlights the importance of the corporate deposit market for banks, even in the full-allotment

period. The magnitude of the coefficient, however, is small suggesting that the supply of

                                                22
corporate deposits is relatively inelastic with respect to the deposit spread.

       The third column provides coefficient estimates of the deposit demand curve. The

coefficient of Log(Notional Deposit Amount) is negative with respect to deposit spreads. That

is, if the weekly provision of deposits is higher, then the marginal utility of having deposits is

lower, which decreases its opportunity cost, i.e. the deposit spread. The coefficient is both

statistically and economically meaningful. A one standard deviation increase in Log(Notional

Deposit Amount) decreases deposit spreads by about 1 bps (= -0.655 × 1.5), which is 5% of the

standard deviation of deposits spreads (and a quarter of the average deposit spread during this

period).

       The coefficients of the interaction terms of central bank liquidity and high and low bank

risk are negative and significant but there is no differential effect of central bank liquidity of

high- versus low-risk banks on deposit spreads as the Wald test suggests. That is, an increase

in central bank liquidity shifts the deposit demand curve inwards and both high- and low-risk

banks are only willing to pay less for corporate deposits, all else equal. The coefficient estimates

are (in absolute terms) somewhat lower compared to our OLS estimates. A one standard

deviation increase in central bank liquidity reduces deposit spreads by about 6 bps. However,

the coefficient estimates between both specifications are still close and they are both consistent

with the same narrative: the central bank provides sufficient liquidity that it reduces the

equilibrium price for corporate deposits. That is, monetary policy transmits through a demand

channel, reducing deposit spreads for depositors of both high- and low-risk banks.

6. Monetary policy and corporate loans

To investigate whether the transmission channel of monetary policy to the corporate loan

market is impaired, we analyze whether low- and high-risk banks pass along their lower funding

costs to their corporate clients during the full-allotment period. We match banks from the

corporate deposit data set to banks in DealScan and compare their lending and deposit-taking

behavior.

                                                23
6.1. Transmission of central bank liquidity to corporate loan spreads by bank risk

We first investigate the impact of central bank liquidity on corporate loan spreads using an

empirical set-up that is comparable to our prior analysis of corporate deposit rates in Section 5.

We use an average of the ECB liquidity over a three-month period prior to loan origination as

a measure of central bank liquidity.16 We control for different borrower characteristics that have

been shown to affect loan pricing such as total assets, leverage, current ratio, interest coverage,

market-to-book ratio and the percentage of tangible assets relative to total assets. We also

include bank-specific controls (such as total assets, asset growth, leverage, return on assets and

non-performing loans). Bank and borrower characteristics are lagged by one year. Additionally,

we control--at the transaction level--for loan size and maturity, the number of previous loans

of the borrower, whether the loan is secured and contains a performance pricing grid, and

market risk (three-month EURIBOR-EONIA swap spread). To improve our estimates and

address the possible endogeneity of central bank liquidity to the business cycle, we further

include (at quarterly frequency) GDP growth in the eurozone, the Composite Indicator of

Systemic Stress (CISS) and the main refinancing rate (which we refer to combined as "Macro

Environment" in the tables). All variables are described in detail in Appendix A1 but remain

unreported for brevity. All models also include loan purpose, loan type, borrower industry,

borrower rating and loan currency fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the borrower

level. We use the following regression specification:


     -.f = g-hfJ/A + .  × /cLM + ./BC + -.f                                                                   (6)

where the dependent variable is the all-in-spread-drawn (AISD) of loan k from bank j to firm i

(i.e. our unit of observation is the loan transaction). We interact . , an indicator variable

representing either High Bank Risk or Low Bank Risk, with Central Bank Liquidity to



16
  Loan negotiations take time to unfold before the loan contract is signed. Alternatively, we also use the average
of central bank liquidity over the week and the month prior to loan origination. The results do not change and are
unreported for brevity.

                                                       24
investigate the effect of average central bank liquidity over the previous quarter on loan spreads.

./BC is a vector of lagged bank, firm and loan characteristics as well as other controls described


above. g-hfJ/A are bank-risk x year fixed effects to control for effects on loan spreads that are

specific to either high- or low-risk banks and that might vary annually. Table 5 shows the results

of pooled OLS regressions using the AISD as the dependent variable during the financial crisis

period.17

         Panel A (Panel B) of Table 5 shows the results without (with) control variables and

fixed effects. Comparing the coefficients with and without control variables and the respective

impact on the R2 helps to further address endogeneity concerns that monetary conditions might

bias our point estimates, particularly during the full-allotment period, when liquidity conditions

were improved by the ECB. Unobserved factors that increase loan spreads could be positively

correlated with the ECB's supply of liquidity, suggesting that we might overestimate the effect

from the liquidity provision (Altonji et al., 2005; Oster, 2019). Standard errors are clustered at

the firm and at the week level using the methods in Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2011) and

Thompson (2011).

                                                  [Table 5 here]

         The results in column (1) of both Panel A and Panel B of Table 5 show that an increase

in central bank liquidity reduces loan spreads. Again, we find a differential effect for high-

versus low-risk banks (column (2)): while low-risk banks reduce loan spreads, the interaction

term with high-risk banks does not enter significantly into the regression. When we split the

overall sample into the financial crisis until the full-allotment period and the full-allotment

period, we find that an increase in central bank liquidity reduces loan spreads only when loans

are issued by low-risk banks, but not by high-risk banks in the full-allotment period

(columns (3)­(6)).

17
  We do not report the results for the pre-crisis period as we focus on monetary policy during the financial crisis.
In the pre-crisis period, we do not find a statistically or economically significant effect of central bank liquidity on
loan spreads for neither the low- nor high-risk banks.

                                                          25
         Comparing the coefficients in Panel A and Panel B of Table 5 shows that our point

estimate during the financial crisis period even decreases when we include control variables

and fixed effects (column (1)). During the full-allotment period, the coefficient somewhat

increases to -164 bps (column (6)) but remains both economically and statistically highly

significant. That is, loan spreads decrease by 27 bps when central bank liquidity increases by

one standard deviation (= -164 × 0.166). These estimates are thus likely in the upper bounds of

the true effect of central bank liquidity on loan spreads. Importantly, the adjusted R2 increases

from 0.04 to 0.74 in Column (6), i.e. any effect of an unobservable factor per (remaining) R2

has to be even larger (Altonji et al. 2005; Oster, 2019) such that the effect of central bank

liquidity becomes zero.

        Overall, and as our introductory quote suggests, monetary policy transmission during

periods of unconventional and expansive monetary policy depends on the stability of the

banking system: monetary policy might not transmit to the real sector if there are substantial

differences in bank balance-sheet strength across the euro area.18

6.2. Intensive versus extensive margin

6.2.1. Heckman selection model

A possible concern with our results might be that poorly capitalized banks charge higher interest

rates due to a matching of weak borrowers with weak banks during the full-allotment period.

We thus investigate the loan spreads of borrowers who borrow from the same group of either

low- or high-risk banks before and after the full-allotment period (intensive margin), as well as

the likelihood that firms switch to a new group of lenders during the full-allotment period

(extensive margin).

        We regress an indicator variable, which is 1 if the borrower does not switch between

risk groups and 0 otherwise, on borrower, bank, and other control variables as explained above.


18
  We focus on differences between the health of lead arrangers to gain an understanding of the transmission of
monetary policy. In unreported tests, we show that the presence of better capitalized banks in a lending syndicate
where the lead bank is weak somewhat increases the pass-through of monetary policy.

                                                       26
If firms and banks match only on quality, we would expect bank risk and other bank

characteristics to be different between borrowers who switch or do not switch banks. We use

an OLS, a probit, and a logit model without fixed effects, as well as an OLS model with bank,

time, bank risk-time, borrower industry and rating, and loan type, loan purpose, and loan

currency fixed effects.

                                          [Table 6 here]

       The results in Panel A of Table 6 shows that bank characteristics and bank risk are not

correlated with the firms' decisions to switch between bank risk groups. Neither our bank risk

indicator variable nor any of the banks' characteristics are usually statistically significant.

       We next investigate the effect of central bank liquidity on the loan spreads of borrowers

who do not switch between bank risk groups before and during the full-allotment period.

Column (1) of Panel B of Table 6 shows a pooled OLS regression model, while column (2)

reports the results of a Heckman selection model using the model employed for the results in

column (3) of Panel A of Table 6 as the first stage. The regression results confirm our earlier

results. In both models, an increase in central bank liquidity translates into lower loan spreads

for borrowers of low-risk banks also when we account for borrower­lender matching. The

coefficient for high-risk banks is insignificant in both specifications. The Wald test, under the

null hypothesis that the coefficients of the interaction terms are identical, can be rejected at the

5% level in both models. Thus, an increase in central bank liquidity reduces the loan spreads of

the borrowers of low-risk banks more, relative to high-risk banks in the full-allotment period.

6.2.2. Propensity score matching

To ensure that these results are not driven by differences in borrower risk between high- and

low-risk banks, we use different propensity score matching (PSM) models: nearest neighbor

matching with 10, 50, and 100 neighbors and kernel matching using both the Gaussian and the




                                                27
Epanechnikov kernel.19 We restrict the match of neighbors for the nearest neighbor matching

to a caliper of 0.1 and for the kernel matching to a bandwidth of 0.01 and use bootstrapped

standard errors.

                                                [Table 7 here]

         The results in Panel A of Table 7 show that in the full-allotment period, high-risk banks'

borrowers pay, on average, 120 bps more when using the nearest neighbor matching methods

and 100 bps more than low-risk banks' borrowers when we use the kernel matching methods

and. This difference is usually significant at the 1% level.

         We then focus on borrowers matched via PSM in multivariate regressions. For both the

nearest neighbor and the kernel matching, we use the nearest match to each treated firm within

the defined caliper or bandwidth (n=1). Panel B of Table 7 shows the results of regressions of

loan spreads on bank risk, central bank liquidity and bank control variables. We find that central

bank liquidity only reduces the loan interest rates of low-risk banks in the full-allotment period.

In Online Appendix G, we show that size, leverage, and current ratio are significantly correlated

with bank risk. We thus add interaction terms of these variables with central bank liquidity

using all loans issued in the full-allotment period to address further concerns that our results

are driven by riskier borrowers that are more affected by expansive monetary policy (Bernanke

and Gertler, 1995). The results are reported in Panel C of Table. The evidence reinforces our

earlier result that the loan-spread differential reflects an impaired transmission of monetary

policy because the banking system is weak.

7. Monetary policy transmission and the real economy

7.1. Monetary policy and loan maturity

While the ECB targets the short end of the yield curve, investments are long-term decisions and

dependent on the availability of funding liquidity at longer maturities. If the transmission


19
  We match borrowers in the full-allotment period based on total assets, leverage, current ratio, coverage, market-
to-book ratio, tangibility, year, borrower industry code, borrower rating, loan type, loan purpose, loan currency,
loan maturity, secured, loan amount, performance pricing, and the number of previous loans.

                                                        28
channel is impaired, we expect to see loan-spread differences between high- and low-risk banks,

particularly for long-maturity loans. We differentiate between short-, medium-, and long-term

loans, which have maturities of less than or equal to one year, one to five years or more than

five years, respectively, and report the results in Panel A of Table 8 for the full-allotment period.

                                          [Table 8 here]

       High- and low-risk banks reduce interest rates on short-term loans when central bank

liquidity increases during the full-allotment period. Wald tests suggest that the reduction is not

significantly different between both bank risk groups. In contrast, low-risk banks require

significantly lower interest rates for medium-term loans than high-risk banks when central bank

liquidity increases. Moreover, lower economic significance for medium- relative to short-term

loans of low-risk banks suggest that the ECB needs longer-term liquidity to influence long-term

loans--importantly, however, this is true after financial stability has been restored. Elevated

loan spreads for medium-term maturities could suggest that high-risk banks are reaching for

yield. We thus run our regressions only on the intensive margin (column (3)). In column (4),

we further include interaction terms of central bank liquidity with borrower size, leverage and

current ratio as in Table 7 to entertain the possibility that our results reflect high-risk banks

reaching for yield. Our results remain qualitatively unchanged. Overall, we find that short-term

liquidity provision by the ECB has an effect in both deposit and loan markets for maturities

below one year, but not for medium- and long-term maturities, for which the transmission

channel is impaired.

7.2. Borrower financial constraints

What frictions prevent borrowers from switching from high- to low-risk banks if borrowing at

high-risk banks is more expensive? A plausible explanation is that borrowers are financially

constrained and thus cannot easily substitute external financing from weak banks. As in Fazzari,

Hubbard and Petersen (1988), Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) or Kashyap, Lamont and Stein

(1994), we use firm size or the availability of debt ratings (from S&P) as proxies for borrowers'

                                                 29
financial constraints and reliance on external funding. We classify firms as small, medium and

large using the 33rd and 67th percentile of total assets of all firms in the data sample.

         In Panel B of Table 8, we find that the transmission of central bank liquidity is impaired

for bank-dependent firms at high-risk banks. High-risk banks do not reduce the loan spreads

for small- and medium-sized firms as well as for firms without a public debt rating, even when

central bank liquidity increases. In contrast, both high- and low-risk banks require lower loan

spreads from large firms and from firms with a public debt rating, when central bank liquidity

increases.

7.3. Investment and financing decisions

Financing constraints of high-risk bank borrowers might affect their investment and financing

decisions (Chodorow-Reich, 2014). We collect capital structure data from Capital IQ (term

loans, revolving loans and notional amount of debt outstanding) and investment variables from

Compustat (liabilities, payouts, capital expenditures, asset growth, investments, and number of

employees) for the 2005­2013 period. Our focus is on borrowers from either a low- or a high-

risk bank before and after the full allotment, which we match using PSM. We then regress

changes in firm characteristics on High Bank Risk using the PSM sample over a period of one

(t+1), two (t+2), and three years (t+3) after a firm received a loan in the full-allotment period

and report the results in Table 9.20 For brevity, we only report the coefficient of High Bank Risk.

                                                 [Table 9 here]

         We find that, relative to borrowers from low-risk banks, the percentage of term loans of

high-risk bank borrowers decreases by about six percentage points in the third year after loan

issuance, while the percentage of revolving loans increases by 5.5 percentage points. This result

is intuitive. The ECB provides high-risk banks with sufficient liquidity to become a credible



20
   We also investigate these changes for one, two, and three years before a firm has received a loan in the full-
allotment period to check the parallel trend assumption. Our results show that the characteristics of high-risk bank
borrowers develop comparably to those of low-risk bank borrowers prior to obtaining a loan during the full-
allotment period.

                                                        30
liquidity provider for borrowers. Consistently, we do not find evidence that high-risk bank

borrowers draw down their credit lines more than low-risk bank borrowers, suggesting that the

result is due to a change in the supply of credit by banks.

       We also find somewhat negative effects on investment and employment of firms

borrowing from high-risk banks. In years two and three after loan origination in the full-

allotment period, payouts, capital expenditures, investments and employment are all lower for

high-risk bank borrowers compared to that of low-risk bank borrowers. Lawrence et al. (2005)

argue that after a monetary policy shock, corporate real investment may have a lagged response

function. Our results, however, are only significant at the 5% or 10% level. A possible

explanation might be the number of large firms in our sample, who are less financially

constrained.

8. Conclusion

Banking sector weakness can impair the transmission of monetary policy. Using deposit and

loan transaction data for Europe during the period from January 2006 to June 2010, we

document that an increase in ECB liquidity up to levels demanded by banks ("full allotment")

results in (i) the same decrease of deposit spreads for low- and high-risk banks, and (ii) a

reduction of loan spreads charged by low-risk banks, but (iii) has almost no effect on the loan

spreads of high-risk banks. While borrowers of high-risk banks increase their credit lines

relative to their term-loan borrowing following the liquidity provision by the ECB, these firms

also invest less, have lower capital expenditures and reduce the number of employees.

       Our results are consistent with high-risk banks not passing on funding cost advantages

to their borrowers. With the ability to charge higher loan spreads from bank-dependent

customers, they might benefit from an increase in central bank liquidity by not passing on their

lower funding costs, which increases their net worth and relaxes both regulatory and economic

constraints (Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2016, and Brunnermeier and Koby, 2019). An

alternative view is that high-risk banks are reaching for yield. Our previous tests show that

                                               31
riskier borrowers do not switch to high-risk banks during the full-allotment period (extensive

margin) and we observe the main results on the intensive margin. However, also on the

intensive margin, risk-shifting of high-risk banks can occur as a consequence of high-risk banks

not passing on lower funding costs to borrowers. That is, keeping interest rates higher might

make firms endogenously riskier. Thus, on the intensive margin, our results are also consistent

with a reaching-for-yield interpretation.

       The ECB's introduction of the full allotment in October 2008 was also a reaction to

banks' liquidity problems in the interbank market. Prior research has largely ignored

problems in funding markets, focusing exclusively on the transmission to the real economy

via loan markets. However, an impaired transmission channel might originate because

funding markets are stressed and the design and the effectiveness of monetary policy

measures might therefore crucially depend on both markets.

       Thus, it is an important question whether the transmission of monetary policy to the real

economy is impaired even after the ECB has addressed the problems in the funding market.

Our results suggest that the ECB has indeed addressed the funding problems with the

introduction of the full allotment. However, we also find evidence that the transmission channel

of monetary policy in the euro area is still impaired in the loan market, which is consistent with

the view that banking sector balance-sheet weakness limited the role of the ECB as LOLR

during the financial crisis. In other words, we have to look at both the deposit and the loan

market to separate whether bank balance-sheet effects are at work, even after the ECB has

addressed the funding problems of banks. The deposit data are key as they highlight that even

when funding conditions are restored to the same level by the ECB for low-risk and high-risk

banks, the loan outcomes are not highlighting a divergence between liquidity- and solvency-

induced outcomes for banks.

       Overall, our results suggest that banks' capital constraints at the time of an easing of

monetary policy pose a challenge to the effectiveness of the bank-lending channel and the

                                               32
effectiveness of the central bank as a lender of last resort. These results have potentially

important implications for other (unconventional) monetary policy measures in the eurozone

such as the long-term refinancing operations (LTRO), which were also undertaken in the

presence of relatively weak bank balance sheets. Finally, while we focused on large firms due

to data availability constraints, the transmission of monetary policy by weak banks is likely to

be even further restricted for financially constrained firms. This is worthy of further inquiry to

understand the full economic magnitude of the effects we have unearthed.




                                               33
References


Acharya, Viral V., Denis Gromb, and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2012, Imperfect competition in the
interbank market for liquidity as a rationale for central banking, American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 4, 184­217.


Acharya, Viral V., and Ouarda Merrouche, 2013, Precautionary hoarding of liquidity and
interbank markets: evidence from the subprime crisis, Review of Finance 17, 107­160.


Afonso, Gara, Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar, 2011, Stressed, not frozen: the federal
funds market in the financial crisis, Journal of Finance 66, 1109­1139.


Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, 2005, Selection on Observed and
Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools, Journal of Political
Economy 113(1), 151-84.


Ashenfelter, Orley, and Cecilia Rouse, 1998, Income, Schooling, and Ability: Evidence from a
New Sample of Identical Twins, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1), 253­284.


Baum, Christopher F., Schaffer, Mark E., and Stillman, Steven, 2007, Enhanced routines for
instrumental variables/GMM estimation and testing, Boston College Department of Economics
Working Paper No. 667.


Bernanke, Ben S., 2007, The financial accelerator and the credit channel, in Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta, Presented at the The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first
Century Conference, Atlanta, Georgia.


Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder, 1988, Credit, money, and aggregate demand, The
American Economic Review 78, 435­439.


Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business
Fluctuations, American Economic Review 79, 14-31.


Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1995, Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary
policy transmission, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27­48.
                                             34
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2016, The I Theory of Money, Working Paper,
Princeton University.


Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Yann Koby, 2019, The reversal interest rate: The effective lower
bound of monetary policy, Working Paper.


Cameron, A.C., J.B. Gelbach, and & D.L. Miller, 2011, Robust Inference With Multiway
Clustering, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics Vol. 29(2).


Campello, Murillo, 2002. Internal capital markets in financial conglomerates: evidence from
small bank responses to monetary policy. Journal of Finance 57, 2773-2805.


Cassola, Nuno, Ali Hortacsu, and Jakub Kastl, 2013, The 2007 subprime market crisis through
the lens of European central bank auctions for short-term funds, Econometrica 81, 1309­1345.


Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014, The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-
level evidence from the 2008-9 financial crisis, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1­
59.


Cornwell, Christopher, Peter Schmidt, and Donald Wyhowski, 1992, Simultaneous equations
and panel data, Journal of Econometrics 51, 151­181.


Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven, and Gustavo A. Suarez, 2017, Bank leverage and monetary
policy's risk-taking channel: Evidence from the united states, The Journal of Finance 72, 613­
654.


Drechsler, Itamar, Alexy Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2017, The deposit channel of monetary
policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4), 1819­1876.


Eisenschmidt, Jens, Astrid Hirsch, and Tobias Linzert, 2009, Bidding behaviour in the ECB's
main refinancing operations during the financial crisis, Working Paper No. 1052, European
Central Bank.



                                             35
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, Bruce C. Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and
corporate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1988, 141­206.


Fecht, Falko, Kjell G. Nyborg, and Jörg Rocholl, 2011, The price of liquidity: The effects of
market conditions and bank characteristics, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 344­362.


Frésard, Laurent, and Carolina Salva, 2010, The Value of Excess Cash and Corporate
Governance: Evidence from U.S. Cross-listings, Journal of Financial Economics 98, 359-384.


Gambacorta, Leonardo, Paolo E. Mistrulli, 2004. Does bank capital affect lending behavior?
Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 436-457.


Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist, 1994, Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior
of small manufacturing firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 309­340.


Gomez, M., Landier, A., Sraer, D., Thesmar, D., 2016. Banks' exposure to interest rate risk and
the transmission of monetary policy. Unpublished working paper. National Bureau of
Economic Research.


Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, and Amir Yaron, 1996. Finite-sample properties of some
GMM models, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14(3), 262­280.


Heider, Florian, Marie Hoerova, and Cornelia Holthausen, 2015, Liquidity Hoarding and
Interbank Market Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk, Journal of Financial Economics
118, 336­354.


Heider, Florian, Farzad Saidi, and Glenn Schepens, 2019, Life below zero: Bank lending under
negative policy rates. Review of Financial Studies 32(1), 3728-3761.


Ioannidou, Vasso, Steven Ongena, and José-Luis Peydró, 2015, Monetary policy, risk-taking,
and pricing: Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment, Review of Finance 19, 95­144.


Ivashina, Victoria, 2009, Asymmetric information effects on loan spreads, Journal of Financial
Economics 92, 300­319.


                                              36
Ivashina, Victoria, and David Scharfstein, 2010, Bank lending during the financial crisis of
2008, Journal of Financial Economics 97(3), 319­338.


Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José L. Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2014, Hazardous Times
for Monetary Policy: What do 23 Million Loans Say About the Impact of Monetary Policy on
Credit Risk-Taking?, Econometrica 82(2), 463­505.


Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José L. Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2012, Credit supply and
monetary policy: Identifying the bank balance-sheet channel with loan applications, American
Economic Review 102.


Kashyap Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1994, Monetary policy and bank lending, in N. Gregory
Mankiw, ed.: Monetary policy (University of Chicago Press).


Kashyap Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1995. The impact of monetary policy on bank balance
sheets. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42, pp. 151-195.


Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, What do a million observations on banks say
about the transmission of monetary policy?, The American Economic Review 90, 407­428.


Kashyap Anil K., Owen Lamont, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1994, Credit conditions and the cyclical
behavior of inventories, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 565­592.


Kocherlakota, Narayana R., 1990, On tests of representative consumer asset pricing models,
Journal of Monetary Economics 26(2), 285­304.


Kishan, Ruby P., Timothy P. Opiela, 2000. Bank size, bank capital, and the bank lending
channel. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32, 121-141.


Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, 2005, Nominal rigidities
and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy, Journal of Political Economy 113, 1­
45.



                                            37
Oster, Emily, 2019. Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: theory and evidence.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37, 187-204.


Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren, 1995, Bank lending and the transmission of monetary policy,
FRB Boston Conference Series, 47­68.


Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren, 2015, The role of banks in the transmission of monetary
policy, in Berger, Allen N., P. Molyneux, and John O.S. Wilson, ed.: The Oxford Handbook of
Banking (1ed), pp. 453-473.


Popov, Alexander, and Neeltje van Horen, 2015, Exporting sovereign stress: Evidence from
syndicated bank lending during the euro area sovereign debt crisis, Review of Finance 19(5),
1825­1866.


Röller, Lars-Hendrik, and Leonard Waverman, 2001, Telecommunications Infrastructure and
Economic Development: A Simultaneous Approach, American Economic Review 91(4), 909­
923.


Tauchen, George, 1986, Statistical properties of generalized method-of-moments estimators of
structural parameters obtained from financial market data, Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 4(4), 397­416.

Thompson, S., 2011, Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and time,
Journal of Financial Economics, 99, 1:1­10.




                                             38
Figure 1. Central bank liquidity
Figure 1 shows the weekly aggregate market liquidity provided to the banking sector by the ECB (Central Bank
Liquidity) during the January 2006 to June 2010 period. It is calculated in Panel A as the sum of banks' current account
and deposit facility holdings with the ECB, centered around its mean value in 2006. In Panel B, Excess Liquidity is
calculated as the sum of banks' current account and deposit facility holdings with the ECB divided by the minimum
reserve requirement imposed by the ECB for the specific reserve maintenance period, minus 1. The vertical dashed
lines indicate (1) the start of the financial crisis in August 2007; (2) the start of the full allotment period in October
2008; and (3) the first longer-term refinancing operation (LTRO) with a maturity of one year as a fixed rate tender
procedure with full allotment in June 2009. All variables are defined in Appendix A1.

Panel A. Central bank liquidity

   400         billion 

   350

   300

   250

   200

   150

   100

      50

      0

   -50
           6




                                                7




                                                                                     8




                                                                                                                              9




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                    6




                                                         7




                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                       9




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                               6




                                                                    7




                                                                                                             8




                                                                                                                                                  9
                                       6




                                                                            7




                                                                                                                     8




                                                                                                                                                          9
         0




                                                 0




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                    1
                 00




                                                      00




                                                                                               00




                                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                                                         01
                                     00




                                                                          00




                                                                                                                   00




                                                                                                                                                        00
                            00




                                                                 00




                                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                                               00
      20




                                              20




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                 20
                -2




                                                     -2




                                                                                              -2




                                                                                                                                   -2




                                                                                                                                                                        -2
                        l-2




                                                             l-2




                                                                                                      l-2




                                                                                                                                           l-2
                                     -2




                                                                          -2




                                                                                                                   -2




                                                                                                                                                        -2
   n-




                                           n-




                                                                                n-




                                                                                                                         n-




                                                                                                                                                              n-
               pr




                                                     pr




                                                                                          pr




                                                                                                                                   pr




                                                                                                                                                                        pr
                                   ct




                                                                        ct




                                                                                                                 ct




                                                                                                                                                      ct
                     Ju




                                                          Ju




                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                        Ju
 Ja




                                          Ja




                                                                               Ja




                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                             Ja
                               O




                                                                    O




                                                                                                             O




                                                                                                                                                  O
           A




                                                 A




                                                                                          A




                                                                                                                               A




                                                                                                                                                                    A
Panel B. Excess liquidity

   180         %

   160
   140
   120
   100
    80
    60
    40
    20
      0
   -20
   -40
                                       6




                                                                            7




                                                                                                                     8




                                                                                                                                                          9
           6




                                                7




                                                                                     8




                                                                                                                              9




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                    6




                                                         7




                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                       9




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                               6




                                                                    7




                                                                                                             8




                                                                                                                                                  9
                                     00




                                                                          00




                                                                                                                   00




                                                                                                                                                        00
         0




                                                 0




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                    1
                 00




                                                      00




                                                                                               00




                                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                                                         01
                            00




                                                                 00




                                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                                               00
      20




                                              20




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                     -2




                                                                          -2




                                                                                                                   -2




                                                                                                                                                        -2
                -2




                                                     -2




                                                                                              -2




                                                                                                                                   -2




                                                                                                                                                                        -2
                        l-2




                                                             l-2




                                                                                                      l-2




                                                                                                                                           l-2
   n-




                                           n-




                                                                                n-




                                                                                                                         n-




                                                                                                                                                              n-
                                   ct




                                                                        ct




                                                                                                                 ct




                                                                                                                                                      ct
               pr




                                                     pr




                                                                                          pr




                                                                                                                                   pr




                                                                                                                                                                        pr
                     Ju




                                                          Ju




                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                        Ju
 Ja




                                          Ja




                                                                               Ja




                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                             Ja
                               O




                                                                    O




                                                                                                             O




                                                                                                                                                  O
           A




                                                 A




                                                                                          A




                                                                                                                               A




                                                                                                                                                                    A




                                                                                              39
Figure 2. Short-term interest rates and central bank liquidity
Panel A of Figure 2 shows the development of the interest rates for the ECB Deposit Facility, the ECB Main
Refinancing Operations, and the ECB Marginal Lending Facility aggregated to the weekly level, together with the
average weekly Corporate Short-Term Deposit Rate in percent over the January 2006 to June 2010 period. Panel B
illustrates the development of the Deposit Spread (solid line, in bps, axis on the left) and the Adjusted Liquidity in the
Banking Sector (dashed line,  billion, axis on the right), both aggregated to the weekly level. The vertical dashed
lines indicate (1) the start of the financial crisis in August 2007; (2) the start of the full allotment period in October
2008; and (3) the first longer-term refinancing operation (LTRO) with a maturity of one year as a fixed rate tender
procedure with full allotment in June 2009. All variables are defined in Appendix A1.

Panel A: Short-term interest rates
 6.00 %

 5.00

 4.00

 3.00

 2.00

 1.00

 0.00
                 6




                                                     7




                                                                                                8




                                                                                                                                             9




                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                          6




                                                               7




                                                                                                             8




                                                                                                                                                          9
      06




                                           07




                                                                                     08




                                                                                                                                  09




                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                  6




                                                                          7




                                                                                                                        8




                                                                                                                                                                  9
               -0




                                                    -0




                                                                                               -0




                                                                                                                                            -0




                                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                      l-0




                                                           l-0




                                                                                                         l-0




                                                                                                                                                      l-0
                                -0




                                                                        -0




                                                                                                                     -0




                                                                                                                                                                -0
   n-




                                        n-




                                                                                  n-




                                                                                                                               n-




                                                                                                                                                                         n-
            pr




                                                   pr




                                                                                           pr




                                                                                                                                        pr




                                                                                                                                                                                  pr
                              ct




                                                                      ct




                                                                                                                   ct




                                                                                                                                                              ct
                     Ju




                                                          Ju




                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                   Ju
  Ja




                                      Ja




                                                                              Ja




                                                                                                                            Ja




                                                                                                                                                                       Ja
                              O




                                                                   O




                                                                                                                 O




                                                                                                                                                              O
           A




                                                A




                                                                                          A




                                                                                                                                        A




                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                    ECB Deposit Facility                                         Main Refinancing Operations
                                                    ECB Lending Facility                                         Corporate Short-Term Deposits


Panel B: Central bank liquidity and deposit spread
 400       bps                                                                                                                                                                    billion    350

 350
                                                                                                                                                                                             250
 300

 250                                                                                                                                                                                         150

 200
                                                                                                                                                                                             50
 150

 100                                                                                                                                                                                         -50

  50
                                                                                                                                                                                             -150
   0

  -50                                                                                                                                                                                        -250
                 6




                                                    7




                                                                                              8




                                                                                                                                         9




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                          6




                                                              7




                                                                                                          8




                                                                                                                                                      9
      06




                                          07




                                                                                 08




                                                                                                                               09




                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                  6




                                                                       7




                                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                                              9
               -0




                                                   -0




                                                                                          -0




                                                                                                                                        -0




                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                      l-0




                                                          l-0




                                                                                                      l-0




                                                                                                                                                  l-0
                                -0




                                                                     -0




                                                                                                                   -0




                                                                                                                                                            -0
   n-




                                       n-




                                                                              n-




                                                                                                                            n-




                                                                                                                                                                      n-
            pr




                                                pr




                                                                                          pr




                                                                                                                                    pr




                                                                                                                                                                              pr
                              ct




                                                                   ct




                                                                                                                 ct




                                                                                                                                                          ct
                     Ju




                                                         Ju




                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                 Ju
 Ja




                                      Ja




                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                                          Ja




                                                                                                                                                                  Ja
                              O




                                                                  O




                                                                                                              O




                                                                                                                                                          O
           A




                                               A




                                                                                      A




                                                                                                                                    A




                                                                                                                                                                              A




                                                        Deposit Spread                              Adjusted Liquidity in Banking Sector




                                                                                              40
Figure 3. Bank risk and deposit and loan spreads
Figure 3 shows banks' average five-year CDS Spread by bank risk category (Panel A), the Deposit Spread by bank
risk category (Panel B), and the Loan Spread difference of borrowers on the intensive margin by bank risk category
(Panel C) in basis points from January 2006 to June 2010. The vertical dashed lines indicate (1) the start of the financial
crisis in August 2007; (2) the start of the full allotment period in October 2008; and (3) the first longer-term refinancing
operation (LTRO) with a maturity of one year as a fixed rate tender procedure with full allotment in June 2009. All
variables are defined in Appendix A1 and Online Appendix A.

Panel A: Banks' CDS spread by bank risk
250       bps



200


150


100


 50


  0
                                         6




                                                                                 7




                                                                                                                    8




                                                                                                                                                         9
                  6




                                                              7




                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                      9




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                             6




                                                                        7




                                                                                                            8




                                                                                                                                               9
    06




                                                    07




                                                                                         08




                                                                                                                            09




                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                       -0




                                                                               -0




                                                                                                                  -0




                                                                                                                                                         -0
              -0




                                                             -0




                                                                                                  -0




                                                                                                                                     -0




                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                         l-0




                                                                    l-0




                                                                                                        l-0




                                                                                                                                           l-0
 n-




                                                 n-




                                                                                      n-




                                                                                                                         n-




                                                                                                                                                                n-
                                     ct




                                                                             ct




                                                                                                                ct




                                                                                                                                                       ct
              pr




                                                          pr




                                                                                              pr




                                                                                                                                 pr




                                                                                                                                                                           pr
                        Ju




                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                       Ju




                                                                                                                                          Ju
Ja




                                                Ja




                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                              Ja
                                 O




                                                                             O




                                                                                                                O




                                                                                                                                                   O
          A




                                                         A




                                                                                              A




                                                                                                                                 A




                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                             High Bank Risk                     Low Bank Risk



Panel B: Deposit spread by bank risk

  150         bps



  100


     50


      0


  -50


 -100
                                            6




                                                                                 7




                                                                                                                    8




                                                                                                                                                        9
                    6




                                                               7




                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                      9




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                 6




                                                                         7




                                                                                                            8




                                                                                                                                               9
         06




                                                     07




                                                                                         08




                                                                                                                            09




                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                        -0




                                                                               -0




                                                                                                                  -0




                                                                                                                                                     -0
                   -0




                                                              -0




                                                                                                  -0




                                                                                                                                     -0




                                                                                                                                                                           -1
                             l-0




                                                                     l-0




                                                                                                        l-0




                                                                                                                                           l-0
      n-




                                                  n-




                                                                                      n-




                                                                                                                         n-




                                                                                                                                                               n-
                                      ct




                                                                             ct




                                                                                                                ct




                                                                                                                                                   ct
               pr




                                                             pr




                                                                                              pr




                                                                                                                                 pr




                                                                                                                                                                        pr
                         Ju




                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                       Ju




                                                                                                                                          Ju
  Ja




                                                Ja




                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                              Ja
                                     O




                                                                             O




                                                                                                                O




                                                                                                                                                   O
              A




                                                          A




                                                                                              A




                                                                                                                                 A




                                                                                                                                                                       A




                                                                             High Bank Risk                     Low Bank Risk




                                                                                                  41
Panel C: Loan spread difference between low- and high-risk bank borrowers (intensive margin)

  200
           bps

  150

  100

   50

    0

  -50

 -100

 -150

 -200
                 6




                                                    7




                                                                                        8




                                                                                                                           9




                                                                                                                                                              0
                          6




                                                             7




                                                                                                 8




                                                                                                                                    9
      06




                                          07




                                                                              08




                                                                                                                 09




                                                                                                                                                    10
                                  6




                                                                      7




                                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                            9
               -0




                                                   -0




                                                                                       -0




                                                                                                                          -0




                                                                                                                                                             -1
                      l-0




                                                         l-0




                                                                                             l-0




                                                                                                                                l-0
                                -0




                                                                   -0




                                                                                                       -0




                                                                                                                                          -0
   n-




                                       n-




                                                                           n-




                                                                                                              n-




                                                                                                                                                 n-
            pr




                                               pr




                                                                                   pr




                                                                                                                      pr




                                                                                                                                                         pr
                              ct




                                                                 ct




                                                                                                     ct




                                                                                                                                        ct
                     Ju




                                                        Ju




                                                                                            Ju




                                                                                                                               Ju
  Ja




                                      Ja




                                                                          Ja




                                                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                                                                Ja
                              O




                                                                 O




                                                                                                     O




                                                                                                                                        O
           A




                                               A




                                                                                   A




                                                                                                                      A




                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                     Difference High minus Low Bank Risk




                                                                                   42
Table 1. Descriptive statistics
This table shows the descriptive statistics of variables for the January 2006 to June 2010 period. This period is also split into the financial crisis until the full allotment
period from August 9, 2007 to October 7, 2008, and the full allotment period from October 8, 2008 until June 30, 2010. All variables are defined in Appendix A1.
Further descriptive statistics are shown in Online Appendix B. The Adjusted Liquidity in the Banking Sector is shown without taking the logarithm before centering it.
The Deposit Rate is reported in basis points (bps) per annum using an actual/360-day count convention. The Deposit Spread is calculated as the difference between the
deposit rate and the ECB deposit facility rate.

                                                             Total Period                          Crisis until Full Allotment                Full Allotment Period
                                                        (2006:Q1­2010:Q2)                         (Aug. 9, 2007­Oct. 7, 2008)                (Oct. 8, 2008­2010:Q2)
                                                43 banks; 40,638 deposits; 2,632 loans        35 banks; 12,078 deposits; 725 loans     40 banks; 20,104 deposits; 775 loans
                                                 Mean          St.Dev.        Median          Mean          St.Dev.        Median       Mean         St.Dev.        Median
CENTRAL BANK LIQUIDITY
Adjusted Central Bank Liquidity ( bn)            81.80          98.98          34.84          35.21          28.50          33.70      183.14         88.14         201.23
CORPORATE DEPOSITS
Deposit Rate (bps)                               226.70        162.88         274.00          398.46         21.00         399.00       81.15         94.19          29.00
Deposit Spread (bps)                             51.41          50.36          58.00          93.29          19.16          98.00       4.16          20.80          0.00
log(Notional Deposit Amount)                     17.15          1.62           17.37          17.20          1.71           17.50       17.14          1.50          17.19
Average Duration (days)                           1.86          1.55           1.00            1.83          1.53           1.00        1.89           1.56          1.00
Bank Competition                                  0.10          0.02           0.10            0.10          0.02           0.10        0.10           0.02          0.09
LOAN CHARACTERISTICS
All in Spread Drawn (bps)                        183.45        145.66         175.00          160.40        128.66         125.00      306.52         148.86        300.00
Log(Maturity in Months)                           3.83          0.64           4.09            3.71          0.72           4.09        3.64           0.55          3.58
Log(Facility Size)                               19.76          1.28           19.81          20.01          1.36           20.18       19.74          1.08          19.78
Log(Number of Previous Loans of Borrower)         1.53          0.91           1.61            1.41          0.94           1.61        1.76           0.87          1.95
BANK CHARACTERISTICS
Low Bank Risk CDS spread                         49.59          34.40          50.00          61.95          30.40          58.00       71.32         27.46          68.00
High Bank Risk CDS spread                        109.87         64.38         104.00          110.20         44.80         120.00      126.85         60.69         124.00
Total Assets ( million)                          13.28          0.74           13.29          13.33          0.70           13.31       13.30          0.80          13.29




                                                                                         43
Table 2. Transmission of monetary policy to deposits
Table 2 reports OLS regression results of Deposit Spread on Aggregate Central Bank Liquidity, bank risk, and other
control variables using transaction data aggregated to the bank-firm-week level over different time periods. The
regressions include Log(Notional Deposit Amount) as the logarithm of the total deposited amount of a firm with a bank
over a week and Central Bank Liquidity as the average over this week. Further control variables are used with their
average values using all transactions of a firm with a bank over a week. Bank accounting variables are used as stated
in the annual report in the year prior to the transaction. The full specification is shown in an Online Appendix. Central
Bank Liquidity is measured as the adjusted liquidity in the banking sector. High Bank Risk is a dummy variable defined
using banks' CDS spreads and explained in detail in Online Appendix A. All variables are defined in Appendix A1.
The statistical significance of results is indicated by * = 10% level, ** = 5% level and *** = 1% level using two-way
clustered standard errors at the bank and at the week level using the method as proposed by Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller (2011) and Thompson (2011).

                                                                  Pre-Financial     Crisis Until Full   Full Allotment
                                                 Total Period
                                                                      Crisis           Allotment            Period
                                                     (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)
ECB Market Liquidity
Central Bank Liquidity                           -27.052***           4.426           -25.972***          -27.474***
High Bank Risk                                      0.621             0.193              1.193              2.974
Log(Notional Deposit Amount)                      -0.773**           -1.050*            -0.410**          -1.638***
Crisis Until Full Allotment                         1.534
Full Allotment Period                            -90.406***
Control Variables                                    Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
Firm FE                                              Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
Time (month) FE                                      Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
Observations                                       11,533             2,045              3,866              5,560
R-squared                                           0.933             0.374              0.341              0.604




                                                             44
Table 3. Transmission of monetary policy to deposits for high- versus low-risk banks
This table reports the OLS regression results of the Deposit Spread of corporate deposits on Central Bank Liquidity,
bank risk and further control variables aggregated to the bank-firm-week level. The regressions include Log(Notional
Deposit Amount) as the logarithm of the total deposited amount of a firm with a bank over a week. The table shows
the results of different regression specifications using data from the crisis until the full allotment period in Panel A and
from the full allotment period in Panel B. Central Bank Liquidity is measured as the adjusted liquidity in the banking
sector. High Bank Risk is a dummy variable defined using banks' CDS spreads and explained in detail in Online
Appendix A. All variables are defined in Appendix A1. All specifications include the same control variables as in
Table 2. The statistical significance of results is indicated by * = 10% level, ** = 5% level and *** = 1% level using
two-way clustered standard errors at the bank and at the week level using the method as proposed by Cameron, Gelbach
and Miller (2011) and Thompson (2011).

Panel A. Crisis until full allotment period
                                                  No Control       Bank Risk × Time                       Firm × Time and
                                                                                      Bank × Time FE
                                                  Variables              FE                               Firm × Bank FE
                                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
ECB Market Liquidity
Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk            -18.837              -7.804             -9.219              -6.425
Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk            -25.041**           -30.979***         -31.129***         -32.151***
Log(Notional Deposit Amount)                                           -0.499*            -0.208*            -0.201**
Control Variables                                    No                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
Bank Risk × Time (month) FE                          No                  Yes                 No                 No
Bank × Time (month) FE                               No                  No                 Yes                 Yes
Firm FE                                              No                  Yes                Yes                 No
Firm × Time (month) FE                               No                  No                  No                 Yes
Firm × Bank FE                                       No                  No                  No                 Yes
Wald Test of Interaction Terms                      0.0547              0.0021             0.0046             0.0022
Observations                                        4,079               3,866              3,866               3,692
R-squared                                           0.037               0.355              0.441               0.550


Panel B. Full allotment period
                                                  No Control       Bank Risk × Time                       Firm × Time and
                                                                                      Bank × Time FE
                                                  Variables              FE                               Firm × Bank FE
                                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
ECB Market Liquidity
Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk           -31.497***          -27.721***         -27.000***         -26.792***
Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk            -39.347***          -25.773***         -28.483***         -31.483***
Log(Notional Deposit Amount)                                           -1.628**           -0.798**           -0.722***
Control Variables                                    No                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
Bank Risk × Time (month) FE                          No                  Yes                 No                 No
Bank × Time (month) FE                               No                  No                 Yes                 Yes
Firm FE                                              No                  Yes                Yes                 No
Firm × Time (month) FE                               No                  No                  No                 Yes
Firm × Bank FE                                       No                  No                  No                 Yes
Wald Test of Interaction Terms                      0.1846              0.6242             0.6063             0.2257
Observations                                        6,239               5,560              5,560               5,297
R-squared                                           0.224               0.614              0.784               0.833




                                                              45
Table 4. Tracing out corporate deposit demand
This table reports results to address possible endogeneity concerns associated with the transmission of ECB liquidity
to deposit spreads during the full allotment period. It shows the results of an estimation of a system of equations using
GMM including aggregate data at the bank-firm-week level. End of Maintenance Period is a dummy variable which
is 1 in the last week of a reserve maintenance period. Excess Cash is a continuous measure of firms' aggregate quarterly
excess cash holdings. Central Bank Liquidity is measured as the adjusted liquidity in the banking sector. High Bank
Risk is a dummy variable defined using banks' CDS spreads and explained in detail in Online Appendix A. All
variables are defined in Appendix A1. System identification is tested following Baum, Schaffer, and Stillman (2007).
The statistical significance of results is indicated by * = 10% level, ** = 5% level and *** = 1% level using standard
errors clustered at the bank-week level.

                                                                                Deposit Supply    Deposit Demand
                                                                Central Bank    Log(Notional
                                                                                                   Deposit Spread
                                                                  Liquidity    Deposit Amount)
                                                                     (1)             (2)                 (3)
End of Maintenance Period                                        -0.836***
Excess Cash                                                                        0.086***
ECB Market Liquidity
Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk                                             0.140**           -26.201**
Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk                                             0.169***          -29.920***
High Bank Risk                                                                       -0.089             -2.290
Deposit Spread                                                                     0.019***
log(Notional Deposit Amount)                                                                          -0.655***
Interbank Deposits                                               -3.277***
Retail Deposits                                                  12.961***
Corporate Deposits                                               0.150***
Control Variables                                                   Yes              Yes                 Yes
Bank × Time (year) FE                                               Yes              Yes                 Yes
Firm × Time (year) FE                                               Yes              Yes                 Yes
Bank × Firm FE                                                      Yes              Yes                 Yes
Wald Test of Interaction Terms                                                                          0.353
Observations                                                       5,297            5,297               5,297
R-squared                                                          0.916            0.423               0.842
System identification                                               Yes              Yes                 Yes
J-statistic p-val.                                                 0.883




                                                           46
Table 5. The transmission of central bank liquidity to loan spreads
This table reports OLS regression results of syndicated loan spreads on Central Bank Liquidity, bank risk, and
additional control variables. It shows six different regression specifications over different time periods. Central Bank
Liquidity is measured as the average over the quarter prior to loan origination of the adjusted liquidity in the banking
sector. High Bank Risk is a dummy variable defined using banks' CDS spreads and explained in detail in Online
Appendix A. All variables are defined in Appendix A1. Bank and borrower accounting variables are used as stated in
the annual report in the year prior to the transaction. The full specification in Panel B is shown in Online Appendix F.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm and at the week level using the method as proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and
Miller (2011) and Thompson (2011). The statistical significance of results is indicated by * = 10% level, ** = 5% level
and *** = 1% level.

Panel A. Baseline regression without control variables
                                            Financial Crisis Period   Crisis Until Full Allotment    Full Allotment Period
                                              (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)            (6)
Central Bank Liquidity                    -47.779***                    87.831                      -155.224*
Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk                    -21.138                     97.574                      -83.411
Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk                    -87.297*                     67.598                    -184.770**
Bank Risk
High Bank Risk                              26.405         26.251        7.914         76.079        23.735        -27.915
Borrower Characteristics                      No             No           No             No            No            No
Bank Characteristics                          No             No           No             No            No            No
Further Control Variables                     No             No           No             No            No            No
Wald Test of Interaction Terms                             0.0837                       0.541                      0.0396
Observations                                 1,156          1,156        533             533          623            623
R-squared                                    0.160          0.161        0.053          0.054         0.029         0.037



Panel B. With control variables
                                           Financial Crisis Period    Crisis Until Full Allotment     Full Allotment Period
                                             (1)             (2)          (3)              (4)         (5)            (6)
Central Bank Liquidity                    -102.007**                    -67.633                      -82.160
Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk                    -76.103                     -63.068                      -49.064
Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk                  -150.996***                    -75.281                   -164.009***
Bank Risk
High Bank Risk                              26.321       46.224***    38.035***         67.459        12.649        -21.910
Borrower Characteristics                     Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Bank Characteristics                         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Loan Characteristics                         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Macro Environment                            Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Bank Risk × Time (year) FE                   Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Borrower Rating FE                           Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Borrower Industry Code FE                    Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Loan Type, Purpose, Currency FE              Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Wald Test of Interaction Terms                             0.0115                       0.2557                      0.0123
Observations                                1,156           1,156        533             533           623            623
R-squared                                   0.755           0.756        0.824          0.824         0.733          0.735




                                                            47
Table 6. Intensive and Extensive Margin
Panel A reports regression results where the dependent variable is an indicator variable that is 1 if a borrower has
received a loan from the same bank risk category prior and during the full allotment period (intensive margin). All
variables are defined in Appendix A1 and Online Appendix A. The borrower variables are Log(total assets), leverage,
current ratio, coverage, market-to-book, and tangibility. The control variables are Log(maturity in months), secured,
Log(facility size), Log(number of loans of borrower), performance pricing, the three-month EURIBOR­EONIA swap
spread, quarterly EU GDP growth (%), the CISS, and the main refinancing rate. Standard errors are heteroscedasticity-
robust and clustered at the firm level. Panel B reports OLS regression results of AISD on Central Bank Liquidity, bank
risk, and control variables focusing on borrowing along the intensive margin (Column (1)). Column (2) shows the
second stage of a Heckman regression model using Column (3) of Panel A as the first stage. The statistical significance
of results is indicated by * = 10% level, ** = 5% level and *** = 1% level. In Column (1), standard errors are clustered
at the firm level. In Column (2), standard errors are derived using resampling via the jackknife method and clustered
at the firm level.

Panel A. Probability to observe a loan of an existing borrower of bank risk category (intensive margin)
                                                (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
 Estimation Method                             OLS                Logit              Probit             OLS
 Bank Risk
 High Bank Risk                               -0.124             -0.632             -0.294              0.092
 Bank Accounting Variables
 Log(Total Assets)                            -0.014             -0.107             -0.051              -0.367
 Leverage                                      0.012              0.045              0.038              -0.027
 Return on Assets                              0.015              0.096              0.071               0.006
 Total Asset Growth                            0.001              0.002              0.001               0.002
 Non-performing Loans/Total Loans             -0.035             -0.112             -0.075               0.034
 Borrower Characteristics                       Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
 Further Control Variables                      Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
 Bank Risk × Time FE (year)                     No                 No                 No                  Yes
 Borrower Rating FE                             No                 No                 No                  Yes
 Borrower Industry Code FE                      No                 No                 No                  Yes
 Loan Type, Purpose, Currency FE                No                 No                 No                  Yes
 Observations                                   754                754                754                 623
 Clustering (Firm)                              No                 No                 No                  Yes
 R-squared / Pseudo R-squared                  0.215              0.175              0.178               0.554


Panel B. Heckman selection model
                                                                                     (1)                  (2)
                                                                                    OLS             Heckman Model
 Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk                                          -154.405             -197.942
 Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk                                          -258.384**           -315.840**
 Bank Risk × Time FE (year)                                                          Yes                   Yes
 Borrower Rating FE                                                                  Yes                   Yes
 Borrower Industry Code FE                                                           Yes                   Yes
 Loan Type, Purpose, Currency FE                                                     Yes                   Yes
 Observations (for (2): Uncensored / Censored / Total)                               272             272 / 422 / 694
 Observations--Borrow Only From High Bank Risk Prior to Full Allotment               58                     58
 Observations--Borrow Only From Low Bank Risk Prior to Full Allotment                13                     13
 Observations--Borrow From Both Bank Risk Categories Prior to Full Allotment         201                   201
 Wald Test of Interaction Terms                                                    0.0252                0.0247
 R-squared                                                                          0.776




                                                          48
Table 7. Central bank liquidity and loan spreads: Robustness
This table reports regression results of borrowers along the intensive margin in the full allotment period. Panel A shows
results from propensity score matching using a nearest neighbor estimator with 10, 50, and 100 nearest neighbors all
with a caliper of 0.1 together with a Gaussian and an Epanechnikov kernel estimator, both with a bandwidth of 0.01.
The propensity score is estimated using a logit regression model and borrowers are matched on the odds ratio. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses using 50 bootstrap replications. Panel B reports OLS regressions of the AISD of
matched borrowers on Central Bank Liquidity interacted with High Bank Risk or Low Bank Risk. Columns (1) and (2)
show the results using the nearest neighbor matching (n=1). Columns (3) and (4) report the results using kernel
matching within a bandwidth of 0.1. The regressions include the same bank control variables as in Panel B of Table 5.
Panel C uses the specification from Panel B of Table 5 during the full allotment period and additionally includes
interactions between Central Bank Liquidity, bank risk category, and borrower characteristics which might especially
be related to monetary policy. As shown in Online Appendix G, these are borrower Total Assets, Leverage, and Current
Ratio. All variables are explained in Appendix A1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm and at the week level using
the method as proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2011) and Thompson (2011). The statistical significance of
results is indicated by * = 10% level, ** = 5% level and *** = 1% level.

Panel A: Propensity score matching
                            Estimation Method                                                Intensive Margin
 High Bank Risk             Nearest Neighbor (n=10)                                             121.385***
 High Bank Risk             Nearest Neighbor (n=50)                                             121.277***
 High Bank Risk             Nearest Neighbor (n=100)                                            121.277***
 High Bank Risk             Gaussian Kernel                                                      99.725**
 High Bank Risk             Epanechnikov Kernel                                                  99.725***


Panel B: Loan spread--intensive margin--matched borrowers
                                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
 Matching Method                                    Nearest Neighbor Matching                    Kernel Matching
 Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk           -39.895*            40.897              -166.558          -133.954
 Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk          -121.089***         -155.680**           -212.002**        -214.211**
 High Bank Risk                                     -10.182            -70.065              -16.043           -78.054
 Bank Control Variables                               No                 Yes                  No                Yes
 Observations                                         264                264                  358               358
 Wald Test of Interaction Terms                     0.0175             0.0489               0.0982            0.0527
 R-squared                                          0.0995             0.1644               0.1005            0.1483



Panel C: Central bank liquidity interacted with borrower characteristics
                                                                          Total Assets,
Variable                                                                   Leverage,                 Borrower Rating
                                                                          Current Ratio
                                                                               (1)                         (2)
Central Bank Liquidity
(1) Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk                                  60.226                       46.672
(2) Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk                                 -291.027**                  -164.815***
Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk × Variable                             Yes                          Yes
Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk × Variable                              Yes                          Yes
Further Controls                                                               Yes                          Yes
Bank Risk × Time FE (year)                                                     Yes                          Yes
Borrower Rating FE                                                             Yes                          Yes
Borrower Industry Code FE                                                      Yes                          Yes
Loan Type, Purpose, Currency FE                                                Yes                          Yes
Clustering (Firm)                                                              Yes                          Yes
Wald Test of Interaction Terms (1) = (2)                                     0.0016                       0.0184
Observations                                                                   623                          623
R-squared                                                                     0.744                        0.736




                                                           49
  Table 8. Monetary policy, loan maturity, and bank-dependence
  This table reports regression results of AISD on Central Bank Liquidity, bank risk, and additional control variables in
  the full allotment period. In Panel A, Central Bank Liquidity is split by loan maturity intervals. Loans are classified as
  short term when maturity  1 year, medium term when maturity is >1 year and  5 years, and long term when
  maturity > 5 years. In Panel B, firm size classes are determined based on the 33rd and 67th percentile of total assets of
  all firms in the data sample. All variables are defined in Appendix A1. The regressions include all control variables
  and fixed effects used in Panel B of Table 5. Standard errors are clustered at the firm and at the week level using the
  method as proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2011) and Thompson (2011). The statistical significance of
  results is indicated by * = 10% level, ** = 5% level and *** = 1% level.

Panel A. Loan maturity
                                                                                                                      Borrower
                                                                                                                   Characteristics ×
                                                    Full Sample           Full Sample          Intensive Margin
                                                                                                                    Central Bank
                                                                                                                      Liquidity
                                                        (1)                    (2)                    (3)                (4)
Central Bank Liquidity × Short-term Loan            -213.957**
Central Bank Liquidity × Medium-term Loan             -47.766
Central Bank Liquidity × Long-term Loan               278.729
Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk ×
(1) Short-term Loan                                                       -258.339**             -544.476***         -149.948**
(2) Medium-term Loan                                                         8.365                 -52.857             143.922
(3) Long-term Loan                                                          322.886                -34.632             340.223
Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk ×
(4) Short-term Loan                                                        -185.332*             -564.236***          -122.693*
(5) Medium-term Loan                                                      -201.288***            -318.551***         -100.376**
(6) Long-term Loan                                                          163.363                 446.38             252.054
Central Bank Liquidity × Borrower Leverage             No                      No                     No                 Yes
Central Bank Liquidity × Borrower Current Ratio        No                      No                     No                 Yes
Bank Risk × Loan Maturity Intervals                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                Yes
Bank Risk × Time FE (year)                             Yes                     Yes                    Yes                Yes
Further Control Variables and Fixed Effects            Yes                     Yes                    Yes                Yes
Wald Test of Interaction Terms                                          0.542 / 0.0184 /       0.8531 / 0.0087 /   0.684 / 0.0237 /
[(1) = (4) / (2) = (5) / (3) = (6)]                                          0.5589                 0.3566              0.8392
Observations                                            623                    623                    272                 623
R-squared                                              0.756                  0.758                  0.844              0.764



  Panel B: Bank-dependence
                                                      (1)                     (2)                      (3)               (4)
 Central Bank Liquidity × Small Firm                -38.776
 Central Bank Liquidity × Medium Firm              -72.799**
 Central Bank Liquidity × Large Firm              -105.442**
 Central Bank Liquidity × No Rating                                                                  -32.224
 Central Bank Liquidity × Rating                                                                   -283.249**
 Central Bank Liquidity × High Bank Risk ×
 (1) Small Firm                                                             23.47
 (2) Medium Firm                                                           -28.435
 (3) Large Firm                                                           -92.366**
 (4) No Rating                                                                                                          2.242
 (5) Rating                                                                                                           -74.360*
 Central Bank Liquidity × Low Bank Risk ×
 (6) Small Firm                                                           -184.946**
 (7) Medium Firm                                                         -196.643***
 (8) Large Firm                                                           -155.411**
 (9) No Rating                                                                                                      -138.785***
 (10) Rating                                                                                                        -295.622***
 Bank Risk × Firm Size Intervals                     Yes                      Yes                      No               No
 Bank Risk × Rating Dummy                            No                       No                       Yes              Yes
 Bank Risk × Time FE (year)                          Yes                      Yes                      Yes              Yes
 Further Control Variables and Fixed Effects         Yes                      Yes                      Yes              Yes
 Wald Test of Interaction Terms
                                                                    0.0139 / 0.0017 / 0.0513
 [(1) = (6) / (2) = (7) / (3) = (8)]
 Wald Test of Interaction Terms
                                                                                                                   0.0063 / 0.0422
 [(4) = (9) / (5) = (10)]
 Observations                                        623                      623                      623               623
 R-squared                                          0.729                    0.734                    0.732             0.751


                                                               50
Table 9. Debt capital structure and firm characteristics
This table reports propensity score matching (PSM) results of changes in borrower characteristics of borrowers along
the intensive margin in the full allotment period. All variables are derived at the firm level and measured in real terms
with 2006 as the base year using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as published by the OECD. Asset Growth is the ratio
of total assets in t divided by the value of total assets in t-1, minus 1. Payouts are total dividends, Capex are capital
expenditures, Investment is total invested capital, and Employment is the number of employees in thousand. The panels
show regression results of either percentage point differences (Term Loans/Total Debt, Revolving Loans/Total Debt,
Notional Outstanding/Total Debt, and Asset Growth), or log differences (Total Liabilities, Payouts, Capex, and
Investments) or differences (Employment) from year t to t+1, t to t+2, and t to t+3, with t as the year when the loan is
initiated in the full allotment period. Regression results of these variables including control variables and fixed effects
used in Panel B of Table 5 are shown in Online Appendix I. All variables are defined in Appendix A1. We use a
Gaussian kernel estimator with a bandwidth of 0.01. The statistical significance of results is indicated by * = 10%
level, ** = 5% level and *** = 1% level using 50 bootstrap replications.

                                                            (t; t+1)                (t; t+2)               (t; t+3)
                                                              (1)                     (2)                    (3)
Method                                                       PSM                     PSM                    PSM
Capital Structure
Term Loans/Total Debt                                      -1.959**               -6.799***               -6.293**
Revolving Loans/Total Debt                                  5.353**                5.098**                5.462***
Notional Outstanding/Total Debt                              0.576                  -0.612                  -1.067
Total Liabilities                                           -0.015                  -0.111                  -0.073
Investments & Employment
Payouts                                                      0.017                 -0.124*                  0.019
Capex                                                        0.017                 -0.170*                 -0.158*
Asset Growth                                                 5.35                   1.163                    3.02
Investments                                                 -0.018                 -0.143*                 -0.052*
Employment                                                   -0.95                -12.414**               -31.133**




                                                            51
Appendix A1. Description of key variables
The table provides descriptions of all variables. All financial variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile
and measured in real terms with 2006 as the base year using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as published by the
OECD.

 Variable                              Definition
 Central Bank Liquidity                Natural logarithm of the absolute amount of liquidity in the banking sector. It
                                       is calculated as the logarithm of the sum of banks' current account and deposit
                                       facility holdings with the ECB. by the ECB ex post on a daily basis in the
                                       "Data on daily liquidity conditions." The variable is centered around its mean
                                       value in 2006.
 Instruments
 End of Reserve Maintenance            Dummy variable, which is 1 on the last day of the ECB's reserve maintenance
 Period                                period.
 Excess Cash                           Excess Cash is a continuous measure of firms' aggregate quarterly excess cash
                                       holdings.
 Corporate Deposits
 ECB Deposit Facility Rate             Interest rate at which banks can deposit funds overnight at the ECB deposit
                                       facility.
 Deposit Spread (bps)                  Spread between the deposit interest rate and the ECB deposit facility rate.
 Log(Notional Deposit Amount)          Natural logarithm of the notional  deposit amount.
 Duration (days)                       The duration of the deposit transaction.
 Bank Competition                      Sum of the squared market share of each bank over the last week using
                                       deposit volume.
 Bank Characteristics
 Bank Risk                             Credit default swap spread in bps on the bank's senior unsecured debt with a
                                       five-year maturity.
 High (Low) Bank Risk                  Indicator whether bank is high (low) bank risk based on its CDS spread.
 Capital Adequacy                      Leverage ratio (total liabilities/total assets) lagged by one year.
 Liquidity                             Liquid assets/short-term funding; total deposits/total assets; net
                                       loans/customer deposits; off-balance sheet exposure; lagged by one year.
 Profitability                         Net interest margin; cost/income-ratio; return on assets; lagged by one year.
 Asset Quality                         Non-performing loans/total loans.
 Investments                           Total assets; total asset growth; net derivatives exposure/total assets; lagged
                                       by one year.
 Borrower Variables
 Borrower Characteristics              Total assets; leverage (total liabilities/total assets); current ratio; interest
                                       coverage ratio; market-to-book ratio; tangible assets/total assets; rating/no
                                       rating dummy or rating classes (based on S&P ratings); lagged by one year.
 Loan Variables
 AISD (bps)                            Coupon spread over LIBOR plus one time fees on the drawn portion of the
                                       loan as stated in DealScan.
 Loan Characteristics                  Facility size; maturity; secured dummy; performance pricing dummy;
                                       currency.
 Loan Type                             Term loan; credit line (> or <= 1 year); bridge loan.
 Loan Purpose                          Corporate purposes; M&A; debt repayment; working capital; other purpose.
 Macro Environment
 Three-Month EURIBOR­EONIA             Spread between the three-month EURIBOR and the three-month EONIA
 Swap Spread                           swap.
 Quarterly EU GDP Growth (%)           The quarterly growth rate of the gross domestic product at market prices.
 CISS                                  Composite Indicator of Systemic Stress as published by the ECB.

Online Appendix A contains a more detailed description of all variables including detailed descriptive statistics.




                                                           52
Appendix A2. Sample
This table shows the construction of the loan-level dataset. Panel A shows how we arrive from the universe of loans
to our sample. Panel B reports the results of a comparison of the regression sample with a larger sample, which includes
the loans not originated by our sample banks.

 Panel A: Loan sample selection
 All Loan Facilities in DealScan: 2006­2010:Q2                                               63,991
 Match Chava­Roberts (2008) Linking File                                 -42,982 =           21,009
 Merge Compustat Data                                                     -8,614 =           12,395
 Clean DealScan Data (e.g., Spread Included, Notional Reported)           -2,527 =           9,868
 Restrict Sample to European Banks Which Also Operate on Platform         -7,236 =           2,632



 Panel B: Differences in loan and borrower characteristics due to restriction of sample to
 platform banks
                                                               (Included ­ Excluded)
 Loan Characteristics
 All in Spread Drawn (bps)                                                2.327
 Facility Size ( million)                                               417***
 Maturity in Months                                                       0.248
 Borrower Characteristics
 Total Assets ( million)                                               4,459***
 Leverage                                                               0.017**
 Current ratio                                                          -0.069*
 Coverage                                                             -14.021***
 Market-to-Book                                                          -0.032
 Tangibility                                                           0.049***




                                                            53
Appendix A3. Exemplary deposit auction
This table shows an exemplary deposit transaction for illustrative purposes.

                                     Bank       Maturity     Transaction                                                                   Status of     Notional       Quote
    Time of Trade         Firm ID                                            Time of Bank Bid      Product       Currency        Status
                                     Name        Date         Start Date                                                                   Bank Bid      Amount         Value
 14-11-2005 12:35:58      xxxxxxxx   Bank1    15-11-2005     14-11-2005    14-11-2005 12:35:43     Deposit         EUR          EXEC        LCAN        76,200,000       2.06
 14-11-2005 12:35:58      xxxxxxxx   Bank2    15-11-2005     14-11-2005    14-11-2005 12:35:34     Deposit         EUR          EXEC        EXEC        76,200,000       2.08
 14-11-2005 12:35:58      xxxxxxxx   Bank3    15-11-2005     14-11-2005    14-11-2005 12:35:33     Deposit         EUR          EXEC        LCAN        76,200,000       2.07
 14-11-2005 12:35:58      xxxxxxxx   Bank4    15-11-2005     14-11-2005    14-11-2005 12:35:35     Deposit         EUR          EXEC        LCAN        76,200,000       2.05
 14-11-2005 12:35:58      xxxxxxxx   Bank5    15-11-2005     14-11-2005    14-11-2005 12:35:39     Deposit         EUR          EXEC        LCAN        76,200,000       2.06
 14-11-2005 12:35:58      xxxxxxxx   Bank6    15-11-2005     14-11-2005    14-11-2005 12:35:26     Deposit         EUR          EXEC        LCAN        76,200,000       2.07

 Trade Number                           Identifying number for a specific trade.
 Time of Trade                          Time when the auction is closed. It shows the date and the exact time in seconds. All transactions are executed on the same day.
 Firm ID                                Numerical identifier for each firm, anonymized for confidentiality reasons.
 Bank Name                              Bank names available but changed for confidentiality reasons.
 Maturity Date                          The maturity of the trade.
 Transaction Start Date                 The start date of the trade.
 Time of Bank Bid                       The exact time a bank is bidding for a deposit amount. If a bank provides several bids in a transaction we use the last bid of this bank.
 Product                                The product which is traded.
 Currency                               The currency of the product.
 Status                                 The status of the entire auction. EXEC means that the trade is executed.
 Status of Bank Bid                     The status of each bank's bid in the auction. LCAN means ListCancel, that is, another bank bid was selected by the firm. EXEC depicts the
                                        executed trade.
 Notional Amount                        The notional amount banks bid for.
 Quote Value                            The deposit interest rate banks are bidding in the auction. Banks bid an annual interest rate in percent using an actual/360 day count
                                        convention.




                                                                                     54
Appendix A4. Excess cash
This appendix describes the methodology for computing excess cash holdings for European non-financial firms using
Compustat Global data. Based on previous approaches described in Fresard and Salva (2010), we estimate the
following model quarterly for firm i's cash holdings:



                 ln($%&( ) =  ,- ln(./( ) + ,1 ln($2( ) + ,3 ln(45$( ) + ,6 ln(78( )
                           +,9 ln($%:;<( ) + ,= ln(>;?;@%A;( ) +  + C(


Where Cash is cash and marketable securities over total assets, TA is total assets in euros, CF is EBITDA over total
assets, NWC is current assets minus current liabilities minus cash over total assets. MV is the market value of the firm,
computed as the sum of the market value of equity and the book value of short-term and long-term debt divided by
total assets. Capex is capital expenditures over total assets, Leverage is the sum of short-term and long-term debt over
total assets.  is an industry-fixed effect.1

We then define excess cash as the difference between actual cash and the predicted normal cash obtained from the
estimation. We aggregate excess cash holdings to a quarterly measure using a firm's total assets as weights.

Based on quarterly cash holdings, we construct two possible instruments: (1) a continuous variables excess cash that
varies quarterly, and (2) an indicator variable that is 1 if excess cash exceeds its long-run mean in a quarter (measured
over a 15-year period prior to the beginning of our sample period).




1
  Note that estimating the model with or without fixed effects does not qualitatively change the results in the main
regressions.
                                                           55
