                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MONETARY EASING, LEVERAGED PAYOUTS AND LACK OF INVESTMENT

                                        Viral V. Acharya
                                        Guillaume Plantin

                                       Working Paper 26471
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26471


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We are grateful to participants in various seminars and conferences for helpful comments and
discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Viral V. Acharya and Guillaume Plantin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Easing, Leveraged Payouts and Lack of Investment
Viral V. Acharya and Guillaume Plantin
NBER Working Paper No. 26471
November 2019
JEL No. E52,E58,G01,G21,G23,G28

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies a model in which a low monetary policy rate lowers the cost of capital for
entrepreneurs, potentially spurring productive investment. Low interest rates, however, also
induce entrepreneurs to lever up so as to increase payouts to equity. Whereas such leveraged
payouts privately benefit entrepreneurs, they come at the social cost of reducing their incentives
thereby lowering productivity and discouraging investment. If leverage is unregulated (for
example, due to the presence of a shadow-banking system), then the optimal monetary policy
seeks to contain such socially costly leveraged payouts by stimulating investment in response to
adverse shocks only up to a level below the first-best. The optimal monetary policy may even
consist of "leaning against the wind," i.e., not stimulating the economy at all, in order to fully
contain leveraged payouts and maintain productive efficiency.


Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Guillaume Plantin
Sciences Po
28 rue des Saints-Peres
75007 Paris
France
and CEPR
guillaume.plantin@sciencespo.fr
Introduction
The Federal Reserve has kept its policy rates at low levels since the 2008
crisis. The financial structure of corporations in the United States (US)
has experienced three remarkable evolutions over the period.1 First, corpo-
rate leverage has significantly risen. Aggregate corporate debt to GDP has
reached historically high levels, exceeding in particular those prevailing just
before the global financial crisis. The share of corporate credit originated
by non-banks--the so-called shadow-banking system--is also at an all-time
high. Second, this high leverage has been coincident with significantly nega-
tive net equity issuances due to higher share buybacks than ever in the past.
Share buyback activity for the S&P 500 Index exceeded for example $800
billion in 2018. Third, fixed business investment since the crisis remains be-
low historical trends to date despite robust corporate profits and favorable
tax reforms.
      The evolution of the US leveraged-loan market epitomizes these trends.
This segment has doubled in size since 2010. Outstanding volumes now
approach that of the high-yield bond market. The share of banks in their
financing has plummeted to 8%. Nearly 70% of the proceeds fund "share-
holder enhancements" such as dividends and buybacks, leveraged buyouts,
or mergers and acquisitions.
      This paper offers a parsimonious model in which a low monetary policy
rate leads to large leveraged payouts by firms that have a detrimental im-
pact on capital expenditures, thereby leading to business investments that
are too low from a social perspective. This adverse effect of low rates occurs
only when the public sector is unable to regulate private leverage; conversely,
an appropriate prudential regulation on leverage in combination with a low
  1
      These evolutions are described in details in, e.g., IMF (2017,2019) or Furman (2015).


                                             2
monetary policy rate can restore the first-best investment level. Thus we of-
fer an equilibrium relationship between several salient features of the current
corporate credit cycle: the significant involvement of a large unregulated
shadow-banking sector, historically unprecedented levels of leveraged pay-
outs, and disappointing capital expenditures.
Gist of the argument. Suppose that an agent who values consumption at
two dates 0 and 1 is endowed with an investment technology that converts
date-0 consumption units into date-1 units with decreasing marginal returns
to scale. The agent is price-taker in a bond market. As the required return
on bonds decreases, the agent (i) invests more in her technology until its
marginal return equates the return on bonds, and (ii) borrows more against
the resulting date-1 output until so does her marginal rate of inter-temporal
substitution. We deem such borrowing for consumption against future output
a "leveraged payout." A natural interpretation of this trade is indeed that
the agent sets up a corporation that operates her investment, and that this
corporation issues bonds, using the proceeds either to buy back shares from
her or to pay her a special dividend.
   Suppose now that the output from investment increases in costly private
effort by the agent. Such moral hazard introduces a tension between in-
vestment and leveraged payouts as the interest rate decreases. On the one
hand, the agent would like to enter into more leveraged payouts to front-load
consumption. On the other hand, borrowing more against date-1 output re-
duces her incentives to increase this output, thereby making investment less
profitable and thus smaller. The agent sets her leverage at the level that
optimally trades off consumption-smoothing and incentives. Very much like
there is a trade-off between eliciting incentives and smoothing consumption
across states of nature in the canonical moral hazard model of Holmstr¨
                                                                      om


                                        3
(1979), there is a tension here between producing an output and borrowing
against it.
   Such agents in our setup are entrepreneurs facing a (real) interest rate
controlled by a benevolent central bank. The central bank aims at stimulat-
ing investment with a low interest rate in an economy in which rigid prices
fail to send the proper signals to entrepreneurs to invest. Whereas such mon-
etary easing would seamlessly work in the absence of moral hazard, the above
mentioned moral-hazard problem creates a wedge between privately and so-
cially optimal leverage as well as investment decisions by entrepreneurs. In
the face of a lower rate, entrepreneurs optimally enter into more leveraged
payouts at the expense of effort and investment. Whereas reduced effort and
investment are deadweight social losses, entrepreneurs' private benefits from
leveraged payouts at a distorted rate are a social wash because they must be
paid for by other agents--in the form of taxes in our setup.
   In sum, our parsimonious model offers a clear connection between mon-
etary easing and the rise of corporate leverage and leveraged payouts at the
expense of capital expenditures and productivity. It has noteworthy impli-
cations for financial regulation and optimal monetary policy.
Implications for financial regulation. We show that the central bank
can implement the first-best despite moral hazard if it has a free hand at
regulating corporate leverage. We view the difference between a setting in
which it can do so and one in which entrepreneurs lever up as they see fit as
a stylized parallel between an economy in which corporate credit originates
from regulated banks and one in which it also stems from non banks--the
"shadow-banking" sector. We show that monetary easing entails more lever-
aged payouts at the expense of productive investment in the latter situation
than in the former. Accordingly, our theory suggests that the existence of


                                     4
a large shadow-banking system may dramatically affect the transmission of
monetary policy. Interestingly, as mentioned above, non banks have played
an unprecedented central role in the US corporate credit boom that followed
the 2008 crisis. Leveraged payouts during this boom have reached record
high volumes whereas business investment has remained disappointing.
Implications for optimal monetary policy. We show that when it can-
not regulate leverage, the central bank optimally targets a strictly smaller
investment level than when it can regulate leverage. Stimulating invest-
ment with low rates comes at the cost of inducing leveraged payouts, which
reduce entrepreneurs' incentives and thus productive efficiency. A smaller
investment target compared to the first-best optimally trades off scale and
productive efficiency. If the pass-through from monetary policy to invest-
ment level is rather muted, as observed recently,2 then the optimal monetary
policy may even consist of "leaning against the wind," i.e., not stimulating
the economy at all, in order to fully contain leveraged payouts and maintain
productive efficiency. This result is akin to Stein (2012), who argues that in
the presence of some unchecked credit growth in the shadow-banking system,
a monetary policy that leans against the wind can be optimal as it raises the
cost of borrowing in all "cracks" of the financial sector.


Related literature

Our paper revisits the notion of "malinvestment" that has been prominent in
Austrian economics (Hayek, 1931, for example). Malinvestment refers to the
possibility that distortion of the real interest rate due to monetary easing
   2
     Besides Furman (2015), see also the evidence presented for the United States by Wang
(2019), who documents a weak pass-through of monetary policy to bank lending rates for
the past two decades, especially so at low interest rates. See also the discussion and
references in Wang (2019) for similar evidence of a weak pass-through of negative interest
rates to the real economy in case of Europe and Japan.


                                            5
subsidizes activities that are not socially desirable (but become privately
profitable) at the expense of preferable investments. We are the first, to our
knowledge, to connect the current fierce debate on the social optimality of
leveraged share buybacks to this old idea of malinvestment.
   Our paper also relates to two more recent strands of literature.
   First, Bolton et al. (2016), Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2017) or Bois-
say et al. (2016) offer like us models in which a low cost of funds may be
detrimental to incentives in the private sector. Whereas a low cost of capital
is due to positive supply shocks in their setups, it stems from an optimal
monetary policy decision aimed at stimulating the economy after a negative
shock in our setup.
   Second, we argue in this paper that this relation between cost of capital
and incentives explains why low policy rates may fail to stimulate invest-
ment. Several recent contributions suggest alternative causes for this failure
of monetary easing to spur investment. Brunnermeier and Koby (2018) show
that this may stem from eroded lending margins in an environment of imper-
fectly competitive banks. Coimbra and Rey (2017) study a model in which
the financial sector is comprised of institutions with varying risk appetites.
Starting from a low interest rate, further monetary easing may increase fi-
nancial instability, thereby creating a trade-off with the need to stimulate
the economy. A distinctive feature of our approach is that we jointly explain
low investment and high leveraged payouts by corporates.
   The paper is organized as follows. As a stepping stone, Section 1 presents
a partial-equilibrium model of optimal investment and consumption-smoothing
in the presence of moral hazard. Section 2 embeds it in a full-fledged equilib-
rium model to determine the optimal monetary policy and derives the main
results. Section 3 presents concluding remarks.


                                      6
1         Cost of capital, investment, and leveraged
          payouts
Consider an economy with a single consumption good and two dates indexed
by t  {0; 1}. An entrepreneur has access to an investment technology that
transforms I date-0 consumption units into a number of date-1 units equal
to f (I ) with probability e, and to zero with the complementary probability,
where f satisfies the Inada conditions. The entrepreneur controls e, the
probability of success of her investment, at a private cost e2 f (I )/(2 ) that is
subtracted from her date-0 utility over consumption, where   (0, 1).3 The
entrepreneur is risk-neutral over consumption at dates 0 and 1 and does not
discount date-1 consumption at date 0. She has a large date-0 endowment
of the consumption good W > 0. She can trade securities with risk-neutral
counterparties that require a gross expected return r > 0 between dates 0
and 1.
        The rest of this section solves for the entrepreneur's utility-maximization
problem, discussing in turn the cases in which the entrepreneur's cost of
capital r is larger or smaller than her (unit) discount rate.
        Suppose first that r  1. The entrepreneur in this case uses her own date-
0 resources to fund the investment I in technology f , and uses the residual
(W - I ) to purchase securities earning the expected return r. She selects the
investment level I and the effort level e that solve
                                !"           #                         $
                                        e2
                         max         e-          f (I ) + r (W - I )                   (1)
                          e,I           2
    3
     The linearity of effort cost with respect to output size plays no other role than sim-
plifying the algebra.




                                                 7
            % &
maximized at e  ^ such that
             ^, I


                                   ^
                            ^ =  , f  (I
                            e            ) = r.                                         (2)
                                  2

In the case r  1, the probability of success  does not depend on the cost
                              ^ and expected output  f (I
of capital r. Both investment I                         ^) decrease with

respect to r.
Leveraged payouts. Consider now the case in which r < 1. Given her unit
discount factor, the entrepreneur would like to borrow at the rate r against
the date-1 consumption that she can generate out of the technology f . Such
borrowing is akin to a leveraged payout, whereby the entrepreneur sets up a
firm that runs the investment in the technology f at date 0, and then lets
this firm borrow against its expected future cash flows to buy back shares
from the entrepreneur or pay her a special dividend.4
    More precisely, the timing is as follows. The entrepreneur announces
an investment level I , an effort level e, and a leverage (1 - x) against her
output, where x  [0, 1] is the fraction of the output against which she
does not borrow -- her "skin in the game." Investors buy her bonds. The
entrepreneur consumes the proceeds and then exerts private effort. The
entrepreneur selects (e, I, x) that maximizes her expected utility subject to
the effort level e being incentive-compatible. Formally, she solves
                        !                           "        #        $
                            (1 - x)ef (I )                e2
                max                        + W - I + xe -      f (I )                   (3)
                e,I,x             r                       2
   4
     Dividends and share buybacks are equivalent in this environment that abstracts from
any informational or differential tax considerations relating to the two forms of sharehold-
ers payouts.




                                              8
s.t.

                                !           $
                                  y2
                 e = arg max xy -               .                            (4)
                          y       2

       Date-0 consumption is the sum of the endowment net of investment
(W - I ) and of the present expected value of the fraction (1 - x) of out-
put against which the entrepreneur borrows at the rate r. Date-1 expected
consumption is the expected retained output xef (I ). Condition (4) is the
incentive-compatibility constraint, stating that the announced effort e must
maximize the entrepreneur's date-1 consumption net of effort costs. Simple
algebra5 yields the respective first-order conditions with respect to e, x, I :

                                              
                                       e=        ,                           (5)
                                            2-r
                                               1
                                       x=        ,                           (6)
                                            2-r
                                         f  (I )
                                                 = r.                        (7)
                                       2(2 - r)

They imply that in the case with r < 1, a lower cost of capital r induces
an increase in leveraged payouts (a lower value of the skin in the game x).
Furthermore, since a lower r induces both a lower probability of success
e =  /(2 - r) and a higher investment I = f -1 (2r(2 - r)/ ), the overall
impact of a reduction in r on expected output ef (I ) is ambiguous. Suppose
for example that f (I ) = I 1/ , where  > 1. We show in the appendix that the
expected output increases in r for r  [2/( + 1), 1], and decreases otherwise.
       The following proposition collects the above results.

Proposition 1. (Cost of capital, investment, and leveraged pay-
outs) Let r(r) = min{r; 1}. The entrepreneur chooses skin in the game x,
   5
       See proof of Proposition 1 in the Appendix.


                                                9
effort e, and investment I , such that

                       1                             f  (I )
                 x=            , e = x =         ,            = r.              (8)
                    2 - r (r )           2 - r(r) 2(2 - r(r))

Thus,

      · For r  (1, +), a reduction in the cost of capital r is irrelevant for
        corporate leverage, payout policy, and incentives. It spurs investment
        and expected output.

      · For r  1, a reduction in the cost of capital r spurs leveraged payouts
        that reduce the entrepreneur's incentives and thus degrade asset quality;
        investment is less sensitive to r than in the case r > 1.

      Proof. See the appendix.                                                   !
      The entrepreneur's linear preferences induce a sharp difference between
the two cases discussed in Proposition 1. This permits a clear and simple
exposition of the important intuition behind our results.6 In the case r > 1,
fluctuations in the cost of capital only affect corporate investment I . When
r < 1, by contrast, the cost of capital affects corporate leverage as well,
even though the entrepreneur has all the internal liquidity W needed for
investment. Leveraged payouts reduce incentives and thus shift the entire
production function downwards.
      The next section embeds this partial-equilibrium model with exogenous
cost of capital into a model in which a central bank controls the real rate and
thus firms' cost of capital in the presence of nominal rigidities. The central
bank seeks to maximize a standard social welfare function, and sets its policy
rate so as to mitigate the distortions induced by sticky prices.
  6
      The broad qualitative insights would carry over under strict concavity.



                                             10
2         Investment, leveraged payouts, and opti-
          mal monetary policy

2.1        Setup

Time is discrete. There is a single consumption good that serves as num´
                                                                       eraire.
There are two types of private agents, workers and entrepreneurs, and a pub-
lic sector.
Workers. At each date, a unit mass of workers are born and live for two
dates. They derive utility from consumption only when old, and are risk-
neutral over consumption at this date. Each worker supplies inelastically one
unit of labor when young in a competitive labor market. Each worker also
owns a technology that transforms l units of labor into g (l) contemporaneous
units of the consumption good.
Entrepreneurs. At each date, a unit mass of entrepreneurs are born and
live for two dates. Entrepreneurs are essentially identical to that in the
previous section. They are risk-neutral over consumption at each date and
do not discount future consumption. They are born with a large endowment
            eraire good.7 Each entrepreneur born at date t is endowed with
W of the num´
a technology that transforms l units of labor at date t into f (l) consumption
units at the next date t + 1 with probability e, and zero units with the
complementary probability.8 Entrepreneurs control the probability of success
e at a private cost e2 f (l)/(2 ) that is subtracted from their utility when
young.
        The technology f features a lag between production and delivery of con-
    7
     We could endogenize this endowment as labor income at some additional complexity
and without gaining insights.
   8
     The joint distribution of entrepreneurs' outcomes is immaterial.



                                         11
sumption services. This technology thus stands in our stylized model for the
most interest-sensitive sectors of the economy such as durable-good, housing
or capital-good sectors. We accordingly deem technology f the capital-good
sector, and technology g the consumption-good sector.9 We also term invest-
ment the resources spent to produce the capital good.
       The functions f and g satisfy the Inada conditions and f is twice contin-
uously differentiable.
Public sector. The public sector does not consume. It maximizes the
sum of the utilities of agents in the private sector, discounting that of future
generations with a factor arbitrarily close to 1.
Bond market. There is a competitive market for one-period bonds denom-
inated in the num´
                 eraire good.
Monetary policy. The public sector announces at each date a rate of return
at which it is willing to trade arbitrary quantities of bonds.
Fiscal policy. The public sector can tax workers as it sees fit. It can
in particular apply lump-sum taxes. However, it cannot tax entrepreneurs.
This latter assumption is made stark in order to yield a simple and clear
exposition of our results. As detailed below, all that matters is that the public
sector does not have a free hand at regulating entrepreneurs' behavior with
appropriate tax schemes. In particular, it cannot use taxation as a substitute
for prudential regulation. One possible reason entrepreneurs cannot be taxed
is that they can operate in a different jurisdiction.
Relationship to new Keynesian models. This setup can be described as
a much simplified version of a new Keynesian model in which money serves
only as a unit of account ("cashless economy") and monetary policy consists
   9
    A full-fledged model of f as a capital-good technology would require that the date-t
investment be combined with labor at date t + 1 in order to generate consumption. This
would complicate the analysis without adding substantial insights.



                                          12
of enforcing the short-term nominal interest rate. Such monetary policy has
real effects in the presence of nominal rigidities. We entirely focus on these
real effects; in particular, we fully abstract from price-level determination by
assuming extreme nominal rigidities in the form of a fixed price level for the
consumption good. This will enable us in what follows to tractably introduce
ingredients that are typically absent from mainstream monetary models.10


2.2       Steady state

We first study steady states in which the public sector announces a constant
gross interest rate r at each date. We suppose that the public sector offsets
its net position in the bond market at each date with a lump-sum tax or
rebate on current old workers. We denote w  0 the steady-state wage,
and l  [0, 1] the steady-state quantity of labor used by entrepreneurs. The
steady state associated with the policy rate r can then be characterized as
follows.
Entrepreneurs. Up to the change of variable I = wl, each entrepreneur's
problem is identical to that in Section 1. As in Section 1, we denote x the skin
in the game of an entrepreneur and r(r) = min{r; 1}. Each entrepreneur's
objective is then
           !               '                    ( "        #        $
                          (1 - x)ef (l)                 e2
       max (1 + r - r(r))               + W - wl + xe -      f (l )                 (9)
       e,l,x                   r                        2

s.t.

                  !            $
                        y2
       e = arg max xy -            .                                               (10)
                y       2
  10
    In somewhat related setups, Benmelech and Bergman (2012), Caballero and Simsek
(2019) or Farhi and Tirole (2012) also abstract from price-level determination as we do.
Their focus is, however, on the financial-stability implications of monetary policy.


                                          13
Expression (9) for entrepreneurs' surplus subsumes (1) and (3). From Propo-
sition 1, each entrepreneur chooses e, x, and l such that

                           1                    f  (l )
                  x=               , e =  x,             = rw.            (11)
                        2 - r (r )           2(2 - r(r))

Furthermore, taking into account that x = 1 whenever r  1, one can write
an entrepreneur's net position in the bond market when young as:

                                           (1 - x)ef (l)
                    {r  1} ( W   - wl) -                 .                (12)
                                                r

Workers.     Young workers' income is comprised of labor income in the
capital-good sector wl, labor income in the consumption-good sector w(1 - l),
and profits from the consumption-good sector g (1 - l) - w(1 - l). These latter
profits are maximum when


                                   g  (1 - l) = w.                        (13)


Since they consume only when old, workers invest the resulting total income


                                  g (1 - l) + wl                          (14)


in the bond market thereby receiving a pre-tax income


                                  r[g (1 - l) + wl]                       (15)


when old.
Public finances. The government stands ready to trade bonds at the an-
nounced rate r. It balances its budget by rebating a lump-sum (possibly



                                           14
negative) to old workers.
    Equations (11) and (13) uniquely determine the steady-state values of
(x, e, l, w) for a given interest rate r. In turn, the surplus of a given cohort,
for such an interest rate, is:
                            "                         # "        #
                                (1 - x)ef (l)                 e2
          (1 + r - r(r))                      + W - wl + xe -      f (l )
                                     r                        2
          )                                   *+                       ,
                                     Entrepreneurs' surplus

           +    rwl + rg (1 - l)                                                          (16)
                )        *+         ,
             Old workers' pre-tax income
                      '                                                         (
                                                 (1 - x)ef (l)
           + (1 - r) {r1} (W - wl) -                           + g (1 - l) + wl           (17)
                                                        r
             )                                   *+                             ,
                                        Rebate to old workers
                    "           #
                             e2
           =W + e-                 f (l) + g (1 - l).                                     (18)
                            2

The entrepreneurs' surplus is given by expression (9) and old workers' pre-
tax income by (15). The net demand for government bonds at each date is
the sum of workers' savings (14) and entrepreneurs' net position in the bond
market (12). The government rebates to old workers this amount net of the
repayment of bonds issued in the previous period (equal to r times this net
demand).11
The social costs of leveraged payouts. An important remark is in order
before solving for the optimal steady-state interest rate. Note from expres-
sion (18) that the interest rate r affects social surplus only indirectly through
its impact on the values of e and l that entrepreneurs choose in equilibrium.
Entrepreneurs' surplus by contrast also directly depends on r from (10). In
particular, when r < 1, entrepreneurs directly benefit from lower interest
   11
      We assume for brevity throughout the paper that old workers' consumption (16)+(17)
is always positive in the relevant range of the interest rate. It is easy to see that this is so
as long as workers earn a sufficiently large amount of total income at each date.



                                              15
rates through higher leveraged payouts. Proposition 1 describes how they
optimally trade off the benefits from such leveraged payouts with the neg-
ative impact of reduced incentives on their expected output. Expression
(18) shows that this trade-off is privately but, however, not socially opti-
mal. Weaker incentives leading to a reduced expected output are social costs
whereas early payouts for consumption are only transfers from old work-
ers towards young entrepreneurs that are neutral given the assumed social
welfare function. If some agents (entrepreneurs) benefit from transferring
consumption across dates at a rate different from one, then other agents
(workers here) have to pay for it. The impossibility to tax entrepreneurs
implies indeed that their leveraged payouts must be financed by taxes on old
workers. In short, leveraged payouts are in this model a form of inefficient
rent extraction by entrepreneurs that is detrimental both to savers, as it re-
distributes resources away from them, and to social welfare, as it results in a
reduced expected output. Notice that if their gains from leveraged payouts
were compensated for by a lump-sum tax on entrepreneurs, then this would
eliminate the welfare-neutral redistribution from workers to entrepreneurs,
yet this would leave unchanged the incentive-based distortion in output.
   We now solve for the optimal steady-state interest rate. Expression (18)
implies that the public sector optimally seeks to implement effort and invest-
ment (e , l ) such that e =  and  f  (l )/2 = g  (1 - l ). Given that profit
maximization implies


                              g  (1 - l) = w                              (19)




                                      16
in the consumption-good sector and

                                  f  (l )
                                           = rw                              (20)
                               2(2 - r(r))

in the capital-good one, the public sector can reach (e , l ) by setting the rate
r = 1. The optimality of an interest rate equal to the (unit) growth rate of
the population of course relates to the "golden rule" maximizing steady-state
utility in overlapping-generations models. Note that at this unit optimal rate,
inflows and outflows in the bond market exactly offset each other so that the
net rebate to old workers is zero.


2.3    Monetary easing

Suppose now that one cohort of workers -- the one born at date 0, say --
has a less productive technology than that of its predecessors and successors.
Unlike the other cohorts, their technology transforms y units of labor into
g (y ) contemporaneous units of the consumption good, where   (0, 1). We
study in turn the implications of such time-varying productivity for optimal
policy and welfare in three different contexts with incremental frictions:

  1. The wage w is flexible.

  2. The wage is downward rigid and the public sector can regulate private
      leverage.

  3. The wage is downward rigid and the public sector cannot regulate pri-
      vate leverage.




                                       17
2.3.1    Flexible-wage benchmark

Proposition 2. (Laissez-faire is optimal when the wage is flexible)
If the wage is flexible, the public sector implements the first-best by setting
the interest rate at the steady-state level r = 1 at each date. At this rate,
there is no need to regulate leverage.
    The cohort born at date -1 subsidizes that born at date 0. There are no
other transfers across cohorts.

Proof. Let us introduce the notation t = 1 + ( - 1)                   {t=0} .   We also use
the subscripted notation (et , xt , lt , wt , rt ) to denote the values of (e, x, l, w, r)
for the cohort born at date t out of the steady state.
The social welfare function assigns the same weight to every unit of con-
sumption no matter who consumes it and when, as well as to private costs of
effort no matter when they are incurred. The first-best is thus reached when
the output of cohort t net of effort costs
                           "            #
                                   e2
                               et - t       f (lt ) + t g (1 - lt )                    (21)
                                   2

is maximum for all t, or


                          et =  , t g  (1 - lt ) =  f  (lt )/2.                        (22)


With a flexible wage, setting rt = 1 for all t implements the first-best. This
induces xt = 1. Profit maximization in both sectors and labor-market clear-
ing then imply


                       et =  ,                                                         (23)

                       t g  (1 - lt ) = wt = rt wt =  f  (lt )/2,                      (24)


                                              18
which characterizes the first-best from (22).
       The proof that the only net transfer across cohorts is that from the date-
(-1) cohort towards the date-0 one is in the appendix.                              !
       When the wage is flexible, the steady-state unit interest rate r = 1
is unsurprisingly optimal at all dates even in the presence of time-varying
productivity. From (24), the date-0 wage adjusts to a level w0 < w such
that the employment level in the capital-good sector l0 is above l . For the
remainder of the paper, we respectively denote l and w this first-best date-0
employment level and the associated market wage in this case of a flexible
wage.
       Time-varying productivity only has a redistributive effect across the co-
horts born at -1 and 0 that is immaterial given our social welfare function.
The savings of agents born at date 0 and thus facing a less productive econ-
omy do not suffice to repay the bonds of old date-(-1) agents that are due at
date 0, and so these latter old agents must pay a tax. Workers born at date
0 conversely receive a matching rebate once old at date 1, as savings from
date-1 born agents are back to the higher steady-state value.12


2.3.2      Rigid wage and regulated leverage

We introduce for the remainder of the paper an additional friction in this
economy in the form of a rigid wage:

Assumption. (Downward-rigid wage) The wage cannot be smaller than
the steady-state wage w at date 0.

       In other words, we suppose that the wage is too downward rigid to track
the transitory negative productivity shock that hits the date-0 cohort, and
  12
   A public sector averse to intergenerational inequality (unlike ours) could of course
smooth these transfers in an international capital market.


                                          19
that the public sector cannot regulate it in the short run.13
       In preparation for our main result, we first suppose here that the public
sector not only sets the interest rate at each date and taxes workers, but can
also control entrepreneurs' leverage. The following proposition shows that in
this case, the combination of a reduction in the date-0 interest rate and of
a prudential regulation enforcing that entrepreneurs do not borrow at this
date implements the first-best, albeit through higher transfers from cohort
-1 to cohort 0 than under a flexible wage.

Proposition 3. (Monetary easing and prudential regulation imple-
ment the first-best) The public sector implements the first-best outcome
with the following policy:

       · It sets r = 1 at all dates other than 0 and thus need not regulate
         leverage at these dates.

       · It sets r = w /w < 1 at date 0 and imposes x0 = 1 to young date-0
         entrepreneurs.

       The cohort born at date -1 subsidizes that born at date 0, more so than
under flexible wage. There are no other transfers across cohorts.

Proof. First-order conditions for profit maximization (19) and (20) show
that the capital-good sector is interest-rate sensitive whereas the consumption-
good sector is not. The public sector can accordingly make up for the absence
of appropriate price signals in the date-0 labor market by distorting the date-
  13
     We could also assume a partial wage adjustment without affecting the analysis. Note
also that the analysis would be similar if the date-0 productivity shock was permanent
("secular stagnation"). All that would matter in this case would be the number of periods
it takes for the wage to adjust to the level that is optimal given the productivity shock.




                                           20
0 capital market. By setting the date-0 policy rate at

                                        w
                                  r =     < 1,                           (25)
                                        w

and imposing x0 = 1 at date 0, the public sector implements the flexible-wage
outcome in the labor market. Entrepreneurs hire up to the optimal level l
since they face under this policy the same first-order condition as when the
wage is flexible and r = 1:

                               
                                f ( l  ) = r w  = w  .                   (26)
                              2

Each worker accommodates by applying in her own firm the residual quantity
of labor that she cannot sell on the labor market at the disequilibrium wage
w . She does so at a marginal return below wage (g  (1 - l ) = w < w ),
and produces at the socially optimal level by doing so.                     !
   Note that the combination of date-0 monetary easing and leverage regu-
lation maximizes the social welfare function, but that it implies more subsidy
to date-0 entrepreneurs from date-(-1) workers. This owes to the fact that
such young entrepreneurs, facing a rate r < 1, prefer to consume their en-
dowment when young rather than save it, and the public sector must make
up for this lower demand for bonds with higher date-0 taxes on old workers.


2.3.3   Rigid wage and unregulated leverage

Suppose now that the public sector no longer has the ability to regulate en-
trepreneurs' leverage. This corresponds to an economy in which a significant
fraction of credit activity can be considered to take place in an unregu-
lated shadow-banking system. The following proposition, where we employ
the subscript u to denote outcomes under the rigid-wage and unregulated-

                                        21
leverage case, shows that monetary easing in this case not only induces lever-
aged payouts but also a lack of investment that puts the first-best out of
reach.

Proposition 4. (Rigid wage and unregulated leverage)

  1. The optimal interest rates are r = 1 at all dates other than 0 and
      ru  1 at date 0.

  2. Surplus is strictly lower when leverage is not regulated than when it is
      because date-0 investment is strictly lower: Entrepreneurs use a quan-
      tity of labor lu strictly smaller than the first-best one l .

  3. The cohort born at date -1 subsidizes that born at date 0, more so than
      under rigid wage and regulated leverage. There are no other transfers
      across cohorts.

Proof. See the appendix.                                                      !
   From (11), in the absence of leverage regulation, the skin in the game of
an entrepreneur x and thus her effort e (strictly) increase in r for r < 1. As
a result, attempts at spurring investment/employment in the capital-good
sector with a reduction in the date-0 interest rate boost leveraged payouts
and degrade productive efficiency. This unintended consequence of monetary
easing implies that social surplus is maximized at a lower date-0 use of labor
in the capital-good sector lu than in the presence of a prudential regulation
imposing x = 1: lu < l . In this sense, lack of investment relative to the
first-best is part of a second-best policy in the absence of a strict prudential
regulation. Also, monetary easing is more anti-redistributive in the sense
that date-0 leveraged payouts by young entrepreneurs lead to an issuance of



                                        22
corporate debt that crowds out public bonds and forces the public sector to
raise more taxes on old workers than under regulated leverage.14

Should monetary easing be more or less aggressive in the presence
of unregulated leverage? Interestingly, investigating whether the optimal
date-0 interest rate ru --the one that leads entrepreneurs to choose lu --is
lower or higher than the optimal date-0 rate in the presence of regulated
leverage, r , reveals an important tradeoff. On the one hand, investment is
less sensitive to the interest rate when leverage is unregulated, which implies
setting a lower interest rate than in the presence of leverage regulation in
order to reach a given target level for l.15 On the other hand, as we just
stated, the target for employment in the capital-good sector should be lower
in the absence of leverage regulation--lu < l , which goes in the direction
of setting ru > r as less stimulation is needed. The following proposition
shows that the dominant effect depends on the size of the shock :

Proposition 5. (Optimal interest rate) There exists ¯  [0, 1) such that

       · If, ceteris paribus,   ¯, then it is optimal to ignore the shock  and
         leave the date-0 interest rate at its steady-state value: ru = r = 1 > r .
         Investment is strictly below the first-best level but productive efficiency
         is at the first-best (lu < l but e =  ).

       · If ¯ > 0, then for   (0, ¯) the optimal monetary policy is more
         accommodative than when leverage is regulated: ru < r . Investment
         and productive efficiency are both strictly below their first-best levels
         (lu < l and e <  ).
  14
      In the presence of an international capital market, this deficit could of course be
financed with debt issuance rather than with current higher taxes on workers.
   15
      In the absence of leverage regulation a given investment level l is reached by setting r
such that  f  (l) = 2w r(2 - r) whereas r is such that  f  (l) = 2rw for x = 1.


                                             23
Proof. See the appendix.                                                        !
   Proposition 5 shows how the optimal interest rate trades off productive
efficiency e and scale l in the capital sector. If  is sufficiently large (the
shock is small), it is always optimal to avoid any leveraged payout by leaving
the rate at r = 1, thereby preserving productive efficiency e =  at the cost
of investing at a scale smaller than the first-best. It may be that this policy
is actually optimal for all possible shocks (case ¯ = 0). Consider for example
the limiting case in which the function f is constant. In this case, a reduction
in the interest rate has only an adverse effect on productive efficiency and no
impact on scale. It is thus undesirable to cut the interest rate below one no
matter the size of the shock.
   Stein (2012) argues that in the presence of some unchecked credit growth
in the shadow-banking system, a monetary policy that leans against the wind
can be optimal as it raises the cost of borrowing in all "cracks" of the financial
sector. This resonates with our result that the optimal policy response to
sufficiently small productivity shocks--and possibly for all shocks-- consists
in "leaning against the wind" this way, and setting ru = 1.
   The proof of Proposition 5 offers formal examples in which ¯ is either
equal to zero or strictly positive. In this latter case, there is a discontinuity
in the stance of monetary policy as  becomes smaller than ¯. It becomes
preferable in this case to spur l even though this comes at an important cost
for productive efficiency. In this case, there is aggressive monetary easing
that still has a limited impact on investment, and generates instead a surge
in leveraged payouts, that in turn induce low productive efficiency.




                                       24
3      Concluding remarks
This paper has shown that a standard hidden-effort problem combined with
hidden leverage suffices to explain why ultra-aggressive monetary easing may
lead to a surge in corporate borrowing aimed at funding shareholder payouts
rather than business investment. Whereas we aimed at delivering these in-
sights in the simplest possible setup, future research could enrich the analysis
along several routes discussed below.


Shadow banking. We interpret the respective polar cases of regulated
(Section 2.3.2) and unregulated (Section 2.3.3) leverage as respectively the
situation in which the financial sector is mostly comprised of banks subject
to prudential regulation and that in which a large shadow-banking sector op-
erates. An interesting route for future research consists of studying the inter-
mediate situation in which the regulation of leverage can only be imperfectly
enforced, and examining the interplay of such imperfect enforcement with
the crowding-out of investment by financial risk-taking highlighted here.16


Taxing entrepreneurs. Whereas we assume that entrepreneurs cannot
be taxed at all for expositional simplicity, our results rely only on the as-
sumption that the public sector does not have a free hand at taxing them.
If entrepreneurial taxation were to be unbridled, then it would be easy to
deter socially inefficient leveraged share buybacks, for example through the
taxation of date-0 consumption by entrepreneurs or of corporate debt. An in-
teresting route for future research consists in studying the situation in which
such taxation is distortive or/and can only be imperfectly enforced.17
  16
    Plantin (2015) develops a model of leverage regulation under imperfect enforcement.
  17
    Landier and Plantin (2017) offer a model of optimal capital taxation under imperfect
enforcement.


                                          25
Zero lower bound and asset purchases. In the face of a zero lower
bound (ZLB) on policy rates, the Federal Reserve (and central banks of sev-
eral developed economies) responded to the 2008 crisis with unconventional
policies that include the purchase of private claims such as mortgage-related
securities (and corporate debt). Suppose that the public sector is subject to
a similar ZLB in our setup: It cannot set the date-0 rate below r = 1.18
The public sector can still enter into asset purchases, swapping date-0 en-
trepreneurs' claims to their date-1 output with public bonds, akin to remu-
nerated excess reserves. Such swaps spur investment at date 0: If the public
sector trades 1/r0 bonds for each date-1 consumption unit, then this amounts
to grant a lower interest rate to date-0 entrepreneurs. Such asset purchases,
however, have the same adverse implications for incentives as interest-rate
reductions because they reduce entrepreneurs' skin in the game in the very
same way as in our case of unregulated leverage.



References


        Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai K. Bergman. 2012. "Credit
        Traps," American Economic Review 102 (6).

        Boissay, Fr´
                   ed´
                     eric, Collard, Fabrice and Frank Smets.                         2016.
        "Booms and Banking Crises," Journal of Political Economy 124 (2).

        Bolton, Patrick, Tano Santos and Jose Scheinkman.                            2016.
        "Savings Gluts and Financial Fragility," working paper.
 18
      For example, because the private sector can secretly store with a unit gross return.




                                             26
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Yann Koby. 2018. "The Reversal
Interest Rate," working paper, Princeton University.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Alp Simsek. 2019. "A Risk-centric
Model of Demand Recessions and Speculation," working paper.

Coimbra, Nuno and H´
                   el`
                     ene Rey.            2018."Financial Cycles with
Heterogeneous Intermediaries," working paper.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole. 2012. "Collective Moral Haz-
ard, Maturity Mismatch, and Systemic Bailouts," American Economic
Review 102 (1).

Furman, Jason. 2015. "Business Investment in the United States:
Facts, Explanations, Puzzles, and Policies," Council of Economic Ad-
visers. Remarks at the Progressive Policy Institute.

Hayek, Friedrich A. 1931. Prices and Production. New York: Au-
gustus M. Kelley Publishers.

Holmstr¨
       om, Bengt. 1979. "Moral Hazard and Observability." The
Bell Journal of Economics. 10(1).

International Monetary Fund. 2017. "Getting the Policy Mix
Right," In Global Financial Stability Report, April 2017.

International Monetary Fund. 2019. "Vulnerabilities in a Matur-
ing Credit Cycle," In Global Financial Stability Report, April 2019.

Landier, Augustin and Guillaume Plantin. 2017. "Taxing the
Rich," forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies 84 (3).




                               27
     Martinez-Miera, David and Rafael Repullo. 2017. "Search for
     Yield,"Econometrica 85 (2).

     Plantin, Guillaume. 2015. "Shadow Banking and Bank Capital
     Regulation,"Review of Financial Studies 28 (1).

     Stein, Jeremy C. 2012. "Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Reg-
     ulation," Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1).

     Wang, Olivier. 2019. "Banks, Low Interest Rates, and Monetary
     Policy Transmission," Working Paper, NYU Stern School of Business.



Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1

The case r  1 is straightforward and derived in the body of the paper. In
the case r < 1, in order to derive the conditions in (7), notice first that (4)
implies e =  x. Plugging this into (3), the objective becomes

                        x[2 - (2 - r)x]
                                        f (I ) + W - I,                   (27)
                             2r

and first-order conditions with respect to x and I yield the two remaining
conditions in (7).
   Suppose f (I ) = I 1/ . When r < 1, the expected output is

                                   "         # -
                                                "         # -
                                                            1
                                                 1   1        1
                       ef (I ) =                                  ,       (28)
                                       2-r           2r

and standard derivation yields its variations with respect to r.             !



                                         28
Proof of Proposition 2

The only result that is not established in the body of the paper regards
transfers across cohorts. For any t, in the absence of leverage regulation, the
surplus of a date-t cohort is
                 '                                (
                   (1 - xt )et f (lt )
(1 + rt - r(rt ))                      + W - wt lt + rt wt lt + rt t g (1 - lt )+
                           rt
                               (1 - xt+1 )et+1 f (lt+1 )
 {rt+1 1} (W - wt+1 lt+1 ) -                             + wt+1 lt+1 + t+1 g (1 - lt+1 )
                                         rt+1
      '                                                                    (
                                                       (1 - xt )et f (lt )
 - rt wt lt + t g (1 - lt ) + {rt 1} (W - wt lt ) -                                (29)
                                                             rt

The first line in (29) is the consumption of entrepreneurs plus old workers'
pre-tax income. The next two lines are the lump-sum rebated to old workers,
comprised of the net savings of the next cohort (second line) minus the
repayment of outstanding bonds to the private sector (third line).
   From (29), straightforward computations show that under the optimal
policy, the surplus of each cohort born at any date t / {-1; 0} is given by

                                    f (l  )
                             W+             + g (1 - l ),                          (30)
                                     2

whereas that of cohort -1 is

                                    f (l  )
                             W+             + g (1 - l ),                          (31)
                                     2

and that of cohort 0 equals

                                    f (l )
                             W+            + g (1 - l ).                           (32)
                                     2

Comparing the surpluses of cohorts 0 and -1 with their respective outputs

                                          29
shows that cohort -1 pays a subsidy equal to g (1 - l ) - g (1 - l ) to cohort
0.                                                                          !


Proof of Proposition 3

From (29), and accounting for leverage regulation, straightforward computa-
tions show that the surplus of each cohort born at any date t / {-1; 0} is
given by

                          f (l  )
                    W+            + g (1 - l ),                          (33)
                           2

whereas that of cohort -1 is

                              f (l  )
                    w  l +            + g (1 - l ),                      (34)
                               2

and that of cohort 0 equals

                          f (l )
                    W+           + g (1 - l ) + W - w l.                 (35)
                           2

Cohort -1 thus pays a subsidy equal to g (1 - l ) - g (1 - l ) + W - w l to
cohort 0, larger than under flexible wage. This is due to the fact that young
date-0 entrepreneurs are unwilling to save (W - w l ) at the rate r < 1, and
prefer instead to consume this when young. This forces the public sector to
collect this additional amount from old date-0 workers.                     !


Proof of Proposition 4

Proof of points 1. and 2. Setting rt = 1 maximizes (21) for all t = 0.
Regarding the date-0 cohort, the optimal rate r  1 maximizes the output


                                        30
net of effort of the cohort:
                           "                    #
                                       e(r )2
                 ( r ) =       e(r ) -              f (l(r)) + g (1 - l(r)),                 (36)
                                        2

where relations (11) implicitly define e(r) and l(r), which are obviously differ-
entiable with respect to r, respectively increasing and decreasing. Straight-
forward computations yield:
                              '                                  (
            (1 - r)f (l(r))      (3 - 2r)f  (l(r))
   (r)   =                  +                      - g (1 - l(r)) l (r).
                                                      
                                                                                             (37)
              (2 - r)3              2(2 - r)2

                   
For r such that l(r ) = l , we have by definition of l that  f  (l(r
                                                                     ))/2 =
g  (1 - l(r
            )), which implies

                                                "            #2
                (1 - r ) f ( l ( r ))                1 - r
      (r
         )   =             )3
                                     -                    
                                                                  f  ( l ( r
                                                                             ))l (r
                                                                                    ) > 0,   (38)
                   (2 - r              2             2 - r

implying in turn points 1. and 2. in the proposition (lu < l ).
Proof of point 3. From (29), straightforward computations show that the
surplus of each cohort born at any date t / {-1; 0} is given by

                   f (l  )
           W+              + g (1 - l ),                                                     (39)
                    2

whereas that of cohort -1 is


                   f (l  )                  (1 - ru )f (lu )
           w lu +          + g (1 - lu ) -                   ,                               (40)
                    2                       ru (2 - ru )2

and that of cohort 0 equals

                   f (l )                            (1 - ru )f (lu )
           W+             + g (1 - l ) + W - w lu +                   .                      (41)
                    2                                ru (2 - ru )2


                                                31
Cohort -1 thus pays a subsidy equal to g (1 - l ) - g (1 - lu ) + W - w lu +
 (1 - ru )f (lu )/[ru (2 - ru )2 ] to cohort 0, larger than under rigid wage and
regulated leverage. This is due to the fact that young date-0 entrepreneurs
consume an additional  (1 - ru )f (lu )/[ru (2 - ru )2 ] when young borrowed
against their date-1 output, which forces the public sector to collect this
additional amount from old date-0 workers.                                     !


Proof of Proposition 5

Step 1. It is optimal to set ru = 1 for  sufficiently large.

Differentiating

  f  (l(r))
            = rw                                                            (42)
2(2 - r(r))

w.r.t. r for r  (0, 1) yields


         4w (1 - r)
l (r ) =             ,                                                      (43)
           f  (l(r))

and so one can write
                  -                      -                                   00
               .  f (l(r))   4w  .                                      11
 (r) = (1 - r) .           +         .  (3 - 2r)f (l(r)) - g  (1 - l(r))11
               / (2 - r)3  f  (l(r)) /     2(2 - r)2                    22
                 ) *+ ,                )              *+               ,
                         A                                 B

                                                                            (44)

We have limr1 l(r) = l , and so for (, r) sufficiently close to (1, 1), term B
becomes arbitrarily close to 0 from the first-best condition  /2f  (l ) = g  (1 -
l ). Term A on the other hand stays bounded away from 0 for (, r) in the
neighborhood of (1, 1), and thus  > 0 in this neighborhood. Furthermore, a

                                       32
standard continuity argument implies that lim1 ru = 1. As a result,  (ru )
must be strictly positive for  sufficiently close to 1, implying that (ru , lu ) is
actually equal to (1, l ) for  sufficiently close to 1.


Step 2. Existence of ¯.

Let r denote the value of r such that (42) yields l(r) = 1. Let  denote the
subset of values of   (0, 1) such that the maximum of  (r) over r  [r, 1]
is interior, that is, such that it is reached at some r  (r, 1). We know from
Step 1 that ru = 1 for  sufficiently large. This implies that  = (0, 1), and
therefore that ¯, if it exists, is strictly smaller than 1.
   If  = , this means that  (r) is maximum at r = 1 for every   (0, 1)
because  is strictly positive in the right-neighborhood of r (in turn because
g  (1 - l(r)) is unbounded in this neighborhood) and thus the maximum of
 , if not interior, cannot be at r. It must therefore be at r = 1. This implies
that ¯ exists and is equal to 0 in this case.
   Suppose otherwise that  = . We show that  must be of the form
(0, ¯). To see this, notice that for any   , the envelope theorem implies
that

                                d 
                                   = g (1 - lu ).                             (45)
                                 d

The output net of effort costs of the date-0 cohort when the interest rate is
ru = 1 reads:

                                
                                 f (l ) + g (1 - l )                          (46)
                               2

because there are no payouts, effort is equal to  , and investment to l in this
case from relations (11). Expression (46) is linear in , with a slope g (1 - l )

                                        33
larger than g (1 - lu ) since lu > l when ru < 1 from (42). This means that if
  , then the left-neighborhood of  is also within  because  admits a
local extremum that is strictly larger than its value for r in the neighborhood
of 1. This establishes that  is an interval of the form (0, ¯).


Step 3. Examples such that ¯ = 0 and ¯ > 0.
                                  1
                       2g  (0.5) 
Suppose that f (l) =       
                                l     for  > 1.
   We have

                               f  (lu )
                                         = ru w  ,                        (47)
                             2(2 - ru )
                              f  (l )
                                       = r w  ,                           (48)
                                2

implying

                                              " # 1
                                                    -1
                                               lu
                             ru (2 - ru ) = r          .                  (49)
                                               l

lu and l remain bounded and bounded away from 0 for as   1 because
they are smaller than 1 and larger than l which tends to 0.5 as   1. Thus,
letting   1 in (49) yields


                                      r  ru (2 - ru ),                    (50)


and this implies


                                              ru < r                      (51)


since r < 1. Note that we have actually established that lim 1 ¯ = 1.


                                            34
   We have
                 '                                                             (
                 2g  (0.5)l1/    2w (3 - 2r)        g  (1 - l) 2 8w 2-1/
 (r)   = (1 - r)              -                  l+                l
                  (2 - r)3       (2 - r)2 ( - 1)       ( - 1) 2
                                                                             (52)

There exists l0 sufficiently small such that the first term dominates the second
one for all values of (r, l)  [0, 1] × (0, l0 ) for  sufficiently large. The third
term dominates the second term for  sufficiently large and all (r, l)  [0, 1] ×
(l0 , 1). Thus  > 0 for  sufficiently large which implies ¯ = 0.                !




                                       35
