                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE SPECIALNESS OF ZERO

                                        Joshua S. Gans

                                      Working Paper 26485
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26485


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




Thanks to Kevin Bryan, Len Goff, Shannon Liu, Barry Nalebuff, Fiona Scott Morton, Hal Varian
and Glen Weyl for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Specialness of Zero
Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 26485
November 2019
JEL No. L11,L41

                                        ABSTRACT

A model is provided whereby a monopolist firm chooses to price its product at zero. This
outcome is shown to be driven by the assumption of `free disposal' alongside selection markets
(where prices impact on a firm's costs). Free disposal creates a mass point of consumers whose
utility from the product is zero. When costs are negative, the paper shows that a zero price
equilibrium can emerge. The paper shows that this outcome can be socially optimal and that,
while a move from monopoly to competition can result in a negative price equilibrium, this can
be welfare reducing. The conclusion is that zero can be a `special zone' with respect to policy
analysis such as in antitrust.


Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com
1       Introduction

There appear to be an increasing number of instances where products are supplied to con-
sumers at a zero price. For instance, in 2019, Charles Schwab and eTrade announced
that commissions on stock trades would be eliminated.1 This has also been common for
advertising-based media models. This was the case with broadcast television over the past
half century (3) and has been extended to Internet services such as search and social media.
As these new services are now provided by firms with a large share of the market, antitrust
authorities globally have started to pay attention to them. However, a common retort is
that, as services are supplied to consumers for free, `normal' antitrust concerns do not apply.
Scholars have pointed out that the premise of this argument is flawed as there is nothing
necessarily special about a zero price.

        Digital platforms are characterized by free services. "Free" is not a special zone
        where economics or antitrust do not apply. Rather, a free good is one where the
        seller has chosen to set a monetary price of zero and may set other, non-monetary,
        conditions or duties. It is possible that a digital market has an equilibrium price
        that is negative; in other words, because of the value of target advertising, the
        consumer's data is so valuable that the platform would pay for it. (16)

There is support in the literature for this view. Since the outset, the literature on platform
competition has demonstrated that negative prices can emerge (5; 9).2 Such payments
raise participation on one-side of the platform allowing firms to earn more from the other
(paying) side of the platform. From this perspective, the prevalence of a zero price in practice
represents somewhat of a puzzle.
    This has not prevented the theoretical literature from imposing a non-negative pricing
constraint as an assumption based on that practice and then analysing situations where
zero pricing is a corner solution. The reasons given, however, are informal. In some cases,
    1
     The business model now involves earning revenue entirely from interest on account cash balances. For
more on these types of business models see Anderson (2)
   2
     In some cases, regulators have actually been concerned about negative prices (14). In addition, what
appears to be zero pricing emerges in a number of settings; in particular, where products are sold as part of
bundles of other goods.

                                                     1
justifications are based on transactions costs or that consumers are, in fact, paying a price
in the form of a reduction in privacy (as their data is appropriated by the firm). However,
the most common justifications allude to adverse selection and opportunistic behaviours (see
(13; 7; 10)).
   That being said, there appears to be no paper that provides a formal model generating a
zero price as an equilibrium price for any of these reasons.3 As a consequence, there has been
no formal analysis of whether more competition in markets where zero prices exist would
actually lead to improved social welfare outcomes once the conditions under which those
prices emerge have been fully specified. The goal of this paper is to provide such a model
and analysis. In so doing, it is demonstrated that the underlying conditions that generate
zero pricing are relevant to welfare analysis and simple intuition based on unconstrained
price theory may not apply.
   A zero price is unlikely to emerge in equilibrium without some sort of anchor. The anchor
analysed here focuses on the mass of consumers in many markets who derive no utility from
consumption of a product. Usually, in industrial organisation research, a demand curve is
given and, technically, passes through zero without any change in its properties (such as
continuity or differentiability). What happens to demand with a zero price or below does
not normally arise in equilibrium where costs are non-negative. Here, however, I draw from
the standard assumption in the rest of microeconomics that there is free disposal.4 Free
disposal places a lower bound on people's utility from a product at 0. At that point, anyone
in the economy is a potential consumer so the (inverse) market demand curve has a kink
at zero. The paper demonstrates that it is this assumption that permits zero price as a
potential equilibrium outcome even though this kink at 0 does not rule out a negative price
­ either as an equilibrium or a socially desirable outcome ­ if costs are negative.
   The free disposal assumption is then paired with the literature on selection markets (no-
    3
      I have searched, enquired of many and have yet to find a model in the literature. If one does exist,
please let me know.
    4
      Varian (17) notes that statements of linear demand often leave this lower-bound out but implicitly
assume it.


                                                    2
tably (15)) where a consumers are not homogeneous with respect to the costs of supplying
them. This is a natural way of modelling adverse selection in markets which, at least infor-
mally, was presented as a reason why negative prices may not arise. Importantly, in order to
allow for an equilibrium with a negative price, the model here allows for the possibility that
costs ­ including consumer-specific costs ­ are negative. As discussed below, this may rep-
resent potential earnings a firm might earn from consumers from another side of a two-sided
platform (e.g., advertising).
   The model here assumes that there is a mass point of consumers and that cost consider-
ations may cause a monopolist to want to serve them or not. Importantly, the analysis to
follow finds that a zero price could either attract that mass point (if there are no consumer-
side (transaction) costs of engaging with the firm) or repel them (if consumers who are
indifferent default to not purchasing a free product). As a result, it is shown that to un-
derstand the full welfare implications of a zero price, one must also observe whether it has
enabled selling or deterring consumption by the mass point.
   Significantly, it is demonstrated that when a monopolist chooses to price at zero, depend-
ing on consumers' default behaviour, it may not improve social welfare to charge a negative
price. This is because when considering whether to serve the mass point or not, to both the
monopolist and a social planner, no additional benefits will come other than a change in the
costs (which may be negative) of production. The monopolist bears all of these social costs
and hence, their decision coincides with the social planner.
   Section 4 then considers what effect competition may have. It is found that, under
conditions where a monopolist would charge a zero price, competition can lead to negative
prices. However, it is demonstrated that this (competitive) outcome is socially undesirable;
too much production occurs in a competitive equilibrium at too high a cost relative to the
social optimum.
   In what follows, I build a basic model with the elements described above and characterise
the monopoly pricing problem. I then consider social welfare and the impact of competition.


                                              3
Section 5 then considers whether have a means of managing costs can overturn these results.
A final section concludes.



2        Model setup

There is a continuum of consumers in the economy on i  [0, 1]. A consumer of type i
is characterised by three properties: their value for the product, their own costs incurred
in purchasing or consuming the product and the costs they impose on the firm. Each is
explained in turn. Each consumer can purchase at most one unit of the product of a firm
where p is the price per unit.


2.1        Intrinsic value

If a consumer uses a product they receive some value described by u(i). Absent any other
relevant factors in the product's purchase or consumption, the standard assumption in in-
dustrial organization is that a consumer's utility is quasi-linear and so their willingness to
pay for a unit is u(i). In most applications, analysis focuses on situations where, for each
consumer, u(i) > 0. However, the standard assumption in microeconomics is to allow the
possibility that, for some consumers u(i) = 0 and to assume that there is free disposal so
that, as a consumer who receives a product or has access to a service can simply choose not
to consume it, that it is not possible that u(i) < 0. To put it another way, a consumer must
be compensated for being a potential consumer in the market.
    To emphasise, the free disposal assumption is standard in economics. Indeed, Farrell and
Gallini (13) argue that this is a reason for a non-negative price constraint.5 However, as
will be demonstrated, when a firm has an ancillary value on acquiring a consumer, this itself
does not create an incentive to refrain from a negative price. Nonetheless, the free disposal
assumption plays an important role here in that it implies that there is (potentially) a kink
    5
        They write,"[a]t a negative price, people could take computers and use them for landfill." (p.679)



                                                        4
in consumer demand with a mass point of consumers for whom u(i) = 0. For expositional
purposes, in what follows, a consumer with u(i) > 0 will be described as generic and those
with u(i) = 0 as non-generic.
                                                                                               v
   In what follows, a specific functional form will be relied upon for u(i) = v - µi for i <   µ
                    v                                                 v
and u(i) = 0 for i  µ . Thus, the share of generic consumers is       µ
                                                                          while the remainder are
non-generic. The latter consumers will not use the product for any positive price.


2.2      Transaction costs

The second component of a consumer's type are the costs they personally incur in using the
product, t(i). These are assumed to be non-positive for all i. They are called transaction
costs here because the costs are specific to a consumer type and, if they are strictly positive,
a consumer who is otherwise indifferent between purchasing a product or not (i.e., an i for
whom u(i) = p) will choose not to purchase. Transaction costs may be literally the cost of
transacting ­ e.g., the costs of filling out a form, travelling to a store, organizing payment ­
or they may be other costs that are incurred by the consumer ­ such as the costs associated
with a loss of privacy, the annoyance of advertisements or incurred trying to mitigate these
costs.
   The set of consumers who purchase the product at a price of p is Q(p)  {i|u(i) - t(i)  p}
. Thus, using the earlier functional form for u(i) and assuming that t(i) = t, demand, q (p),
for the product is as follows:
                                            
                                               v -t-p
                                                             -t  p
                                            
                                                  µ
                                  q (p) =               if
                                                 1           -t > p


That is, quantity demanded is strictly decreasing in price until price falls below a threshold in
which case the mass point of non-generic consumers for whom u(i) = 0 choose to purchase the
product. Alternatively, if t(i) is continuously differentiable in i and u(i) - t(i) is everywhere
non-decreasing, there will remain a kink in demand at i such that u(i) = 0 but there will be

                                                  5
no mass point there.
   To anticipate the results to follow, the existence of a mass point at u(i) = 0 will be a
necessary (but not sufficient) condition for p = 0 to be an equilibrium price in any non-
degenerate manner (i.e., as a chosen price not simply because of the specific coincidence of
all of the model parameters but, instead, for a range of parameters). Thus, in what follows,
it will be assumed that:
(A1) There exists a share,  > 0, of non-generic consumers for whom t(i) = t  0.
This assumption ensures there is a mass point in demand. The following approach captures
this assumption in a tractable format alongside the functional form assumptions on intrinsic
demand. Specifically, regardless of their value for the firm's product, there is some share of
consumers in the population () who have a transaction cost of t(i) = t while the remainder
have t(i) = T > t. Thus, who has significant transactions costs is independent of the value
each consumer places on the product.6
   At what price will that mass point purchase the product? For t > 0, that price will
be p = -t. If t = 0, then if the price is p = 0, the mass point will purchase the product.
That said, if t > 0, then, as t  0, the mass point will not purchase the product. Thus,
depending upon whether (i) t = 0 or (ii) t  0, p = 0 will either add (i) or not add (ii)
the mass point as purchasers. In what follows, it is demonstrated that whether cases (i) or
(ii) hold have different implications for the rationale behind a zero price outcome (and its
welfare properties). It is left to the specifics of particular applications whether (i) or (ii) is
the more appropriate/reasonable assumption. The purpose here remains to characterize all
of the cases that result in a zero pricing outcome.


2.3     Customer-specific costs

In terms of the costs supplying to consumers imposes, two assumptions are made. First, the
firm faces a marginal cost, c, that is common to all consumers they supply. Significantly,
   6
     Importantly, there is a share, , of non-generic consumers who have a transaction cost of t while a
share, 1 - , have transaction cost of T .

                                                  6
c need not be positive and, in fact, a necessary condition for a zero price to emerge in
equilibrium is for it to be negative. We assume that v > c. Second, the firm also faces a
cost, ai specific to each consumer, i.
    This assumption plays an important role and is worth elaborating on. The consumer-
specific cost means that the firm is not indifferent as to who it supplies. This type of cost
was introduced by Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen (12) and Einav and Finkelstein (11), and
further developed by Mahoney and Weyl (15) to model selection markets. In such markets,
an increase in price may lead to higher or lower average costs depending upon whether they
induce adverse or advantageous selection. For instance, if a < 0, then, by charging a higher
price, p, consumers with a higher i will not purchase the product and so the average cost
serving a share, q , of consumers, c + 1
                                       2
                                         aq , will rise. Thus, a higher price deters "lower cost"
consumers; that is, there is adverse selection. The reverse happens if a > 0 where a higher
price lowers average costs; that is, there is advantageous selection.7
    Selection markets have been useful for understanding insurance markets where a higher
premium likely selects for consumers who have private information that their risk of an
adverse event is higher (modelled as adverse selection or a < 0). They are also useful in the
context of platforms whereby attracting a consumer to one side of the market allows the firm
to earn revenue from the other side of the market. For instance, in a credit card network,
those who may be willing to pay a high fee to avoid carrying cash may be those consumers
who have large expenditures and are, therefore, of more value to merchants. This would be
consistent with a model where a > 0. Similarly, a media outlet may attract readers of a
certain type which can be better matched with advertisers or a social media network may be
able to attract more reliable data from those who are active because they value the network.
In this case, a lower price reduces the "quality" of consumers for advertisers and hence, the
revenue a platform might earn. This is consistent with a > 0.
   7
     Of course, it is possible that these selection costs do not operate in a monotone fashion as described
here so there is adverse/advantageous selections over different consumer segments. It will be apparent that
this possibility does not have a significant impact on the conclusions drawn in this paper.



                                                    7
    Intuitively, the existence of selection effects complicates the choice of price by a firm.
In their absence, price is chosen and driven by demand-side considerations (as captured by
consumers' intrinsic value and transaction costs described above). When there are selection
effects, the firm must take into account the `quality' of the set of consumers a given price
selects. This poses challenges for a firm that have monopoly power over price and for the
outcomes of competitive markets. As will be shown, it is the firm's concern regarding the
quality of consumers it attracts, in particular, from the mass point of consumers that will
drive its incentives to set a zero price.



3     Zero pricing by a monopolist

One of the key motivations for this paper was the concern raised by some that dominant
firms setting zero prices may raise antitrust concerns. To provide a basis for analysing this
concern, an understanding of why a monopolist might set a zero price is required. The
conditions for zero pricing by a monopolist will be established in this section. Then these
conditions will be used in the following section to analyse the impact of competition being
imposed.


3.1    Homogeneous transaction costs

To build intuition, the case where  = 1 is analysed first. In this situation, all consumers face
the same transaction cost, t. In doing this, we will analyse two cases: (i) where consumers
default to purchase if they are otherwise indifferent; that is, where t = 0 and (ii) where
consumers default to not purchase if they are otherwise indifferent; that is, where t  0.
Given this, the t notation will be dropped for the remainder of this section.
    Before considering pricing, the monopolist's quantity decision is analysed. In so doing,
it is not that the monopolist cannot choose to have a fraction of the non-generic consumers
and either must supply all or none of them. The following proposition characterises this


                                               8
choice:



Proposition 1 Suppose that t  0 and  = 1. It is profit maximising to sell to the mass
point of non-generic consumers if c < M in[- 1 2
                                                 a(1 + µv            a
                                                          ), -v (1 + µ )]. It is profit maximising
                   v                       1        v             a
to sell to a share µ of consumers if c  [- 2 a(1 + µ ), -v (1 + µ )).

Proof : Let p(q ) be the inverse demand for the product. First, note that marginal revenue,
                                    v                                                  v
M R(q ), up to a market share of µ    is v - 2µq while M C (q ) = c + aq . If at q = µ   , MR  MC
                 a                                                         v
or c  -v (1 + µ    ), then the firm prefers to set price such that q  µ      , than to price so that
                                                                 v        v          v
mass point purchases its product. Second, profits at q = µ         are  ( µ ) = (p( µ  )-c- 1     av)v
                                                                                                 2 µ µ
                                                1                     v
while profits at q = 1 are  (1) = p(1) - c - 2    a. Suppose that p( µ  )  p(1)  0 then the firm
prefers to sell to the mass point rather than not if  ( µ )   (1) = c  - 1
                                                           v
                                                                                   2
                                                                                     a(1 + µv
                                                                                              ) . Note,
                                  a             1        v                                           v
therefore, that if c < -v (1 + µ ) and c > - 2 a(1 + µ ) then profits are maximised at q  µ            .
                       1       v              a                1
This is possible if - 2 a(1 + µ ) < -v (1 + µ ) or vµ < a( 2 µ - v ). Thus, necessary conditions
         v                                             v
for q = µ  to maximize profits are that a > 0 and µ      >1  2
                                                               .


   The proposition provides sufficient conditions as to whether the firm wants to sell to the
mass point of consumers or not. Note that if AC (1) = c + 1
                                                          2
                                                            a  0, then the firm does not
want to sell to them as the average quality would be too low and the firm, as it could not
set a positive price, would be making a loss. Because there is a non-convexity in the firm's
profit maximisation problem, the proposition also provides conditions under which the firm
                                                                          v
will want to sell to all consumers but those in the mass point; i.e., q = µ . This is something
that can occur even if AC (1) > 0.
   These considerations are relevant because, depending on consumer defaults, each may
be associated with a zero pricing choice. First, suppose that t = 0 and consumers default
to purchase when indifferent. In setting price, demand is continuous if p > 0 but jumps to
                                                                                    v
1 for p  0 implying that the monopolist cannot obtain a market share in the range [ µ , 1].
This means that there are two candidate prices that maximise profit, (p - c - 1
                                                                              2
                                                                                aq (p))q (p):
(1) the standard monopoly mark-up over costs and (2) a price of 0. Given this, Proposition
1 provides a characterisation of when the monopolist sets p = 0; precisely when it wants to
supply to the mass point of consumers (i.e., set q = 1). Note that a clear sufficient condition
for this to occur is c + a  0; making all consumers valuable in terms of ancillary earnings for

                                                   9
the firm. In this case, it is optimal to cover the market as marginal cost, M C (q ) = c + aq (p),
is less than marginal revenue.
   Second, suppose that t  0 and consumers default not to purchase when indifferent. In
this case, to attract the mass point of consumers, the firm would have to set p < 0. Thus,
a necessary condition for a zero price in this case is that the firm does not want to supply
                                                                                     v
the mass point of consumers. Note, however, that if it wants to supply q <           µ
                                                                                       ,   then the
                                                                          v          v
monopolist would choose p > 0. It will find it optimal to do this if M R( µ ) < M C( µ ). If
     v          v
M R( µ ) = M C( µ ), then it is optimal to set p = 0. However, this is non-degenerate as it only
holds where c = - 1
                  2
                          v
                    a(1 + µ                     v
                            ). However, if M R( µ          v
                                                  ) > M C( µ ), then it is possible that q =     v
                                                                                                 µ

is the optimal quantity. By setting p = 0, this share of consumers purchases the product.
Proposition 1 provides these conditions.
   That said, it is perhaps useful to state some more interpretable sufficient conditions for
this type of zero pricing outcome.


                                                                          v
Proposition 2 Suppose that  = 1. If (i) marginal cost at q = µ              is less than marginal
                          v
revenue (i.e., -v > c + a µ ); (ii) there is advantageous selection (a  0) and (iii) the average
                                                     1
cost supplying all consumers is positive (i.e., c + 2  a > 0), then, as transactions costs become
arbitrarily small (t  0), the monopoly price is zero.


This outcome is illustrated in Figure 1. Here, at a price of 0, M R > M C while AC (1) > 0
(as per condition (i)). If, by contrast, c > 0, then marginal cost is always above 0 and
standard monopoly pricing is optimal. More precisely, standard monopoly pricing may still
                                                                                         v
be optimal if marginal revenue is less than marginal cost at the threshold quantity, q = µ .
   Note that, if a < 0 (violating (ii)), then apart from a degenerate case where the standard
monopoly price is 0, it is optimal for the monopolist to cover the market. This could happen,
for instance, if there are network effects on the other side of a platform. Similarly, if average
costs associated with covering the entire market are negative (violating (iii)), then it is




                                               10
possible that the monopolist will choose cover the entire market.

                         Figure 1: Monopoly with Zero Price




3.2    Heterogeneous transaction costs

We now consider what happens when  < 1. Recall that, in this case, a share of all consumers
() has a transaction cost of t while the remainder have a higher transaction cost T > t.
The distribution of transaction cost is independent of other consumer-specific factors. While
this basic model captures the essential intuition that would drive a zero pricing outcome,
it is useful to extend the model to incorporate significant transaction costs in some manner
and examine whether a zero pricing outcome can be maintained. This is important as such

                                             11
consumer generated costs may not be caused by transactional issues but by a loss of utility
from privacy if data is appropriated by the firm or from annoying advertising.
     Under these assumptions, there exists a point whereby no consumer with both u(i) < 0
and a transaction cost of T purchases the product while all consumers with a transaction
cost of t purchase the product. This point occurs at p  0 with the specifics depending upon
the consumers' default purchase rule in the case of indifference. Thus, the demand for the
product is either:
                                    
                                     (1 - ) v-T  -p
                                                    +  v- p
                                                              p0
                                               µ        µ
                                    
                     lim q (p, t) =
                     t0
                                       (1 - ) v-Tµ
                                                   -p
                                                      +  if -T  p < 0
                                    
                                               1             p < -T
                                    


or                                   
                                      (1 - ) v-T  -p
                                                     +  v- p
                                                               p>0
                                                µ        µ
                                     
                     q (p, t)t=0   =    (1 - ) v-Tµ
                                                    -p
                                                       +  if -T < p  0
                                     
                                                1             p  -T
                                     

These are depicted in Figure 2. Importantly, there are now two kinks in demand. The first is
the one explored earlier at q-  (1 - ) v-
                                        µ
                                          T   v
                                            + µ while the latter arises at q+  (1 - ) v-
                                                                                       µ
                                                                                         T
                                                                                           + .
Thus, the critical factor driving whether the monopolist prices at zero is whether it wants
                                         v
to sell to the fraction q+ - q- = (1 - ) µ or not. As before, this will be driven by cost-side
considerations. Specifically, it can be easily show that the firm will prefer to supply to the
mass point than not if:
                                           1
                                        c + a(q- + q+ ) < 0
                                           2

Another way of putting this is that if the average of M C (q- ) and M C (q+ ) is negative, then
it is worthwhile for the firm to supply the mass point.




                                                12
  Figure 2: Monopoly with Zero Price with Heterogeneous Transaction Costs




   The following proposition characterises the parameters that give rise to a zero equilibrium
price with expensive disposal.



Proposition 3 A necessary condition for an equilibrium monopoly price of zero is:

                                            v-T                       v - (1 - )T
             c  -(µ + a(1 - ))            +              , -(µ + a)               .
                                       1-    µ                              µ
                                       1
If, in addition, (i) t  0 and (ii) c + 2 a(q- + q+ )  0, then there exists a zero price equilibrium
                                                                            1
without the mass point (at q- ). If, in addition, (i) t = 0 and (ii) c + 2    a(q- + q+ )  0, then
there exists a zero price equilibrium with the mass point (at q+ ).

                                                13
Proof : First, note that an interior standard monopoly price for q < q- will be preferred to
setting price such that q = q- if M R(q- ) < M C (q- ) = c > ((1-)T µ      -v )(a+µ)
                                                                                     . This gives
the upper bound on  for the necessary condition in the proposition. Second, note that
an interior standard monopoly price for q > q+ will be preferred to setting price such that
q = q+ if M C (q+ ) < M R(q+ ) = c < (-µ - a(1 - )) 1-        
                                                               
                                                                  + v-
                                                                     µ
                                                                       T
                                                                         . This gives the lower
bound on c completing the proof of the necessary condition whereby the firm prefers with
q = q- or q = q+ .
    The remaining sufficient conditions for zero pricing follow from a combination of a par-
ticular default case and the earlier derivation of whether the firm would prefer to supply the
                                v
mass point, q+ - q- = (1 - ) µ    , or not.


    Observe that when  = 0 there is no range of c for the necessary condition; that is, a
non-degenerate zero pricing outcome is contingent on (A1). When  is high, this is both
associated with high `generic' demand and a larger share of `non-generic' demand from
consumers who choose to purchase as the price falls below zero. However, these two factors
make it more likely a positive price will be chosen. By contrast, when  is low, there is both
low `generic' demand and a low share of `non-generic' demand who purchase when the price
becomes negative leading to an equilibrium price that is strictly negative. For intermediate
levels of  a zero price equilibrium arises as depicted in Figure 2. Of course, whether this
involves the mass point or not depends upon consumers' default choices when indifferent
(condition (i) for each case in Proposition 3) and whether the firm prefers to sell to the mass
point or not (condition (ii) for each).



4     Impact of competition

Having derived the conditions under which a monopolist would set a zero price, we now turn
to the impact of competition and, specifically, whether its addition can improve welfare.
In particular, recall that the motivation here is to examine, conditional on a monopolist is
observed to be pricing at zero, whether welfare would be increased by the advent of compe-
tition. It is well-understood that when a monopolist charging a positive price, welfare can
be improved by reducing prices. Here the focus is on whether it can be improved by moving


                                               14
from a zero to a negative price.


4.1    Welfare

To begin, it is useful to examine how the monopoly pricing outcome compares the socially
optimal outcome. The welfare criterion used is the sum of consumer and producer surplus.
Thus, in the absence of a kink in demand, the socially optimal outcome occurs where con-
sumer willingness to pay is set equal to marginal cost. Here this is complicated somewhat
by the fact that willingness to pay may be always higher than marginal cost; in which case,
the socially optimal outcome is for all consumers to consume the product ­ something that
could be achieved by setting p = c + aq . However, if marginal cost is above 0 for some range,
then it may equal willingness to pay only where willingness to pay is 0. In this case, the
optimal outcome could be achieved by rationing consumption to that point but this outcome
could not be implemented using a simple linear price.
   Given this, we can establish a remarkably clean coincidence between the monopolist's
preferences and those of a social planner.



Proposition 4 For t  0, the social planner's preference between supplying the product to
the mass point or not coincides with that of the monopolist.


In the mass point, u(i) = 0 and, by assumption, those consumers do not incur more
than infinitesimal transaction costs. These are necessary conditions for zero pricing to be
an equilibrium for the monopolist. Given this, the only welfare change is the difference,
AC (q+ )q+ - AC (q- )q- , which is the same as the change in monopoly profits from moving
from q- to q+ . Intuitively, while a social planner would take into account consumer welfare,
both it and the monopolist's decision are based purely on `cost' side considerations as both
consumer welfare and revenue do not change as we move from q- to q+ .
   An implication of this is that if there are homogeneous transaction costs (that is,  = 1),
then, conditional on the monopolist's optimal quantity being q- or q+ , there will be no

                                             15
improvement in welfare from moving to a negative price. Either the mass point is not
supplied, in which case, supplying it would raise social costs without any increase in consumer
surplus or the mass point is supplied in which case a negative price will be a pure transfer
from the producer to consumers.
   Zero pricing is optimal when there are homogeneous transaction costs. When there are
heterogeneous transaction costs, the social optimality of the monopolist's choice regarding a
zero price depends on the default rule for consumers when they are indifferent. In particular,
if consumers' default rule is not to purchase (that is, t  0), then a zero price by the
monopolist is associated with an intention not to supply the mass point of non-generic
consumers. A necessary condition for this to be an equilibrium choice for the monopolist is
that M C (q+ ) > 0. If this condition did not hold, then the monopolist would prefer to price
slightly below zero. Under this condition, the marginal cost curve intersects the demand
curve at a quantity below q+ . Thus, the social planner is necessarily considering between
outputs q- and q+ which, by Proposition 4, coincides with that of the monopolist.
   By contrast, a monopolist's zero pricing choice may be socially sub-optimal if consumers'
default to purchasing (that is, t = 0). In that case, the monopolist chooses a zero price if
they want to supply the mass point of consumers up to q+ . If M C (q+ )  0, this choice
coincides with the social planner's preference by Proposition 4. However, if M C (q+ ) < 0,
the socially optimal quantity is greater than q+ and can be achieved with a p < 0.


4.2    Competition

We now turn to consider (perfect) price competition with more than one firm in the market.
As demonstrated by Mahoney and Weyl (15), in selection markets, competition drives price
to average cost. Here, the kinked demand curve means that this is not necessarily the
equilibrium outcome. In particular, if average costs are positive if the mass point of non-
                                                1
generic consumers are supplied (that is, if c + 2 aq+ > 0) then competitive firms pricing so
that this outcome occurs would not be profitable. In this case, they would set a price such


                                              16
that only q- consumers purchase in the market. At this point, any firm lowering price would
end up making a loss. Note, however, that in this situation, if the monopolist were pricing
so that quantity was q- , then competition would not change this outcome and this outcome
would also be socially optimal.
               1
   What if c + 2 aq+ < 0? In this case, competitive firms would set a negative price and
quantity would exceed q+ . How does this compare to the socially optimal outcome?
   It can easily be seen that this outcome can be socially suboptimal. If a > 0, then
M C (q+ ) > AC (q+ ) and the social planner would prefer a smaller output. In other words, in
a competitive market, price may be too low compared with a socially optimal and, indeed,
a monopoly outcome. This mirrors Mahoney and Weyl's (15) result that when there is
advantageous selection (where with a > 0), competition results in over-production relative
to the social optimum. We have shown that this conclusion extends to the kinked demand
curve case although their result regarding monopoly under-production does not hold under
the conditions already discussed.
   What does this imply about the impact competition will have on a market where a
monopolist would set p = 0? First, if the consumers' default is not to purchase (t  0),
then the monopolist's quantity is q- while it is possible that, if c + 1
                                                                       2
                                                                         aq+ < 0, a competitive
outcome will involve a negative price. However, by Proposition 4, this negative price is
socially sub-optimal. That is, a competitive market leads to too many high cost consumers
being selected.
   Second, if the consumers' default is to purchase (t = 0), then a zero price by the mo-
nopolist will lead to them producing q+ . In this situation, if c + 1
                                                                    2
                                                                      aq+ < 0, a competitive
outcome will involve a negative price as will the social optimum. But does this mean that
competition will lead to higher social welfare? It is easy to show that competition does not
increase social welfare over a monopoly zero price outcome if:

                               (1 - )(v - T - c) + µ   q- + q+
                          q                          >
                                    (1 - )a + µ           2


                                              17
Intuitively, if c is less negative (all other things remaining equal), a zero price by a monopolist
will still be socially more desirable than a negative price under competition. The same is
true as a rises and there is a greater selection cost associated with lower pricing.


4.3        Cost changes

In platform markets, costs (specifically, negative costs) are generated by the firm's ability
to earn revenue from the other side of the market. It is useful to remark that, if there is an
effect of competition on that other side of the market, it is to reduce those earnings and to,
therefore, raise costs.8 In this situation, a full welfare analysis would require an examination
of welfare on both sides of the market. However, in this case, both the socially optimal price
and the competitive price are likely to be higher than those examined here. Moreover, in
this situation, if the monopolist is pricing at zero, then an improvement in social welfare
would lead to a positive rather than a negative price.



5        Cost management

Thusfar, the model assumes that the costs to the firm of various consumers are given and
cannot be managed. In practice, firms that choose to charge a negative price often engage in
`cost management.' For example, for some years Microsoft has offered consumers valuable
rewards for searches they conduct on its Bing search engine. Microsoft opts for what is
essentially a negative price for each search because of the potential advertising revenue such
activity could generate. However, it does not simply offer rewards verbatum. Instead, it
engages on various practices to deter consumers who may be searching solely to earn rewards
and not be engaging in advertisements (as well as bots designed to mimic them). Microsoft
needs to do this otherwise the quality of consumers it delivers to advertisers might become
    8
        See (6), (1) and (4)




                                                18
too low and reduce the amount advertisers are willing to pay.9
   While Microsoft has experimented with different policies, typically, consumers are only
entitled to rewards if they actively opt in (by completing a tour that informs them how
rewards work and how they can be redeemed). In addition, rewards are only generated if
consumers conduct a certain number of searches and there are daily caps on the magnitude
of rewards earned. Finally, Microsoft can observe searches and directly identify consumers
who appear to be entering nonsense search terms just for rewards. Broadly, these practices
are motivated by a desire to manage costs and to ensure that marginal costs are capped and
genuine consumers are selected.
   The interesting case that creates this issue is where the firm is motivated to avoid selling
to the mass point of non-generic consumers by pricing at zero. Thus, we assume here that
t  0 (consumers default to not purchasing) and  = 1 (transaction costs are homogeneous).
We want to see whether the ability to manage costs ­ particularly associated with the mass
point ­ changes the conclusions regarding the social optimality of monopoly zero pricing in
this case.
   To explore this, suppose that, at a cost of f > 0, a firm can implement a cost management
system that prevents any consumer for whom marginal cost is positive from purchasing the
product.10 What this means is that if p < 0, then the maximum quantity that can be sold
         c
is q = - a ; which is less than 1 if we assume that marginal cost when the entire market is
                                                                                   c          1 c2
covered is positive. Thus, a firm setting a negative price will earn profits of -p a +        2 a
                                                                                                     - f.
                                               v
By contrast, a firm setting p = 0 will earn -c µ -1
                                                  2
                                                       v 2
                                                    a( µ                               c
                                                         ) (where it is assumed that - a  v
                                                                                         >µ .
In this case, cost management will be preferred to a zero price if:


                                  c 1 c2         v 1 v
                                -p +     - f > -c - a( )2
                                  a 2a           µ 2 µ
   9
      Note that web searches would fall into the non-free disposal model because those searches, unless
performed by bots, would be costly for consumers to perform. That said, the point here regarding the
quality of consumers and how to manage that quality remains.
   10
      (18) explore these techniques in a more micro-founded environment.




                                                  19
With cost management, the monopolist will set a price close to 0 as t  0. Thus, the
                                                 (av +cµ)2
monopolist will prefer cost management if          2aµ2
                                                             > f.
                                                                                                       c2
     By contrast, a competitive firm will set price equal to average cost or pCM
                                                                              COM P =                  2a
                                                                                                            +
fa
 c
   under cost management where we assume, for simplicity, that there is just a single
competitive firm that is price constrained in a perfectly contestable market. Note that,
the average cost under cost management always lies above the average cost without cost
management (that is, ACCM > AC in Figure 3). Thus, if there otherwise was a competitive
equilibrium with a negative price, no firm would invest in cost management as their price
would be undercut by their competitors. For this reason, to explore the incentives to invest
in cost management, we assume that, in its absence, competitive firms are also setting a zero
price. In this situation, one of those firms will have an incentive to adopt cost management
                                                           c
if average cost with cost management are negative at q = - a ; that is, -f a
                                                                           c
                                                                                 1 c
                                                                             +c- 2 a a < 0 or
c2
2a
     > f . This outcome is depicted in Figure 3.11
     This condition for a competitive equilibrium to involve cost management is more re-
                                                                           (av +cµ)2       c2
strictive than the condition for a monopolist to do so; that is,             2aµ2
                                                                                       >   2a
                                                                                              .   Thus, cost
management is less likely to occur under competition than under monopoly; specifically, if
(av +cµ)2           c2
  2aµ2
            > f >   2a
                         then cost management will be chosen under monopoly but not under
competition.
   11
      Observe that a competitive equilibrium under cost management does not result in a minimisation of
                                                         v    c
average costs because there is a range of quantity, q  ( µ , -a ) that cannot be targeted by price alone.




                                                   20
             Figure 3: Equilibrium Outcomes with Cost Management




   This analysis shows that there is a greater incentive to engage in cost management under
monopoly than under competition. We now turn to consider the welfare properties of these
outcomes. Conditional on there being no cost management, if a monopolist chooses a zero
                                                              v
price, this is socially optimal with quantity supplied at q = µ . If there is cost management,
                                       c
the socially optimal quantity is q = - a which is what arises in both the competitive and
monopoly outcomes with cost management. Ignoring f , the increment to surplus moving
                                (av +cµ)2
between these two outcomes is     2aµ2
                                          .   This is the same as the increment to the monopolist's


                                                   21
(net) profit from adopting cost management. This follows the intuition of Proposition 2.
However, it also demonstrates that pricing can remain inefficiently high under competition
due to the diminished incentives to adopt cost management by competitive firms.



6     Conclusion

This paper has examined the conditions under which a zero price equilibrium may emerge
in both monopoly and competitive markets. It identifies free-disposal plus advantageous
selection with negative costs over a significant share of demand as key drivers of the choice
of a zero price. Under the conditions that generate this outcome, it is demonstrated that
a monopolist's pricing incentives can result in outcomes that are socially optimal while a
negative price, should it occur in a competitive market, can be socially inefficient. This result
is robust to the inclusion of cost management techniques that can limit high cost consumers
from the market.
    The results here suggest that there may be some credence to the notion that an observed
zero pricing outcome in monopoly markets may require a specialised analysis of policy im-
pacts ­ such as those that might arise from antitrust enforcement and regulation. This is
because the conditions generating that outcome also lead to conditions under which compe-
tition (and lower pricing) may not improve welfare. This analysis would also apply to policy
issues such as those advocating regulations to facilitate markets that pay consumers for data
provided to firms (see (8)); requiring more careful exploration of the impact of such policies
(including institutions that may overcome the limitations of relying on pricing for selection).
    Nonetheless, it is important to note that the model here was designed to provide a
general treatment and did not engage in a more micro-founded approach to the cost-side of
the analysis. Such approaches have been typically found in the analysis of platforms and
a critical issue for future work is an examination as to whether these would over-turn the
qualitative results of this paper.



                                               22
References

[1] Ambrus, Attila, Emilio Calvano, and Markus Reisinger. "Either or both competition:
  A `two-sided' theory of advertising with overlapping viewerships." American Economic
  Journal: Microeconomics 8.3 (2016): 189-222.

[2] Anderson, Chris, Free: The Future of a Radical Price, Hyperion: New York, 2009.

[3] Anderson, Simon P., and Stephen Coate. "Market provision of broadcasting: A welfare
  analysis." Review of Economic Studies 72.4 (2005): 947-972.

[4] Anderson, Simon P., Oystein Foros, and Hans Jarle Kind. "Competition for advertisers
  and for viewers in media markets." Economic Journal 128.608 (2017): 34-54.

[5] Armstrong, Mark "Competition in two-sided markets," The Rand Journal of Economics,
  37 (3) (2006): 668-691.

[6] Athey, Susan, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua S. Gans. "The impact of consumer multi-
  homing on advertising markets and media competition." Management Science 64.4 (2016):
  1574-1590.

[7] Amelio, Andrea and Bruno Jullien, "Tying and Freebie in Two-Sided Markets," Inter-
  national Journal of Industrial Organization, (2012): 436-446.

[8] Arrieta-Ibarra I, Goff L, Jim´
                                 enez-Hern´
                                          andez D, Lanier J, Weyl EG. "Should We Treat
  Data as Labor? Moving beyond Free," AEA Papers and Proceedings Vol. 108, (2018):
  38-42.

[9] Caillaud, Bernard and Bruno Jullien, "Chicken and Egg: Competition among Interme-
  diation Service Providers," Rand Journal of Economics, Summer (2003): 309-328.

[10] Choi, Jay Pil and Doh-Shin Jeon, "A Leverage Theory of Tying in Two-Sided Markets
  with Non-Negative Price Constraints," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics,
  (2019), forthcoming.

                                            23
[11] Einav, Liran, and Amy Finkelstein, "Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Em-
  pirics in Pictures," Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (2011): 115­138.

[12] Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen, "Estimating Welfare in Insurance
  Markets Using Variation in Prices," Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2010), 877­921.

[13] Farrell, Joseph and Nancy T. Gallini, "Second-Sourcing as a Commitment: Monopoly
  Incentives to Attract Competition," Quarterly Journal of Economics, (1988): 673- 694.

[14] Gans, Joshua S., "Are We Too Negative on Negative Fees for Payment Cardholders?"
  (April 14, 2018). Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 3162627. Available
  at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3162627.

[15] Mahoney, Neal and E. Glen Weyl, "Imperfect Competition in Selection Markets," Re-
  view of Economics and Statistics, 99(4), (2017): 637­651.

[16] Scott Morton, F., P. Bouvier, A.l Ezrachi, B. Jullien, R. Katz, G. Kimmelman, A.
  D. Melamed, and J. Morgenstern, Committee for the Study of Digital Platforms Market
  Structure and Antitrust Subcommittee Report, George J. Stigler Center for the Study of
  the Economy and the State, The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, (2019).

[17] Varian, Hal. "Price Discrimination and Social Welfare." American Economic Review
  75:4, (1985): 870-75.

[18] Veiga, Andr´
                ei, and E. Glen Weyl. "Product design in selection markets." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131(2), (2016): 1007-1056.




                                           24
