The Intellectual Spoils of War? Defense R&D, Productivity and International Spillovers
Enrico Moretti, Claudia Steinwender, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 26483
November 2019, Revised in August 2020
JEL No. O3,O30,O31,O33,O38

                                         ABSTRACT

In the US and many other OECD countries, expenditures for defense-related R&D represents a
key policy channel through which governments shape innovation, and dwarf all other public
subsidies for innovation. We examine the impact of government funding for R&D - and defense-
related R&D in particular - on privately conducted R&D, and its ultimate effect on productivity
growth. We estimate longitudinal models that relate privately funded R&D to lagged
government-funded R&D using industry-country level data from OECD countries and firm level
data from France. To deal with the potentially endogenous allocation of government R&D funds
we use changes in predicted defense R&D based on industry mix as an instrumental variable. In
both datasets, we uncover evidence of "crowding in" rather than "crowding out," as increases in
government-funded R&D for an industry or a firm result in significant increases in private sector
R&D in that industry or firm. On average, a 10% increase in government-financed R&D
generates a 5% to 6% additional increase in privately funded R&D. We also find evidence of
international spillovers, as increases in government-funded R&D in a particular industry and
country raise private R&D in the same industry in other countries. Finally, we find that increases
in private R&D induced by increases in defense R&D result in productivity gains.

Enrico Moretti                                  John Van Reenen
University of California, Berkeley              Department of Economics, E62-518
Department of Economics                         MIT
549 Evans Hall                                  50 Memorial Drive
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                         Cambridge, MA 02142
and CEPR                                        and NBER
and also NBER                                   vanreene@mit.edu
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

Claudia Steinwender
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-521
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
csteinwe@mit.edu
                     The Intellectual Spoils of War?
       Defense R&D, Productivity and International
                                              Spillovers
          Enrico Moretti1, Claudia Steinwender2 and John Van Reenen3
                        1
                            University of California at Berkeley, NBER and CEPR
                                       2
                                           MIT, NBER, CEP and CEPR
                                       3
                                           MIT, LSE, NBER, and CEPR
                                               August 26th 2020




Abstract. In the US and many other OECD countries, expenditures for defense-related R&D represents
a key policy channel through which governments shape innovation, and dwarf all other public subsidies
for innovation. We examine the impact of government funding for R&D - and defense-related R&D in
particular - on privately conducted R&D, and its ultimate effect on productivity growth. We estimate
longitudinal models that relate privately funded R&D to lagged government-funded R&D using
industry-country level data from OECD countries and firm level data from France. To deal with the
potentially endogenous allocation of government R&D funds we use changes in predicted defense R&D
based on industry mix as an instrumental variable. In both datasets, we uncover evidence of "crowding
in" rather than "crowding out," as increases in government-funded R&D for an industry or a firm result
in significant increases in private sector R&D in that industry or firm. On average, a 10% increase in
government-financed R&D generates a 5% to 6% additional increase in privately funded R&D. We also
find evidence of international spillovers, as increases in government-funded R&D in a particular industry
and country raise private R&D in the same industry in other countries. Finally, we find that increases in
private R&D induced by increases in defense R&D result in productivity gains.


JEL: O31, O32, O38, H56, H57
Keywords: R&D, defense, productivity, international spillovers


Acknowledgements: We thank the Economic and Social Research Council for their financial support through the
Centre for Economic Performance. Patrick Warren has provided truly outstanding research assistance. Pierre
Azoulay, Josh Lerner, Heidi Williams, and participants in many seminars have given helpful comments. Mirko
Draca kindly made his data on US defense procurements available to us, which was invaluable. We are also
grateful to Sharon Belenzon and David Thesmar for useful discussions and sharing their data with us.




                                                      0
   1   Introduction
       We study the impact of government funding for R&D on privately conducted and financed R&D,
and its ultimate effect on productivity growth. We focus on an important but relatively understudied
component of public policy on R&D: defense-related R&D. Defense R&D represents a key channel
through which governments all over the world shape innovation. In the US, annual government defense-
related R&D expenditures amounted to about $78.1 billion in 2016, 57.2% of all government-funded
R&D (Congressional Research Service, 2018). While defense-related R&D is motivated by goals that
are not mainly economic, it is often the most important de facto industrial policy used by the federal
government to affect the speed and direction of innovation in the economy. The amount of public money
flowing into defense R&D dwarfs the amount spent on other prominent innovation policy tools in the
US. For example, the total budget of the National Science Foundation or the overall value of the federal
R&D tax credit in a typical year are less than one tenth of federal outlays for defense-related R&D (NSF
2006). Defense R&D is the single most important component of government-funded R&D in the UK
and France as well, and a major component of government-sponsored R&D in many other developed
economies.
       In this paper we use two complementary panel datasets--a country-industry-year-level dataset
for OECD countries and a firm-year-level dataset for France--to address two related questions. First,
we estimate the effect of government-funded R&D on private R&D--namely, R&D conducted and
financed by private businesses. We are interested in whether government-funded R&D in a given country
and industry (or to a given firm) displaces or fosters private R&D in the same country and industry (or
firm). We use arguably exogenous variation in defense-related R&D to isolate the causal effect of
government-funded R&D. Having found evidence of a positive effect, we next estimate how investment
in R&D affects productivity. For both types of analysis, we assess whether the benefits of public R&D
investment are limited to a single country or spill over across multiple countries.
       The effect of defense R&D expenditures on private sector innovation and economic growth has
been a hotly debated topic for many years (e.g., see surveys by Mowery, 2010, and Lichtenberg, 1995).
Proponents of the benefits of defense R&D point to the commercial success of major innovations such
as jet engines, computers, radar, nuclear power, semiconductors, GPS, and the Internet as evidence that




                                                    1
military R&D has been a crucial source of technological development with civilian applications.1 Some
even argue that the Pentagon's role as the world's most generous investor in technological innovation
during the Cold War--ultimately resulting in superior technologies for American companies and
enduring gains in their competitiveness (Braddon, 1999)--was an important reason that US industries
became so dominant. More recently, defense R&D has been viewed as an important contributor to
national economic growth through private sector spinoffs and agglomeration economies.2 Proponents of
this view often point to Israel as an example of how defense spending has spawned a multitude of
commercially successful high tech startups (e.g. Senor and Singer, 2009).
         On the other hand, critics argue that the social returns to defense R&D are likely to be low
because the secrecy that surrounds defense R&D inherently limits the scope of spillovers to civilian
firms. Even more fundamentally, critics argue that defense-related R&D might displace private R&D
and therefore could have little (or even a negative) impact on the total amount of innovation in a country.
Overall, there is much anecdotal evidence of some of the positive and negative effects that defense R&D
might have on growth, but little systematic econometric evidence.3
         We begin our empirical analysis using a unique dataset that we constructed by linking detailed
information on defense-related and non-defense related government-funded R&D to information on
private R&D, output, employment, and salaries in 26 industries in all OECD countries over 23 years.
We estimate models that relate privately funded R&D in a given country, industry, and year to



1
  For example, see Lichtenberg (1984, 1988), Ruttan (2006), Mazzucato (2013) and the recent discussion of the DARPA
model by Azoulay et al. (2019b). Draca (2013) estimates the impact of US defense spending on firm-level innovation and
finds that increases in procurement contracts are associated with increases in patenting and R&D. Bhattacharya (2018)
presents a structural model of R&D in the context of the US Department of Defense SBIR program and has a good recent
survey of issues around military procurement and innovation.
2
  An additional benefit of military R&D is the creation of highly specialized human capital valued by the private sector.
Silicon Valley companies increasingly scout Pentagon and NSA personnel for potential hires (Sengupta, 2013)
3
  For a recent survey of the literature on the evaluation of innovation policies, see Bloom, Van Reenen, and Williams (2019).
The literature focuses on two types of R&D policies. First, there are fiscal policies towards R&D such as Hall (1993), Bloom,
Griffith, and Van Reenen (2002), Moretti and Wilson (2014), Dechezlepretre et al. (2019) and Rao (2016). This generally
finds positive effects. Second, there is a body of empirical research on the effect of public R&D on private R&D (e.g. David,
Hall, and Toole, 2000; Lach, 2002; Goolsbee, 1998; Wallsten, 2000). The results here are mixed ­ see for example the meta-
study of Dimos and Pugh (2016). There is a small number of recent papers that have clearer causal identification strategies,
but these papers tend to differ from ours in that they focus on single countries, different policy instruments, and different
outcomes than those we focus on. For example, Jacob and Lefgren (2011) and Azoulay et al. (2019a) study the effect of NIH
grants on publications and patenting; Bronzini and Iachini (2014) focus on the effect of R&D subsidies on capital investment
by Italian firms; Howell (2017) looks at Department of Energy SBIR grants on venture capital funding and patents; and
Slavtchev and Wiederhold (2016) study the effect of government procurement on innovation. Guellec and van Pottelsberghe
de la Potterie (2001) and Pless (2019) are rare exceptions that look at multiple types of R&D policies.




                                                             2
government-funded R&D in the previous year, conditioning on a full set of country-industry and
industry-year fixed effects.
        We complement this industry-level analysis with a firm-level analysis based on a longitudinal
sample of firms that engage in R&D followed collected by the French Ministry of Research from 1980
to 2015. This is the only available dataset we know of that disaggregates public defense R&D subsidies
by firms across the whole economy. One advantage of using firm-level data is that we observe which
firms within an industry actually receive public R&D funds and which do not. The longitudinal nature
of the data allows us to control for firm fixed effects, absorbing all time invariant unobserved differences
across firms that may be systematically correlated with the propensity to invest in R&D. We compare
the same firm to itself in different moments in time and identification stems from the exact timing of the
public R&D award.
        In both the OECD data and the French data, we use predicted defense R&D as an instrumental
variable to isolate exogenous variation in public R&D. This instrument combines nationwide changes to
defense R&D with fixed allocations across industries. Predicted defense R&D provides arguably
exogenous variation because annual aggregate changes in defense spending reflect political and military
priorities that are largely independent of productivity shocks in different domestic industries. Wars,
changes of government, and terrorist attacks have had major influences on defense spending. In the US,
for example, military R&D spending ramped up under President Reagan; fell back after the end of the
Cold War, and rose again after 9/11. Importantly for our identification strategy, the impact that
nationwide exogenous changes in military spending have on defense related R&D varies enormously
across industries, because some industries (e.g. aerospace) always rely more heavily on defense-funding
than others (e.g. textiles).4
        The sign of the effect of government-funded R&D on privately-funded R&D could be positive
or negative, depending on whether government-funded R&D crowds out or crowds in privately-funded
R&D. Crowding out may occur if the supply of inputs to the R&D process (specialized engineers, for
example) is inelastic within an industry and country (Goolsbee, 1998). In this case, the only effect of an
increase in government-funded R&D is to displace private R&D with no net gains for total R&D.



4
 The idea of using military spending as an exogenous component of government spending has been used in other contexts.
In the analysis of fiscal multipliers Ramey (2011), Barro and Redlick (2011) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) have argued
for the importance of using defense spending to mitigate endogeneity concerns. See also Perotti (2014).




                                                            3
Crowding in may occur if (i) R&D activity involves large fixed costs and, by covering some of the fixed
                                                                                                                  5
costs, government-funded R&D makes some marginal private sector projects profitable;                                  (ii)
government-funded R&D in an industry generates technological spillovers that benefit other private
firms in the same industry; and/or (iii) firms face credit constraints.
        Empirically, we find strong evidence of crowding-in both the OECD and French datasets.
Increases in government-funded R&D generated by variation in predicted defense R&D translate into
significant increases in privately-funded R&D expenditures, with our preferred estimates of the elasticity
equal to 0.518. Our estimate implies that defense-related R&D is responsible for an important part of
private R&D investment in some industries. For example, in the US "aerospace products and parts"
industry, defense-related R&D amounted to $3,026 million in 2002 (nominal). Our estimates suggest
that this public investment results in $1,948 million of additional private investment in R&D.
Considering the total amount spent by the US government, we estimate that private R&D investment in
the US is $85 billion higher than the counterfactual with no government-funded defense R&D.
        Our estimates also indicate that cross-country differences in defense R&D might play an
important role in determining cross-country differences in overall private sector R&D investment. For
example, we estimate that if France increased its defense R&D to the level of the US as a fraction of its
GDP (admittedly a large increase) private R&D in France would increase by 10.3%.
        We find evidence of spillovers between countries.6 In the OECD data, increases in government
funded R&D in one country appear to increase private R&D spending in the same industry in other
countries. For example, an increase in government-funded R&D in the US chemical industry induced by
an increase in US defense spending in the chemical industry raises the industry's private R&D in the
US, but it also raises private R&D in the German chemical industry. This type of cross-border spillover
is consistent with the presence of industry-wide technological or human capital externalities.
In the final part of the paper, we turn to the effect of investment in R&D on productivity. We estimate
models where measures of productivity growth ­ growth in TFP or output per worker - are regressed on
lagged private R&D intensity, using predicted defense R&D as a share of value added or sales as an
instrumental variable. Industry-level models based on OECD data indicate a positive effect of private


5
  Examples of fixed costs include labs that can be used both for government-financed R&D and for private R&D or human
capital investment in the form of learning by scientists on topics that have both military and civilian applications.
6
  International spillovers of R&D are studied by Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen (2010); Coe and Helpman (1995); Pottelsberghe
and Lichtenberg (2001); Keller (2004); and Bilir and Morales (2015).




                                                           4
 R&D on TFP. An increase in the defense R&D to value added ratio of one percentage point is estimated
 to cause a 8.3% increase in the yearly growth rate of TFP (e.g., from 0.98 percent per annum to 1.06
 percent). OLS estimates from firm-level models based on French data are qualitatively consistent with
 these findings, but IV estimates are imprecisely determined.7
          We view this as a significant but not overwhelming effect. It suggests that a small fraction of US
 economic growth is accounted for by investment in defense R&D. For example, defense R&D in the US
 increased by a third between 2001 and 2004 following the 9/11 attack. We estimate that, holding taxes
 constant, this translated into a 0.005 percentage point increase of the annual TFP growth rate in the US
 in the affected years--about a 1.5% increase.
          Overall, our estimates suggest that cross-country differences in defense R&D play a role in
 explaining cross-country differences in private R&D investment, speed of innovation, and ultimately in
 productivity of private sector firms.
          We caution that our estimates do not necessarily imply that it is desirable for all countries to raise
 defense R&D across the board. Our finding that government-funded R&D results in increased private
 R&D does not necessarily imply that defense R&D is the most efficient way for a government to
 stimulate private sector innovation and productivity. There are other possible innovation policies
 available to governments (Bloom, Van Reenen and Williams, 2019) and our analysis does not compare
 defense R&D to other types of public R&D spending.
         The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a simple framework and the empirical
models. Section 3 describes the data. Sections 4 and 5 present the empirical results. Section 6 concludes.
Online Appendices detail the data (A); quantify alternative policies (B) and simulate the impact of the 9/11
shock (C).


     2    Conceptual Framework, Econometric Models and Identification
          We start with a simple framework that is useful in deriving the empirical models we take to the
 data, and in clarifying how to identify and interpret our empirical estimates. Here we focus on the effect
 of government-funded R&D on private R&D activity. Specifically, we are interested in the direct effect


 7
   Consistent with the existence of international technology spillovers, we also uncover a positive effect of investment in R&D
 in an industry and country on productivity of firms in the same industry but in different countries.




                                                               5
for an industry-country pair or a firm of receiving government-funded R&D on the recipient's own
private R&D investment. In addition, we are interested in international spillover effects that might arise
if changes in government-funded R&D in a particular industry and country indirectly affect private R&D
activity in the same industry in other countries. In Section 5, we will discuss the framework to estimate
the direct and indirect effects of R&D investment on productivity.


   2.1 Conceptual Framework
       We assume that output of firm f in industry i in country k at time t is a function of capital, K,
labor, L, and intermediate inputs, M:


                              =  ( ,  ,  )                                                              (1)


where A is Hicks-neutral TFP. Following the R&D literature (e.g. Griliches, 1979) we assume that A is
determined by the lagged R&D knowledge stock G:


                        ln =  ln(-1) +  +                                                               (2)
            
where  =        is the elasticity of output with respect to the business R&D stock, X are other factors
            

influencing TFP, and  is a stochastic error term. The R&D stock G is an increasing function of
privately funded R&D expenditures (R) and government-funded R&D expenditures (S).
       We assume that S is set by the government, while R is chosen by the firm based on the technology
embodied in equations (1) and (2), as well as on the cost of R&D. We assume that the (static) demand
for private R&D can be written as:


                                        ln R =  ln U(S) +  ln Y + v                                     (3)


       where U is the Hall-Jorgenson tax-adjusted user cost of R&D capital, which is allowed to depend
on public subsidies, S (see Criscuolo et al, 2019, for a discussion of how subsidies affect the user cost of
capital). The user cost will also depend on current and expected interest rates, depreciation and the tax
system as a whole (including R&D tax credits). This equation can be rationalized as the steady state




                                                     6
demand for R&D from the first order conditions from specializing equation (1) to a CES production
function (e.g. Bloom, Griffith, and Van Reenen, 2002). Under this interpretation,  is the elasticity of
substitution and  is the returns to scale parameter ( =1 indicates constant returns) and v is a function
of technological parameters in the production function indicating factor biases.8
         In our empirical analysis, we use two alternative datasets to estimate two variants of equation
(3). In our analysis of OECD data, the level of observation is an industry-country-year and we assume
that we can take a first order approximation of equation (3) as:


                            ln Rikt = OECD ln Sik(t-1) + OECDln Yikt + Xkt + dik+ dit + ikt                                 (4)


where the determinants of R&D other than S and Y are assumed to be a vector of country by year
observables Xkt, a set of industry by country fixed effects (dik), industry by year dummies (dit, e.g.
industry specific product demand or technological shocks), and an idiosyncratic error (ikt). 9 In our
baseline models, Xkt includes country-specific linear trends and GDP at t-1, thus controlling for country-
specific long run trends and business cycles as these demand side effects are likely to affect innovation
(e.g. Shleifer, 1986). (The linear trends are not absorbed by the vector dit because they are allowed to
vary by country). In some specifications, Xkt includes a country-specific quadratic trend and additional
controls that may affect R&D.
         In our analysis of the French data, the level of observation is firm-years, and we assume that we
can take a first order approximation of equation (3) as:


                                   ln Rfit = FRA ln Sfi(t-1) + FRAln Yfit + df + dt+ fit                                    (5)


where we include a set of firm fixed effects (df) to absorb all sources of time-invariant heterogeneity
across firms. Since in this specification we only have one country, we do not include Xkt and dik - these




8
  If the production function was more general than CES, v would also include other factor prices such as the wage rate.
9
  We include dummy variables to control for the country-industry fixed effects, which formally requires strict exogeneity of
the right hand side variables. Since our panel is long (up to 26 years) we do not think there is likely to be much bias from this
issue, but to check we also estimated the equation in first differences, which requires weaker exogeneity assumptions and
obtained similar results.




                                                               7
are absorbed by the time dummies and firm fixed effects respectively. We also consider industry-level
versions of equation (5) where we can disaggregate industries at a finer detail than in the OECD data.
       Equations (4) and (5) represent our baseline models in the empirical analysis of the effects of
government R&D on private R&D. The focus of our analysis is on estimating the coefficients OECD and
FRA that relate changes in government-funded R&D in a given year to changes in private R&D in the
following year. (Recall that the dependent variable is only the privately funded part of business R&D,
so there is no mechanical association between R and S.)
       The sign of  is unknown a priori. If increases in government-funded R&D crowd out private
R&D, the  terms should be negative. In the case of complete crowding out, the only effect of the policy
is to displace private R&D, with no net gain in total R&D. This would be the case if, for example, the
supply of inputs in the R&D process in any given industry was perfectly inelastic in the short run. A key
input in this respect is likely to be specialized scientists and engineers and the elasticity of their supply
to a country-industry depends on their mobility across industries and countries. With inelastic supply to
a country-industry, increases in public funds for R&D come at the expense of declines in private R&D.
       If, on the other hand, increases in government funded R&D crowd in private R&D, the  terms
should be positive. In this case, more public R&D stimulates even more private R&D. There are at least
three possible reasons for why this might be the case.
       First, in the presence of large fixed costs, public R&D may make marginal private projects
feasible. In most industries, R&D activity is characterized by large fixed costs in the form of labs,
research, human capital accumulation, set up costs, etc. It is realistic to think that some of these fixed
costs can be used for multiple projects. For example, lab infrastructure set up for a specific project can,
in some cases, be used for other projects as well. Similarly, a scientist's human capital acquired while
working on a specific project--the intellectual understanding of a specific literature, for example, or her
mastery of a scientific technique--can be helpful in other projects. By paying for some of the fixed costs,
government-funded R&D may make profitable for private firms' projects that otherwise would not have
been profitable. Similarly, if government-funded R&D results in process innovation, it is conceivable
that this innovation can indirectly benefit private R&D.




                                                     8
           Second, if firms are credit constrained, the public provision of R&D might relax these financial
constraints. Although capital markets are generally well developed for the OECD countries we study,
the special nature of R&D investments highlighted by Arrow (1962), such as riskiness and asymmetric
information, may make it especially vulnerable to financial frictions.10
           Third, government-financed R&D investment by one firm may make other firms in the same
industry more productive because of technology or human capital spillovers (e.g. Moretti, 2004 and
2019). In this case, an increase in government-financed R&D directly raises R&D in the firm that
receives the government contract, and may indirectly raise R&D in other firms in the same industry or
same locality. Spillovers could also be negative in the case of strategic substitutability, as rival firms
could free ride off the R&D of the supported firms (e.g. Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen, 2013).
           An implication is that in the presence of R&D spillovers within an industry the estimated
coefficient from industry-level data in equation (4) does not need to be identical to the coefficient from
firm-level data in equation (5). Broadly, we expect industry coefficients should be larger if crowd-in
induces rival firms to do more R&D (due to strategic complementarity) or smaller if rivals do less R&D
(due to strategic substitutability).
           In terms of inference: to account for the possible correlation of residuals in each year across
industries in a given country and across countries in a given industry, standard errors for OECD data
throughout the paper are multi-way clustered by country by industry pair and country by year pair
(Miller, Cameron and Galbech, 2009). In the regressions based on the French data, we cluster at the 2-
digit industry for industry-level regressions; and 3-digit industry for firm-level regressions.


       2.2 Identification and Threats to Validity
           Equations (4) and (5) allow us to control for a wide variety of shocks that affect private R&D
and may also be correlated with government-financed R&D. In equation (4), the inclusion of industry-
year dummies accounts for the fact that different industries have different propensities to invest in R&D,
and these differences can vary over time as a function of technology shocks and product demand shocks.
The inclusion of industry-country fixed effects accounts for differences in the propensity to invest in
R&D across countries and the fact that these international differences may be more pronounced in some
industries than others.

10
     See Garicano and Steinwender (2016) for some empirical evidence on financial frictions for R&D.




                                                             9
        In equation (5), the vector of controls also include firm fixed effects. This is an important
advantage of using firm-level data. It allows us to absorb all time-invariant unobserved differences across
firms that may be systematically correlated with propensity to invest in R&D. In equation (5), we
compare the same firm to itself at different moments in time. Identification stems from the timing of the
public R&D award.
        Even after conditioning on this rich set of controls, our models yield inconsistent estimates if the
timing of public R&D is correlated with unobserved time-varying determinants of private R&D. We
cannot rule out this possibility, as government policies are unlikely to be random. It is possible that
governments allocate R&D funding to specific industries or specific firms based on criteria that are
correlated with determinants of private R&D investment. This may happen, for example, if governments
tend to use public funds to help firms in sectors that are struggling and are experiencing declines in
private R&D. In this case, changes in public R&D would be negatively correlated with unobserved
determinants of private R&D, introducing a negative bias in our estimates of the coefficient  in
equations (4) and (5). The opposite bias arises if governments tend to use public funds to help firms in
sectors that are thriving, and are experiencing increases in R&D over and above those experienced by
the same sector in other countries.
        In either case, Sik(t-1) might be correlated with ikt in equation (4) and Sfik(t-1) might be correlated
with fikt in equation (5). If governments disproportionately help winners, the correlation between Sik(t-1)
and ikt (and Sfik(t-1) and fikt) is positive. If governments disproportionately help "losers" (compensatory
policies), the correlation between Sik(t-1) and ikt (and Sfik(t-1) and fikt) is negative. Note that in equation
(4) what matters are industry-country specific time-varying shocks. Equation (4) is robust to industry
specific time-varying shocks shared by all countries. For example, if the telecommunication industry is
struggling in all countries, and governments decide to endogenously increase publicly funded R&D for
the industry, equation (4) would yield consistent estimates.
        To deal with these issues, we use predicted public defense R&D subsidies as instrumental
variable for publicly funded R&D. Mowery (2010) explains that defense R&D is the most important
example of "mission-oriented R&D," i.e., R&D that is spent not in order to pursue economic goals, but
any other, unrelated government objectives. In particular, defense R&D is usually motivated by
geopolitical, not economic, considerations. Our identifying assumption is that time variation in predicted
defense-related R&D is largely driven by events exogenous to country-specific R&D shocks, such as




                                                      10
wars, terrorism, geopolitical shocks like the end of the Cold War, and the ideological preferences of the
political leaders in power. Defense R&D is by far the largest component of government R&D in many
countries, e.g., United States, United Kingdom, and France. This ensures that our instrument has a strong
first stage. Defense R&D also causes the biggest variations in public R&D over time, and there is a large
variation across countries, ranging from pacifist country like Japan or neutral countries like Austria, to
defense-heavy countries like the United States and South Korea.
        In theory, one could use actual R&D defense subsidies in a year as the instrument for government
funded R&D ( ) in that year. However, it is in principle possible that even defense subsidies have an
endogenous component, responding to R&D supply or demand shocks. Thus, we use predicted public
defense R&D subsidies as instrumental variable instead of actual defense R&D subsidies. While this
may weaken the power of the instrument in the first stage, it strengthens its validity. In practice, our first
stage has good power and is robust to various changes in the assumptions we use to construct the
instrument.
        The exact definition of predicted public defense R&D differs slightly for the OECD and the
French dataset due to differences in level of aggregation and variable definitions. The details on how we
construct the instrument are in Appendix A.
        For the OECD analysis, predicted defense R&D subsidies (
                                                                 ) is defined as
                                            
                                               
                                             = (-1)  

                                                            11
where  is country k's total defense R&D spending in year t.
                                                               The term (-1)
                                                                        
                                                                             is not the

actual industry i's share of government defense R&D in country k. Instead, (-1)
                                                                           
                                                                                is a weighted
average of one-year lagged government defense R&D in industry i as a share of all the government
defense R&D in the United States and France. The weights are country-industry-time specific and
depend on the similarity of country k's patent technology class distribution to the distributions of the
United States and France. We use (-1)
                                 
                                      rather than the actual own country share in order to
further reduce the risk that the industry distribution of defense R&D subsidies responds to expected
country-specific shocks. Using the US and French data also has the practical advantage that defense

11
  Notice that this includes not only defense related R&D subsidies spent by businesses, but also spend by sectors including
e.g., universities (called "government budget appropriations or outlays on R&D" or GBAORD by the OECD). We do not
have aggregate numbers for the business sector only component for all OECD countries (only for France). In Table 3 we
conduct robustness tests where we control for non-business R&D to make sure our affects are not being driven by defense
R&D carried out in government labs or universities.




                                                            11
R&D subsidy data at the country-industry level by year is not available for the other countries.12 Notice
that since (-1)
           
                is country-industry-year specific, it is not absorbed by any of our fixed effects.
         Is possible that while the overall level of defense spending in a country is orthogonal to the
residual ikt, the industry composition of defense spending may still be correlated with ikt. This would
be the case if, for example, French defense spending declined after the end of the Cold War for
exogenous reasons, but the decline was smaller in, say, aerospace, for endogenous reasons. Because we
are using a weighted average of US and French industry shares for all countries, this is a problem only
to the extent that endogenous adjustments to the industry shares reflect unobserved industry-specific
time-varying shocks that are shared by the US, France and the relevant country. As tests of this we look
at models that exclude the US or France (or both) and find that they all yield similar estimates.
         In the French analysis, the IV for firm-level models is defined as 
                                                                             = 4  3,

where 4 is the annual share of defense R&D subsidies allocated to firm f's main four-digit SIC
industry (averaged across all years); and 3, is the level of defense subsidies defined at the three-
                                          

digit industry level excluding subsidies going to firm f itself in a particular year, to avoid a mechanical
correlation between the IV and instrumented variable. Analogously, in our three-digit industry level
analysis for France, we use the three-digit industry defense R&D share and the two-digit industry defense
R&D subsidy excluding the subsidy to firm f's three digit industry: 3  2, . We tried using the
                                                                       

US shares for the French analysis, but the level of coarseness of the aggregation of industry meant that
the first stages were weak.
         A possible concern is that, although shocks to military R&D are unlikely to be related to
technology shocks, they could in principle signal shocks to future product demand. Under this view, an
event such as 9/11 generated a direct increase in military R&D, but also increased current and future
demand for military products. In turn, this second channel could stimulate additional private R&D
through a demand or market size effect, thus invalidating our instrument. We note that it is not ex ante
obvious that this is a major issue in our context because historically large increases in government



12
  The US industry shares are given for each fiscal year, so it is partially lagged compared to the other variables. It is available
for the years 1987-2003 for the US (we hold the 2003 share constant for the years after 2003). Apart from the US, the defense
breakdown by industry is only available for France between 1980 and 2015 (see data description further below). Our results
are robust to dropping either the US or France or both. We use only the France-specific data in the French firm-level analysis
below.




                                                               12
defense procurement are typically targeted toward existing, rather than new technologies, while most
R&D is likely to be directed at new technologies.13
        Nevertheless, we present four tests intended to probe the sensitivity of our findings to these
demand effects. (i) As a first pass, we estimate models that condition on future industry output. These
models are not our preferred specification, because future output needs to be thought of as an endogenous
variable. (ii) We then estimate models that condition on non-R&D military spending and expectations
thereof. (iii) We also estimate our baseline model solely on the US, where we have industry-specific
R&D and non-R&D public military spending. (iv) Finally, we perform placebo tests based on
components of defense spending that are unrelated to R&D subsidies paid to businesses. The idea is that
our instrumental variable estimates should not be driven by changes in defense procurement that
stimulate demand rather than R&D. Overall, our findings indicate that changes in expected demand are
not major sources of bias in our models.
        Another issue to consider in interpreting our IV estimates has to do with the possibility that
government-funded R&D by country i is set endogenously in response to government-funded R&D by
country i's competitors. For example, an increase in government-funded R&D in, say, the German
chemical sector may induce France to increase its own government-funded R&D in the chemical sector.
This does not invalidate our estimates--even in an ideal randomized setting where public subsidies are
randomly assigned this issue would arise--but it affects their interpretation. In this case, the  parameters
should be interpreted as the effect of S on R, after allowing for the endogenous reaction of other countries.
This is arguably the parameter of interest for policy. It informs policymakers of what they can expect
from a policy change is other countries react.


     2.3 Employment and Wages
We also examine the effect of increases in public R&D investment on employment and wages. This is
important because an increase in private R&D expenditures does not necessarily equal an increase in
R&D activity. We distinguish between the effect on labor market outcomes of R&D workers and labor
market outcomes of non-R&D workers. If the supply of R&D workers is completely inelastic in the short
run, increased R&D spending could simply result in higher wages, with little or no effect on employment


13
  This is why many historians like Milward (1977) have argued that wars tend to retard technological change by engendering
a more conservative attitude to military procurement.




                                                           13
and innovation (Goolsbee, 1998). On the other hand, if R&D workers can move across industries or
across countries so that supply to a specific country and industry is fairly elastic, we might find
significant increases in R&D personnel and limited increases in their wages. The effects on demand for
non-R&D personnel in the industry depend on whether R&D generates technologies that substitute for
or complement such labor. On the one hand, more R&D in an industry may result in product innovation,
higher sales, and therefore more labor demand. On the other hand, process innovation can easily reduce
employment by making it easier to produce the same output with fewer labor inputs.
        To empirically assess these questions, we estimate models where the dependent variable is the
employment of R&D workers, employment of non-R&D workers, and average wages.


    2.4 International Spillovers
It is in principle possible that increases in government-funded R&D in an industry in a given country
affect private R&D investment by firms in the same industry located abroad. For example, an increase
in government-funded R&D in the German chemical industry may reduce private R&D in the French
chemical industry. This may be due to strategic reasons, as French firms decide it is not worth competing
to catch up with their German rivals (e.g. international R&D is a strategic substitute) or the cost of
internationally used industry-specific R&D inputs (e.g. chemical engineers) may be driven up. The
opposite spillover effect could also arise if R&D is a strategic complement between countries, so that
increased public R&D in Germany results in French firms investing more to keep up in the race; or if
there are significant cross-country technological or human capital externalities.
        To empirically assess international spillovers, we use our OECD data to estimate models of the
form:
              lnRikt =  OECDlnSik(t-1) +  OECDlnSPik(t-1) +  OECDlnYikt +  Xkt + dit + dik + ikt       (6)
where SPik(t-1) is a weighted average of government-funded R&D in other countries in the same industry
and year with weights measuring the between country i and each other country: SPik(t-1) = j dijSjk(t-1)
where dij is the economic or geographic "distance" between country i and country j (normalized to sum
to one for each country i) and Sjk(t-1) is, as before, government-funded R&D in industry i in country j.


3   Data and Basic Facts




                                                    14
        We use two separate data sets: section 3.1 details the data used in our OECD industry-country
level analysis; section 3.2 describes the data used in our French firm-level analysis.


3.1 OECD Industry-Country Data
        Data Sources. We combine data for OECD countries from the STructural ANalysis (STAN)
dataset and the Main Science and Technology Indicators (MSTI) dataset. Our data include 26 countries,
26 industries, and 23 years, from 1987 to 2009. The Data Appendix describes in detail how we cleaned
and merged the data and provides the exact definition of each variable with the corresponding source.
        The definitions of R&D are based on the internationally recognized "Frascati Manual" used by
the OECD and national statistical agencies. Our main R&D variable measures industry-level R&D
conducted by businesses (known as "Business Enterprise R&D" or "BERD").
        We will generally refer to BERD as simply "R&D" for brevity. While all BERD is conducted by
firms, some of its funding comes from private sector sources while other funding comes from the
government. Hence, in the notation of our model, BERD = R + S.
        We refer to the part of BERD that is funded by private sources as "privately-funded R&D," or
        "private R&D." This is the variable R, the main dependent variable in equations (4) and (5).
        We refer to the part of BERD that is funded by the government as "government-funded R&D"
        or "public R&D." This is the variable S.
        A subset of public R&D is defense-related, and we refer to it as "defense R&D." Note that S only
        includes government-funded R&D conducted by private firms, and does not include R&D
        conducted by universities (and other non-profits) and by the government itself (e.g. in
        government R&D labs). Also note that we do not have data on industry-specific defense R&D in
        the OECD dataset, but we instead construct a predicted defense R&D as described above.14
Appendix Table A1 (Panel A) summarizes the variable definition and presents summary statistics.


        Facts about R&D. There is wide variation in private R&D, public R&D, and defense R&D
across countries, industries, and years. Consider first aggregate R&D as a percent of GDP by country


14
  The OECD also reports two other sources of funds: Other national and funds from abroad. These sources are small, with
other national sources contributing to 0.01% of total R&D, and sources from abroad contributing to 2.5% of total R&D in the
dataset. We add these funding sources to privately funded R&D for simplicity, but our main results are not affected by this.




                                                            15
(Appendix Table A2). The most R&D-intensive country is South Korea at 2.7%, followed by Sweden at
2%. The US also has a very high R&D/GDP ratio of 1.9%. At the other end of the spectrum, there are
Southern European countries like Greece and Portugal, with ratios approximately 0.2%. Although there
appears to be a general upward trend in R&D over time, there is substantial variation across countries in
growth rates, with some countries experiencing steep increases (e.g. Denmark) while others experience
declines (e.g. the UK).
        R&D intensity also varies widely across industries (see Appendix Table A3). The most R&D-
intensive industries are generally Information Technology (Office, accounting, and computing
machinery) and telecommunications (Radio, TV, and other communications equipment), with R&D
intensities of over 20%. The next most R&D intensive sectors are chemicals (including pharmaceuticals),
medical/precision instruments, and transport equipment (including aerospace) with over 10% of value
added devoted to R&D. By contrast there is very little formal R&D in the distributive trades (wholesale
and retail), personal services, and construction.
        Public R&D also varies widely across countries and over time. Table 1 shows that the US and
Eastern European nations such as Poland and Slovakia have the highest share of R&D funded by the
government (over 15%), whereas the share is under 2% in Switzerland and Japan. In many countries,
such as the US, the UK, France, and Canada, the rate of public funding has decreased over time. Some
of this is likely to be due to a shift from direct to indirect support to business R&D, such as tax breaks
(see Guellec and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, 1999). We explicitly add controls for tax incentives in
robustness checks presented below. Table 2 shows the defense share of government-funded R&D by
country. Not surprisingly, the US has the highest proportion of defense-related R&D (57%), followed
by Great Britain (35%), and then France (29%). In the data, we observe the defense-related part of the
government's total R&D budget from the OECD MSTI.15 Ideally, we would have just the government-
funded and business-conducted part of R&D, but this data does not exist over time across countries. It
is likely that the two series track each other, however.16




15
    Specifically, "Total government funded R&D" is all government budget appropriations or outlays of total R&D, i.e., not
just the government-funded part of R&D conducted by businesses, but also the government-funded part of R&D conducted
outside of enterprises.
16
   Indeed, for the US and for France we have a more detailed breakdown and we confirm that the correlation is 0.73 (US) and
0.88 (France).




                                                            16
         The defense share of R&D varies not just across countries, but also within country over time.
This is important for the identification of our models, which include country by industry fixed effects.
Figure 1 illustrates how the four largest economies in our data experienced very different developments
in their shares of defense-related and government-funded R&D to GDP ratios over time. In the United
States, defense R&D spending started at a very high level in the late 1980s under Reagan (over 0.8% of
GDP) and fell subsequently after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. After 9/11, defense R&D spending
ramped up again under the War on Terror and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, rising from 0.45% (in
2001) to 0.59% (in 2008) of GDP. In Germany, defense spending is at a much lower level. Like the US,
Germany reduced defense spending after the Cold War, with the rise of President Gorbachev and the fall
of the Berlin Wall. In 1996, however, Germany and France cofounded a military agency focusing on
R&D activities, causing a pick-up in defense R&D in Germany. In contrast to the US, Germany did not
ramp up defense spending after 9/11; instead, it continued to downsize its military (European Parliament,
2011). In stark contrast, Japan has an even lower level of defense R&D spending, as its constitution
commits the country to pacifism. However, Japan increased its military activities in response to North
Korean missile tests in the late 1990s by starting a surveillance satellite program that resulted in satellite
launches in 2003, 2006, and 2007 (Hagström and Williamsson, 2009). Finally, France shows a time-
pattern relatively similar to Germany: The reduction in defense spending after the end of the Cold War
is visible, but in contrast to Germany, France did ramp up defense spending after 9/11.
         Overall, the experiences of these four major economies with highly variable levels of defense
R&D illustrate how the timing of changes in defense R&D often reflects factors that are largely
exogenous to economic and technological conditions, being driven by geopolitical events that are
heterogeneous across countries.17
         Our instrumental variable strategy is predicated on the notion that defense R&D is an important
driver of overall government-funded R&D. Figure 2 presents the series of defense R&D and public R&D
by country (summed across industries). Clearly, in most cases the two series tend to move together: the
average correlation is 0.29 (standard error 0.11). The importance of defense R&D varies widely across
industries: Aerospace tends to be the single most important beneficiary of defense R&D. In the OECD


17
  Spain saw a rise in military spending after 1996, when the conservative center-right party came to power and pursued a
new defense policy. The policy included a large increase in the military budget, which resulted in a sharp increase in military
R&D spending. The financial crisis in 2008 forced the government to significantly cut the military budget, including R&D
contracts (Miralles, 2004; Barbé and Mestres, 2007).




                                                             17
data the first stage of our IV relies on the relationship between public R&D and predicted defense R&D.
The correlation at the industry level is visually strong (see Appendix Figure A1). In years when defense
R&D is high (low), overall government funded R&D tends to be high (low). Below we quantify this
relationship more formally.


3.2 French Firm-level Data
       Data Sources. We use firm-level data collected by the French Ministry of National Education,
Higher Education and Research ("Ministry of Research") in their annual R&D survey from 1980 through
2015. The Data Appendix provides details on the survey that seeks to include all large firms that perform
R&D and a rotating sample of smaller firms that perform R&D. Firms conducting research and
development are asked to report detailed information on their R&D activity (R&D budget, number of
R&D employees, R&D wage bill, number of researchers), and broader firm information (such as their
firm identifier - SIREN, total number of employees, sales, main industry, etc.). Importantly for us, the
dataset includes information on which firms receive R&D subsidies and how much, as well as what type
of subsidy they receive (including defense). In the rest of the paper:
       We refer to all R&D subsidies originating from Ministry of the Armed Forces and its agencies
       as "defense R&D subsidies."
       We refer to the sum of all R&D subsidies (including defense R&D subsidies) originating from
       any ministry or government agency as "total R&D subsidies" or just "R&D subsidies."
       We refer to the firm's R&D budget less total R&D subsidies, other national funds, and
       international funds, as "privately funded R&D."

   Descriptive Statistics. The sample includes 40,787 firms for an average of 3.9 years each. Only
24% of firms appear in five or more years and almost 40% of firms appear just once. Since our models
include firm fixed effects, we drop firms that appear only once. We also drop firms with missing R&D
data. The usable sample includes 12,539 firms appearing an average of 6.5 years each, 56% of which
appear in more than 5 years. Summary statistics are in Panel B of Appendix Table A1.
       The largest two-digit industries by firm count in our sample are business services (8,025 firms)
and software/data (7,507 firms), followed by machinery (2,755 firms). Because the survey targets firms
that are likely to be conducting R&D, this ordering also holds when we rank industries by number of




                                                    18
firms conducting R&D in one or more years: 7,112, 6,940, and 2,550 firms in business services,
software/data, and machinery, respectively. Looking at the number of firms receiving R&D subsidies,
business services (3,118 firms), software/data (3,092 firms), and machinery (1,178 firms) remain the
three most prominent industries. R&D subsidies cover a large fraction of firms in these industries, while
a much smaller portion receive defense R&D subsidies: just 229 business services firms, 133 electronics
firms, and 115 software/data firms over the 36-year period for which we have data.
           While most R&D subsidies are not for defense, most euros allocated via subsidies are for
defense. Of the 833 billion in R&D conducted in our sample, 87 billion was publicly funded, and 57
billion of that was targeted at defense. In industries like aerospace/transport,18 the dominance of defense
subsidies is even clearer, with the industry conducting 119 billion in R&D, of which 38 billion was
publicly funded, almost 31 billion specifically for defense. Using the value of defense subsidies
allocated to each industry, the largest defense industries after aerospace/transport are electronics,
technical instruments, machinery, and chemicals.


4      The Effect of Government-Funded R&D on Privately-Funded R&D, Employment and Wages
           We begin our empirical analysis by estimating the effect of publicly financed R&D on privately
financed R&D (sub-section 4.1) and jobs and wages (sub-section 4.2). In sub-section 4.3, we estimate
international spillover effects of R&D. In section 5 we turn our attention to the effects of R&D on
productivity.


4.1 Effect of Public R&D on Domestic Private R&D
4.1.1 Estimates Based on OECD Data
           Table 3 presents estimates of the relationship between privately funded R&D and lagged public
R&D in the OECD industry-country panel. The dependent variable is R&D conducted in the private
sector (BERD) that is also financed by the private sector (recall that it excludes government financed
R&D). As discussed in the Data section, "Public R&D" is government-financed R&D performed by
private firms. All columns control for a full set of country by industry fixed effects, a full set of industry
by year dummies and a set of country-specific linear trends. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the



18
     In addition to aerospace, this includes rail and ships, but not automobiles.




                                                                 19
industry-country and country-year level. All models are weighted by the industry-country pair's initial
share of employment in total country employment.
        Panel A reports OLS estimates. It shows that there is a statistically significant positive correlation
between public R&D and private R&D, more consistent with crowding in than crowding out. In Panel
B, we report 2SLS estimates obtained by using predicted defense R&D as an instrument for public R&D.
The first stages of our instrumental variable estimates are generally well identified. Weak instrument
diagnostics are reported at the bottom and show that the instruments have good power: the F-Test
(Kleibergen-Paap) ranges from 10.02 to 14.66 in our main specifications; and Anderson-Rubin Wald
test rejects the null hypothesis of weak instruments in all columns.
        Full first stage coefficients are reported in Appendix Table A4; these are interesting in their own
right. A priori, it is unclear whether an increase in predicted defense R&D in an industry will necessarily
result in an increase in total government-funded R&D in that industry. In theory, given a budget
constraint, it is possible that increases in defense spending are offset by declines in non-defense
subsidies, leading to no net effect on total public R&D. The estimates in the table, however, suggest that
this is not the case. A 10% increase in predicted defense R&D is associated with a 0.9% to 1.01%
increase in total government-funded R&D, so there is not complete offset.19
        The entry in column (1) in panel B of Table 3 indicates a positive effect of public R&D on private
R&D. A 10% increase in public R&D subsidies is associated with a 5.6% increase in the industry's
privately funded R&D spending in the following year. A comparison with panel A indicates that the
point estimate is larger than the corresponding OLS estimate. This could indicate that subsidies are
compensatory ­ targeted at "losers" and/or the presence of measurement error in private R&D.
        One possible concern is that changes in defense R&D that are due to changes in the political
orientation of a government might be correlated with changes in other policies that affect firms' private
R&D spending. For example, our model would be biased if, say, right-wing governments tend to both
increase defense spending for specific sectors and simultaneously adopt pro-business policies for those
sectors. In the rest of the table, we probe the robustness of our estimates to additional controls intended
to capture variation in public policies. Since these additional controls are not always available, and our



19
  There is also likely to be measurement error in the instrument that could attenuate the relationship between public R&D
and defense R&D.




                                                           20
sample size declines from 5,026 to 4,459, in column (2) we replicate the model in column (1) using the
smaller sample for comparison. The estimated coefficient falls slightly to 0.492 (0.199).
       In column (3) we add controls for industry output and national GDP; the coefficient on public
R&D increases slightly to 0.518 (0.204). Recall that our models condition on country-specific linear
trends. Adding country-specific quadratic trends to absorb non-linear drifts in each country would result
in significantly larger estimates of the effect of Public R&D. For example, the estimated IV coefficient
from the model in column (3) is 0.780 (0.244) (results available on request).
       In column (4), we add a measure of R&D tax credits based on data from Thomson (2012). R&D
tax credits are an alternative form of government support for R&D used by a number of countries. Over
the past 20 years, many governments have started to replace direct R&D subsidies with other fiscal
policies such as R&D tax credits (Guellec and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, 1999; Moretti and
Wilson, 2012). From the point of view of governments, publicly funded R&D and R&D tax credits are
likely to be substitutes, making it possible that in practice the two types of public support are negatively
correlated. In this case, our estimates might understate the true effect of government-funded R&D. In
practice, the magnitude of this bias is unlikely to be large, since R&D tax credits are in most countries
part of the national tax code, and unlike the direct R&D subsidies, they are not industry-specific.
Empirically, the coefficient on public R&D in column (4) appears to decrease to 0.476 (0.190).
       Besides businesses, other institutions like universities and government-funded research labs
receive subsidies for R&D, which might be correlated with business R&D subsidies. In column (5) we
also include R&D subsidies to non-business institutions. Empirically, non-business R&D does not
appear to affect private R&D undertaken by businesses significantly, and the coefficient on public R&D
rises slightly. R&D subsidies might also be correlated with other business favoring policies, for example
taxes on businesses, which might also affect private R&D directly (e.g. Akcigit et al, 2018). In column
(6) we control for business tax revenues as a proportion of GDP (tax revenue data is from OECD and
includes taxes on income, profits and capital gains of corporates). There is a weakly negative effect of
taxes, but the point estimate on public R&D subsidies is robust to this addition.
       As an additional robustness check on the role played by government policies we estimate a model
that controls for the political orientation of the government. If R&D subsidies are correlated with other
government policies, this is likely to be especially true for the case when defense R&D changes are due




                                                    21
to changes in the political orientation of the government after elections. 20 Columns (1) and (2) in
Appendix Table A5 indicate that the estimated effect of public R&D appears unchanged, indicating that
variation in industry-specific defense R&D is not highly correlated with the general political orientation
of governments.
         As discussed above, an important concern is that increases in defense R&D spending might be
correlated with increases in expected future demand for output. For example, after 9/11, US firms
producing aircraft may have anticipated increased demand for military planes and increased private R&D
in expectation of this greater demand, even in the absence of public R&D. This would violate the IV
strategy as both public and private R&D respond to an exogenous event. While some specifications in
Table 3 condition on industry and aggregate output and industry by time dummies, these variables may
not fully account for expectations of future demand changes that are specific to an industry-country pair.
         We seek to address this concern in four ways. As a first pass, in columns (3) and (4) of Appendix
Table A5, we show robustness to conditioning on future industry output. These models are not our
preferred specification, because future output needs to be thought of as an endogenous variable. Second,
in columns (5) and (6) of Appendix Table A5, we use only country*year variation in the defense
instrument. These estimates ignore variation across industries and are identified only by variation across
countries and time in defense expenditures. While the first stage is a bit lower, the estimated coefficients
are not very much affected. Thirdly, in columns (7) and (8) of Appendix Table A5, we estimate models
that condition on non-R&D military spending and expectations thereof. The sample size drops to 2,108
since we do not have data on total public military spending for all countries but the estimates based on
the sub-sample where we do have this information are similar to the baseline estimates in Table 3.
Including total military spending does not significantly affect the coefficients on public R&D.21
         Finally, in Appendix Table A6, we perform placebo tests based on components of defense
spending that are unrelated to R&D subsidies paid to businesses: defense procurement excluding R&D;
and military wage bill excluding R&D (either using a narrow or a broad definition of R&D, so overall
there are four placebo instruments). Changes in both defense procurement excluding R&D and military
wage bill excluding R&D are likely to be correlated with changes in demand, but should not result in


20
   The political orientation data is from the World Bank's Database of Political Institutions (DPI) and indicates whether the
chief executive's party is right wing, center, or left wing.
21
   The direct effect of total military spending or procurement on private R&D is positive, as expected, but the first stage F-
statistic is low.




                                                             22
changes in R&D. Therefore, in models where public R&D or private R&D is regressed on defense
procurement or military wage bill, the four placebo instruments should not be predictive of public or
private R&D. Finding a significant correlation between the placebo instruments and public or private
R&D would suggest that our IV estimates might be driven by demand effects coming from defense
spending other than R&D, or by a correlation of defense spending with other policies that encourage
economic growth and therefore R&D. The results in Appendix Table A6 indicate that measures of non-
R&D defense procurement and non-R&D military wage bill are uncorrelated with public and private
R&D.
         Overall, while we cannot completely rule out that future demand expectations play a role in our
estimates, the weight of the evidence appears to be more consistent with the effects of public R&D on
private R&D reflecting forces of supply rather than demand.
         We performed numerous additional robustness tests. Since our models are identified by changes
in public R&D over time, one might be concerned that the results are driven by countries with very low
defense R&D levels. If we re-estimate our model only including countries with above-median defense
R&D to GDP ratios--US, France, UK, South Korea, Sweden, Spain, Germany, Slovakia, Italy--our
estimates appear robust. The OLS and IV coefficients of the same specifications as in column (3) in
Table 3 are 0.160 (0.026) and 0.694 (0.328), respectively. 22 We also checked for outliers by (i)
winsorizing observations in the top and bottom 1% of the level of the private R&D distribution and (ii)
winsorizing observations in the top and bottom 1% of the changes in the private R&D distribution.
Additionally, we tried winsorizing the growth rates of the IV. The results are robust to all these
modifications.23
         Finally, we note that our baseline model has linear country time trends but not a full set of country
by year dummies. The reason is that the first stage is weak if country-year fixed effects are included,
reflecting the fact that much of the variation in the instrument is at the country-year level. The addition




22
   One may also harbor the opposite concern, namely that our results could be driven by the US or by France. The results are
similar when we drop these countries. The coefficient on public R&D in the IV specification is 0.564 (0.247) when we drop
the US, and 0.544 (0.217) when we drop France.
23
   One other concern that we tested is whether the positive effect of public R&D subsidies on private R&D subsidies in the
same industry might be driven by R&D subsidies to industries which are connected by input output linkages. In order to test
this, we control for domestic R&D in other industries, which we weigh by their input or output share to the respective industry.
This concern does not seem to be relevant in the data, as our estimates remain unchanged (results available upon request).




                                                              23
of country-year dummies makes little difference to the OLS results, especially once we include GDP to
account for macroeconomic shocks.24


4.1.2 Estimates Based on French Data
        Table 4 contains the estimates for the French dataset. Compared to the estimates based on the
OECD data, the firm-level French data allow for a much finer level of detail, since we observe which
firms within an industry actually receive public R&D and which do not. In terms of identification, firm-
level data allow us to estimate models that include firm fixed effects, therefore accounting for all time-
invariant heterogeneity across firms. Identification comes from comparing the level of private R&D in
the same firm observed before it receives a government R&D subsidy and after it receives a government
R&D subsidy.
        Panel A presents the industry-level results for France and panel B presents the firm-level results.
We present industry-level results for comparison to the OECD industry-country data in Table 3, although
it should be noted that the French data allow for a finer degree of industry disaggregation (195 sectors).
Column (1) of panel A shows the OLS estimates. The coefficient suggests a positive correlation between
privately funded business R&D and lagged government subsidies, but is smaller in magnitude than the
OECD results in Table 3. Column (2) reports the corresponding IV estimate using defense spending
predicted from more aggregate industry trends as an instrument for defense R&D subsidies. The first
stage F-statistic is F = 11.56. (All first stage coefficients are reported in Appendix Table A7). The IV
estimate is significant and much larger than the OLS estimate, just like the OECD results. The IV
coefficient of 0.346 is not significantly different from the comparable OECD coefficient of 0.511 in
column (2) of Table 3 Panel B (p-value of difference = 0.20).
        Recall that defense spending at the industry level is not available in OECD industry data for most
countries, but we do have it in France. Consequently, we include it directly on the right hand side of the
private R&D equation in the columns (3) and (4) of Table 4. The coefficient on defense subsidies is
positive and significant for the OLS and IV specifications, although again the IV coefficient is larger:
0.150 (0.041). Note that a 10% increase in total subsidies is obviously a larger amount of money than a



24
  For example, in the third column of Panel A in Table 3, the coefficient (standard error) on public R&D increases slightly
to 0.167 (0.028) when country by year fixed effects are included.




                                                            24
10% increase in defense subsidies alone, which explains the smaller elasticity in column (4) compared
to (2).
          The firm-level analysis in panel B is based on a longitudinal sample of 12,586 firms observed
for several years, for a total sample size of 81,201 firm-years. Panel B shows similar patterns to the
results in panel A. In column (2), the IV coefficient is 0.119 (0.069), while in column (4), it is 0.374
(0.215). The IV estimates again lead us to reject the null of crowd-out: increases in public R&D result
in more investment in private R&D, not less. Based on entries in column (2), a 10% increase in R&D
subsidies is associated with a 1.2% increase in the firm's privately funded R&D spending in the
following year. This confirms that even after controlling for firm fixed effects, defense R&D subsidies
appear to be crowding in private R&D spending.
          A comparison with panel A of Table 4 indicates that industry-level coefficients are smaller than
firm-level coefficients when we use defense R&D subsidies (columns (3) and (4)), but the reverse is true
for total R&D subsidies (columns (1) and (2)). Coefficients from industry-level data do not need to be
identical to coefficients from firm-level data in the presence of technology spillovers from R&D within
an industry. Industry coefficients should be larger if crowd-in induces rival firms to do more R&D
(strategic complementarity). However, it might be that rivals do less R&D if there is strategic
substitutability (e.g. free riding), for example, meaning that industry coefficients would be less than their
firm-level counterparts (Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen, 2013). We will investigate spillover
effects at the international level in more detail below.25
          Overall, there is little evidence in Tables 3 and 4 of upward bias in the OLS estimates. In fact,
the OLS estimates are consistently below the IV estimates. In the context of our discussion in Section 2,
this is consistent with compensatory government policies, whereby governments tend to subsidize
industries that are underperforming in terms on R&D investment.26 The finding of IV estimates larger
than OLS estimates may also reflect attenuation bias from measurement error in OLS; or a local average
treatment effect, with public funds directed towards industries that are likely to "match" subsidies more
strongly (or a combination of these explanations).



25
   When we separate the sample into firms that are larger than the median in their industry or smaller than the median in their
industry, OLS estimates indicate that that smaller firms crowd in less than large firms, though these estimates are imprecise
and preclude definitive conclusions.
26
   Criscuolo et al. (2019) find that the same appears to be true in the case of UK investment subsidies.




                                                             25
4.1.3 Magnitude of the Estimated Effect
         Taken together, the estimates in Tables 3 and 4 indicate that increases in public R&D translate
into increases in private R&D expenditures. This is true both when we focus on industry changes across
the whole OECD or within France and when we focus on within-firm changes in France. This crowd-in
is consistent with the existence of agglomeration economies--whereby increases in government R&D
raise the returns for private companies in the same country and industry--or large fixed costs or credit
constraints.
         Our preferred elasticity for the OECD dataset is 0.518 (Table 3, panel B, column (3)), suggesting
that a 10% increase in government subsidies in a given year is expected to result in a 5.1% increase in
private sector R&D the following year. At the mean values of public and private R&D, this implies that
$1 of additional public funds for R&D translates into $6 of extra R&D funded by the private sector. Our
preferred elasticity at the firm level in the French dataset is 0.119 (Table 4, panel B, column (2)). At the
mean values of public and private R&D in France, this implies that 1 of additional public funds for
R&D translates into 0.85 of extra R&D funded by the private sector. As noted above, the smaller firm
level effects compared to industry level effects could be due to positive within industry spillovers.
         Our findings imply that in some industries, defense-related R&D is responsible for a significant
portion of private R&D investment. For example, in the US "aerospace products and parts" industry,
defense-related R&D amounted to $3,027 million in 2002 (nominal). Our estimates suggest that this
public investment results in $1,948 million of additional investment in private R&D.27 If we take the
total amount spent by the US government, we estimate that private R&D investment is $85 billion higher
than the counterfactual with no government-funded defense R&D.
         Interestingly, differences in defense-related R&D can account for some of the differences in
private R&D across countries. For example, our estimates indicate that if France increased its defense
R&D to the level of the US as a fraction of GDP (admittedly a very large increase: roughly a factor of
2.2), private R&D investment would increase by 10.3%.28


27
   Public R&D in aerospace products and parts amounted to $4,306 million in 2002 (nominal). Therefore, defense related
R&D was 70% of public R&D. A reduction of public R&D by 70% translates into a reduction of private R&D by 36% using
our preferred elasticity of 0.518 in column (3) of Table 3. Private R&D was $5,349 million in aerospace products and parts
in 2002, so 36% of this number yields $1,948 million.
28
   Our estimates also indicate that if Germany increased its defense R&D to the level of the US as a fraction of GDP (an even
larger increase), private R&D investment would increase by 72%. Defense R&D expenditure as share of GDP in our data
(averaged over all years) is 0.58% for the US, 0.28% for France, and 0.07% for Germany. To reach the defense R&D share




                                                            26
         Finally, we compare public R&D subsidies to R&D tax credit policies. We consider the impact
on total R&D of abolishing the US tax credit and reallocating the saved public funds to direct government
grants.29 On the most recent data, the federal tax credit costs $11.3 billion. Using the user-cost elasticity
of unity in Table 3, we estimate that the credit raises R&D by $14.2 billion. By comparison, the crowd-
in elasticities of Table 3 imply that spending the $11.3 billion saved from abolishing tax credits on grants
would raise total R&D by $30.7 billion. This is over twice as much as the effect generated by R&D tax
credits. Appendix B provides the details, considers a range of robustness tests and concludes that direct
grants are likely no worse value for money than tax incentives and generally seem to perform better.
There is, of course, great uncertainty over these back of the envelope calculations, but we do think they
are useful for understanding the order of magnitude of the effects of alternative innovation policies.


4.2 Effect on Employment and Wages
         Appendix Table A8 reports estimates of models similar to those in Tables 3 and 4 where the
dependent variable is employment or wages. For convenience, column (1) reproduces the baseline effect
of public R&D on private R&D from column (1) of Table 3 (OECD data) and columns (1) and (2) of
Table 4 (French data). Since data on employment and wages are not available for all countries and
industries and years, column (2) reports the baseline elasticity estimated on the sample for which
employment and wage data are available. In column (3), the dependent variable is the number of workers
directly engaged in R&D activities; in column (4) it is the number of workers not engaged in R&D
activities; and in column (5) it is the average salary of R&D workers -- measured as the cost of R&D
personnel over divided by R&D personnel. The top panel reports OLS estimates, while the bottom panel
reports IV estimates.
         OLS estimates using the OECD data uncover significant elasticities of employment of R&D
workers and the average salary of R&D workers and significant positive but much smaller elasticities
on the employment of non-R&D workers. The large employment effects and smaller wage effects for
R&D workers are consistent with an elastic labor supply, possibly indicating that it might be easy for
R&D workers to relocate to the affected industry from other industries or countries.


of the US, Germany would have to increase own defense R&D spending by a factor of 9.3--a very large increase. Multiplying
this with the coefficients of the first stage and the IV estimates yields the estimated percent increase in private R&D spending.
29
   Other thought experiments are possible. But this one sidesteps the issue of what is the impact of R&D on productivity and
what is the distorting effects of raising public funds.




                                                              27
       For France, the estimated elasticities on employment of R&D workers in column (3) are similar
to those for R&D expenditures in column (2), indicating that employment of French scientists increases
proportionally to increases in R&D expenditures. At the same time, the employment effects are much
larger than the wage effects, indicating a more elastic labor supply of researchers from possibly abroad
compared to the average OECD country.
       IV estimates for France 3-digit industries have a similar pattern as OLS estimates, but estimates
based on OECD data and French firm level data are too imprecise to draw firm conclusions.


4.3 International R&D Spillover Effects
       So far, we have estimated the direct effect of government-funded R&D in an industry and country
on private R&D activity in the same industry and country. We now consider the possibility that
government-funded R&D in an industry and country may have an additional, indirect effect on private
R&D investment in other countries. It is possible that increases in government-funded R&D in an
industry in a given country will result in lower R&D in similar industries abroad. Alternatively,
knowledge generated from public R&D in one country may spill over to a different country and generate
additional private research efforts. To quantify these spillover effects, we estimate equation (6) where
we include both domestic public R&D and neighbors' public R&D. We base this analysis on the OECD
industry-country data.
       Specifically, in panel A of Table 5 we regress private R&D on lagged domestic public R&D and
lagged neighbors' public R&D, measured as a weighted average of public R&D in other countries in the
same industry and year, with weights reflecting various measures of geographic and economic proximity.
Column (2) uses the difference in GDP per capita as a distance measure, column (3) the geographic
distance in kilometers between the capital cities, column (4) the difference in skill intensity as measured
by the share of the population with tertiary education, column (5) the similarity of patent technology
classes (out of 15 different technology classes), column (6) the difference in R&D intensity as measured
by R&D/GDP. We instrument domestic public R&D but not neighbors' public R&D, which we assume
to be exogenous to domestic firms. (The corresponding OLS coefficients are in Appendix Table A9).
       The effect of domestic public R&D on private R&D remains positive across all specifications.
The coefficient of interest is the one on neighbors' public R&D. It is positive and statistically significant
in all columns but (4) which uses skill intensity, indicating that if one country increases its public R&D,




                                                     28
firms in nearby countries in the same industry increase their investment in private R&D after controlling
for public R&D received from their own government. The positive effect is consistent with significant
crowd-in between close countries when proximity is defined by income, geography, technology, FDI
flows, and R&D intensity. The estimated elasticities range from 0.151 (0.053) in column (2)--where
proximity is based on per-capita GDP--to 0.909 (0.211) in column (5)--where proximity is based on
technology.
       Panel B uses business R&D (not government-funded R&D) to compute the international
spillover pool to test whether private R&D undertaken in a foreign country can also generate spillover
effects. Here the coefficients in columns 5 and 6 are negative, providing evidence of international
displacement between firms that are technological close or have similar R&D intensity. The coefficients
in the other columns are not statistically different from zero. Private R&D investment by firms in an
industry and country appear to have either no effect, or in some cases to discourage competitors in the
same industry in other countries from undertaking their own R&D.
       In panel C we include both international public R&D and international business R&D
simultaneously. In all but one specification, elasticities on international public R&D are positive while
elasticity on international private R&D are negative and significant. The elasticities on the international
public R&D and international private R&D appear of the same order of magnitude in absolute value,
indicating that they have a quantitatively similar percentage effect, although of opposite sign.
       Overall, we conclude that private and public R&D generate rather different spillover effects on
R&D behavior. While there are positive spillover effects from public R&D subsidies, private R&D leads
to either no spillover effects or crowding out. One possible explanation could be the fact that
governmental subsidies may be associated with requirements to make research findings public; or that
research supported by the government tends to be more basic research.


5   The Effect of R&D on Productivity
       Having documented the effect of government-funded R&D on private R&D investment, we now
turn our attention to quantifying the effect of R&D investment on productivity. We start in sub-section
5.1 by deriving the econometric model that we use in our empirical analysis. In sub-section 5.2 we
present estimates of the effect of total R&D on domestic productivity based on industry-level OECD
data and firm level French data. We also present estimates of international spillovers based on OECD




                                                    29
data--namely, the effect of R&D performed in an industry and country on productivity in the same
industry but in different countries. We conclude in sub-section 5.3 with an illustration of the magnitude
of the effects implied by our estimates based on the 9/11 shock.


5.1 Econometric Models
        We relate measures of productivity to R&D investment. In the OECD data, we measure
productivity as industry-country-year TFP. We approximate F(.) in equation (1) above by a second order
flexible form and can therefore estimate TFP as the superlative index:


                                   1                                             1                             
      ln = ln (               ) - ( + (-1) ) ln (                    ) - (1 - ( + (-1) )) ln (                       )(7)
                     (-1)          2                          (-1)               2                           (-1)

where VAikt is value added, Likt is total employment, and Kikt is the capital stock. We measure  using
labor's share of value added in two ways. First, we simply use the industry-specific average of the share
(across all countries and years).30 Alternatively, we use Harrigan (1997) smoothing methods to construct
the share of labor in value added,  . Both methods give very similar results. The Data Appendix
describes in more detail how we estimate TFP. To estimate the effect of R&D on TFP at the industry
level, we assume that the total R&D stock can be described by the perpetual inventory formula:  =
 +  + (1 - )(-1) where  is the depreciation rate of knowledge. If  is close to zero, the
TFP growth equation can be approximated by:
                                                   +
                                    ln =  (             )        +  +                                                 (8)
                                                         (-1)
             
where  =        is the gross rate of return to R&D capital.31
             

         In the French firm-level data, we have no information on capital stock or value added. Thus, our
                                                                                     
dependent variable is labor productivity defined as output per worker, ( )                  :
                                                                                      




30
   Since our TFP estimates are at the industry level, this method is more suited to estimate productivity than alternative
methods such as Olley-Pakes (1996) or Levinsohn-Petrin (2003) which are designed for estimation at the level of the firm.
31
   Although conventional, assuming  =  +  + (1 - )(-1) is restrictive. We considered an alternative
specification  =  +  + (1 - )(-1) that allows a dollar of public R&D to have a different effect on the
knowledge stock than a dollar of private R&D. This implies including two separate R&D terms on the right hand side of
equation (8). The problem is that this requires an additional instrument for privately funded R&D. We considered using R&D
tax credits, but the first stage had insufficient power when both public and private R&D were taken as endogenous.




                                                            30
                                                                    +
                                             ln ( )          =  (       )          +                                     (9)
                                                                         (-1)

         Equations (8) and (9) focus on the direct effect of a country's R&D investment on its own
productivity. It is possible that there is an additional indirect effect in the form of an international
technological spillover. This would occur if a country's investment in a given industry ends up
benefitting the productivity of firms in different countries due to international knowledge spillovers. To
test for this possibility, we use our OECD data to estimate a variant of equation (8):


                           ln Aikt = ((R+S)/VA)ik(t-1) + (RP/VA)ik(t-1) + Xikt + uikt                                   (10)


where (RP/VA)ik(t-1) is the weighted average of R&D/value added in all other countries in the same
industry and year, with weights measuring the economic or geographic distance of country k to all other
countries (as in the spillover variable in equation (6)). A positive (negative)  would indicate the
existence of positive (negative) international technological spillovers.
         In practice, variation in value added and output per worker reflect both variation in physical
productivity as well as variation in the prices of output. This is a common problem in the estimation of
production functions. In our context, this problem is likely to be serious because shocks to the demand
for defense products (geopolitical shocks, leadership changes, etc.) are likely to results in shocks to the
price of defense-related products. The defense industry is highly concentrated and has significant barriers
to entry, at least in the short run. This means that the supply curve is almost certainly not infinitely elastic
in the short run. An upward sloping supply curve implies that when product demand increases, our
measure of TFP increases even if productivity does not change. As standard in this literature, we deal
with this problem by using industry-year specific price deflators.32


5.2 Effect of R&D on Productivity
         In Table 6, we estimate equations (8) and (9) by regressing changes in productivity on lagged
total R&D intensity. Total R&D is measured as the sum of private R&D (R), public R&D (S) and R&D




32
  This is more problematic for the firm level results when there are firm-specific prices. In this case the coefficient on R&D
includes an effect on markups as well as quantity-based productivity.




                                                             31
from any other source. Columns (1) to (4) are based on OECD industry-level data (equation (8)).
Columns (5) and (6) are based on the French firm-level data (equation (9)).
         The OLS coefficient on R&D of column (1) indicates a positive correlation between lagged R&D
intensity and subsequent TFP growth. Column (2) adds country dummies and shows that the coefficient
is essentially the same as in column (1). We find a similar coefficient of 0.097 (0.031) for the IV estimate
in column (3), which is not statistically different from the OLS estimate. Column (4) reports the reduced
form estimate. In this model the independent variable is defense R&D divided by value added, which
has a both positive and statistically significant effect.33 We conduct a similar exercise for French three-
digit industries in column (5). The OLS estimate is positive, just like the one for the OECD industry-
country panel, but of smaller magnitude--0.026 (0.004). In column (6) we repeat this exercise on the
French firm-level data. We uncover a coefficient (standard error) of 0.040 (0.004), a bit larger than the
corresponding industry-level elasticity. Unfortunately, the IV estimates corresponding to columns (5)
and (6) are unidentified as the first stages have insufficient power (the F-statistics at the industry and
firm level are 0.96 and 0.10 respectively).34
         The magnitude of the estimated effects in Table 6 is economically significant. Using the estimate
for the OECD industry-country panel in column (4), for example, a permanent increase in the predicted
defense R&D to value added ratio of one percentage point is associated with an increase in the annual
growth rate of TFP of 0.08 percentage points. Since average annual TFP growth in our sample is around
0.98%, this represents an increase from 0.98% to 1.06% a year (i.e., an increase by 8.3%). Using the
OLS estimate in column (5), a similar calculation suggests an increase from an average annual labor
productivity growth rate of 0.05% to 0.076% a year in France.
         To put this in perspective, consider that our estimates indicate that if France and Germany were
to raise their defense spending to the level of the US as a percentage of value added--holding constant




33
   We probed the robustness of our finding using several alternative specifications. For example, estimates of the impact of
R&D on TFP using Harrigan (1997) smoothing techniques are very similar: the equivalent coefficient (standard error) on
R&D intensity in column (3) was 0.089 (0.032).
34
   The lack of first stage power in this table stands in contrast with strong first stages in the previous tables. A possible reason
is that the first stage does not include firm fixed effects (otherwise the second stage would be effectively in double
differences). This suggests the changes in firm R&D and changes in firm defense public may be more strongly related than
the level relationship.




                                                                32
everything else and ignoring the additional tax revenues needed--they would experience an increase in
the productivity growth rate by 3% and 5%, respectively.35
        The finding of a positive effect on productivity has an additional implication for our earlier
analysis of crowding in. The estimated positive effects on productivity indicate that the positive
crowding in effects that we found in the previous section are unlikely to be driven only by a relabeling
of other expenditure as R&D expenses in order to obtain subsidies. A pure relabeling would not result
in measurable productivity increases.
        Finally, we turn to the question of international productivity spillovers. We estimate equation
(10), where we use the same set of weights used in Table 5. Findings in Appendix Table A10 indicate
statistically significant positive international spillovers with coefficients ranging between 0.188 (0.068)
and 0.304 (0.070) in the IV specifications. In order to interpret the magnitude note that the average values
of own R&D/value added and the international spillover pool are different, so the coefficients cannot
directly be compared. The effect of the spillover pool is larger because it requires all the other countries
to increase their public R&D.36


5.3 An Illustration of the Magnitude of the Effects: The 9/11 Shock
        We end with an illustration of the magnitudes of various effects arising from our analysis based
on a concrete example: the increase in military R&D that occurred in the US after the 9/11 attacks. As
described in Figure 1, US defense R&D rose by 52% bringing it from 0.45% to 0.60% of GDP between
2001 and 2004. Using all the linkages in the results above, we calculate that the 9/11 shock induced an
increase of the TFP growth rate by 0.005 percentage points, holding taxes constant. Since the average
annual growth rate in this period is 0.4%, this effect amounts to a 1.5% increase. We view this effect as
significant but not exceedingly large. In addition, TFP growth in other OECD countries is estimated to
rise by 0.028% on average. We provide a detailed explanation of how we quantified these effects in


35
   The average defense R&D to value added ratios for the US, France, and Germany in our data are 0.53%, 0.30%, and 0.08%,
respectively. Thus, France would need to increase its defense R&D/value added by 74%, while Germany would need a 603%
increase.
36
   For example, in a specification using geographical distance weights for spillovers, the own R&D coefficient is 0.004 and
the spillover coefficient is 0.237 (Table A10, column (3)). An increase by one standard deviation of own R&D/value added
(14.8 percentage points) is associated with future TFP growth by 0.04%. By contrast, an increase by one standard deviation
of the spillover pool (5.8 percentage points) increases TFP growth by 0.85%. Note that the coefficient on domestic R&D falls
and becomes insignificant when spillovers are included which is due to the fact that domestic and international R&D are
highly correlated, so it is difficult to estimate both effects simultaneously.




                                                            33
Appendix C. In short, the effect on US TFP growth comes from using the TFP estimate in Table 6,
column (3), combined with an increase in total US R&D/GDP of 0.06 percentage points (or 2.9%; which
is composed of public R&D rising by 4.8% according to Table A4, column (3), and private R&D rising
by 2.5% according to the IV results of Table 3, column (3), due to crowding in). The effect on other
OECD countries comes from the international spillover arising from the increase in US R&D (Table
A10). There is also a small TFP offset because US R&D displaces some foreign R&D (down -0.02% on
average; Table A11).
         In interpreting these estimates, three points need to be highlighted. First, our estimates quantify
the TFP gains occurring within a relatively short horizon. It is likely that the effects are larger when
looking at a longer time horizon, e.g. over decades, therefore our estimates are likely to underestimate
the true effect of public R&D subsidies on private R&D and productivity growth. Second, we only
examine within industry productivity effects. To the extent there are inter-industry spillovers, we again
underestimate the productivity benefits. Third, these estimates do not account for the opportunity cost of
public funds needed to finance the increase in public R&D. In reality, the US government faces a budget
constraint, and the increase in public expenditures on R&D needs to be thought of as coming either from
a decrease in other forms of public expenditures or as an increase in current or future taxes, or a
combination of both. In either case, the opportunity cost of the additional public R&D expenditures
induced by 9/11 is unlikely to be zero, although it is difficult to estimate in practice.37
         Overall, our estimates need to be interpreted as partial equilibrium estimates of an increase in
public R&D (see Akcigit, Hanley and Stantcheva, 2017, for example for a general equilibrium approach).


4    Conclusions
     Given the central role that productivity plays in explaining economic growth, it is not surprising that
the search for the determinants of productivity has been central to modern economics. While a large
body of empirical research has argued that R&D is a key source of firm productivity growth (e.g. Aghion
and Howitt, 1992; Romer, 1990), the question of exactly which policies governments should adopt to
foster R&D investment is still largely an open question.


37
  The opportunity cost could be high if it cut other forms of public expenses with high returns or if the expected increase in
taxes crowd out private investment. Alternatively, the opportunity costs could be low if the federal government financed the
increase in public R&D by cutting unproductive or wasteful public expenses. For example, military procurement is widely
considered inefficient and ripe with waste and rent seeking.




                                                             34
   In this paper, we study the impact of public R&D spending--and defense R&D spending in
particular--on private R&D spending and productivity. We uncover some unexpected intellectual spoils
of war. First, our results suggest that government R&D "crowds in" rather than "crowds out" private
R&D. Second, we find evidence that an increase in public R&D in one industry and country raises private
R&D in the same industry in other countries through a positive spillover effect. Third, we uncover
significant but not overwhelming effects of private R&D investment on TFP growth and therefore
economic growth.
       In terms of policy implications, our estimates point to a concrete tool that governments can use
to raise private R&D investment in their jurisdiction. Our estimates indicate that government-funded
R&D in general--and defense R&D in particular--are effective at raising a country's total expenditures
on innovation in a given industry. The ultimate effect of government-funded R&D on overall R&D
significantly exceeds its dollar value because government-funded R&D stimulates additional R&D
investment on the part of the private sector. This positive effect of government-funded R&D on private
R&D is important not just in itself, but because it generates higher productivity. This of course does not
imply that it is efficient to raise defense R&D or government-funded R&D across the board, since
government-funded R&D clearly has an opportunity cost in the form of taxpayer money used plus any
welfare loss that inevitably comes from taxation. Our paper does not compare the benefits of
government-funded R&D to its costs.
       Our findings also indicate that the benefits of public R&D investment do not stop at a country's
borders, but spillover to other countries. This implies that countries that spend aggressively on
government funded R&D--like the US--indirectly support the productivity of countries with less
government-funded R&D. This externality indicates the desirability of more international cooperation
in government-funded R&D.

References
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (1992) "A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction"
       Econometrica, 60(2), 323-51
Akcigit, Ufuk, Douglas Hanley, and Stephanie Stantcheva (2017) "Optimal Taxation and R&D
  Policy." NBER Working Paper 22908.
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas and Stephanie Stantcheva, S. (2018) "Taxation and
  Innovation in the 20th Century." NBER Working Paper No. 24982.
Arrow, Kenneth (1962) "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention" in The Rate
  and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, 609-626




                                                   35
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Zivin, Danielle Li, and Bhaven Sampat (2019a) "Public R&D Investment and
   Private Sector Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding Rules" Review of Economic Studies, 86(1),
   117-152.
Azoulay, Pierre, Erica Fuchs, Anna Goldstein and Michael Kearney (2019b) "Funding Breakthrough
   Research: Promises and Challenges of the ARPA Model", in Innovation Policy and the Economy,
   Volume 19, Josh Lerner and Scott Stern (eds)
Barbé, Esther and Laia Mestres (2007) "Spain and ESDP", in: Brummer, Klaus (Ed.) The South and
   ESDP, Gütersloh.
Barro, Robert and Charles J. Redlick (2011) "Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases and
   Taxes" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 51-102
Bhattacharya, Vivek (2018) "An Empirical Model of R&D Procurement Contests: An analysis of the
   DOD SBIR Program", Northwestern mimeo
Bilir, L. Kamran and Eduardo Morales (2015), "The Impact of Innovation in the Multinational Firm,"
   mimeo
Bloom, Nick, Rachel Griffith and John Van Reenen (2002) "Do R&D tax credits work? Evidence from
   a panel of countries 1979-1997" Journal of Public Economics 85(1), 1-31
Bloom, Nick, Mark Schankerman and John Van Reenen (2013) "Technology Spillovers and Product
   Market Rivalry" Econometrica, 81 (4), 1347­1393
Bloom, Nicholas, John Van Reenen and Heidi Williams (2019) "Policies to Promote Innovation",
   Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(3), 163-184
Braddon, (1999) "Commercial Applications of Military R&D: US and EU Programs Compared",
   mimeo, University of the West of England
Bronzini, Raffaello and Eleonora Iachini (2014) "Are Incentives for R&D Effective? Evidence from a
   Regression Discontinuity Approach", American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4), 100-134
Caves, Richard, Laurent Christensen and Erwin Diewert (1982) "The economic theory of index numbers
   and the measurement of input, output and productivity", Econometrica, 50, 6, 1393-1414
Coe, David T. and Elhanan Helpman (1995) "International R&D Spillovers". European Economic
   Review 39(5), 859-887
Congressional Research Service (2018) Government Expenditures on Defense related R&D by the US
   and other OECD Countries Washington DC https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R45441.pdf
Criscuolo, Chiara, Ralf Martin, Henry Overman and John Van Reenen (2019), "Some causal effects of
   an industrial policy" American Economic Review 109(1) 48-85
David, Paul, Bronwyn Hall and Andrew Toole (2000) "Is public R&D a complement or substitute for
   private R&D? A review of the econometric evidence" Research Policy, 29(4-5), 497-529.
Dechezlepretre, Antoine, Elias Einio, Ralf Martin, Kieu-Trang Nguyen and John Van Reenen (2019),
   "Do Fiscal Incentives increase innovation? An RD Design for R&D" CEP Discussion Paper 1413
Dimos, Christos and Geoff Pugh (2016) "The effectiveness of R&D subsidies: A meta-regression
   analysis of the evaluation literature" Research Policy, 45, 797-815
Draca, Mirko (2013) "Reagan's innovation dividend? Technological impacts of the 1980s US defense
   build-up." CAGE Working Paper Series No. 168.
European Parliament (2011) "The Impact of the Financial Crisis on European Defense", Annex.
Garicano, Luis and Claudia Steinwender (2016) "Survive another day: Using changes in the composition
   of investments to measure the cost of credit constraints", Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(5),
   913-924.




                                                  36
Goolsbee, Austan, (1998) "Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and Engineers?"
   American Economic Review, 88(2), 298-302.
Griliches, Zvi (1979) "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
   Productivity Growth" Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 92-116.
Griliches, Zvi (1992) "The search for R&D spillovers", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94, 29-47
Guellec, Dominique and Bruno Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2001) "R&D and Productivity Growth :
   Panel analysis of 16 countries" OECD Economic Studies, 33, 103-126
Hagström, Linus and Jon Williamsson (2009) "`Remilitarization,' Really? Assessing Change in Japanese
   Foreign Security Policy" Asian Security, 5(3), 242-272.
Hall, Bronwyn (1993) "R&D Tax Policy during the 1980s: Success or Failure?" Tax Policy and the
   Economy, 7, 1-36
Hall, Bronwyn and Jacques Mairesse and Pierre Mohnen (2010), "Measuring the Returns to R&D,"
   CIRANO Working Papers 2010s-02, CIRANO.
Harrigan, James (1997) "Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization: Estimating the
   Neoclassical Model," American Economic Review, 87(4), 475-94.
Howell, Sabrina (2017) "Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants." American Economic
   Review, 107(4), 1136-64.
Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren (2011) "The impact of research grant funding on scientific productivity",
   Journal of Public Economics, 95(9-10), 1168-1177
Keller, Wolfgang (2004): "International Technology Diffusion" Journal of Economic Literature, 42(3),
   752­782.
Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams and Owen Zidar (2019) "Who Profits from Patents?
   Rent-Sharing at Innovative Firms" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134 (3), 1343­1404
Lach, Saul (2002) "Do R&D subsidies stimulate or displace private R&D? Evidence from Israel"
   Journal of Industrial Economics, 50, 369-90
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin (2003) "Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs To Control
   For Unobservables" Review of Economic Studies, 70(2) 317-341
Lichtenberg, Frank (1984) "The Relationship between Federal Contract R&D and Company
   R&D" American Economic Review 74(2) 73-78.
Lichtenberg, Frank (1988) "Assessing the Impact of Federal Industrial R&D Expenditure on Private
   R&D Activity in the U.S." in The Relation Between Defense and Civil Technologies, Philip Gummett
   and Judith Reppy (eds) Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 68-87.
Lichtenberg, Frank (1995) "The Economics of Defense R&D". In Hartley, K and Sandler, T. (eds)
   Handbook of Defense Economics, Volume 1. Elsevier: New York.
Mazzucato, Mariana (2013) The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths,
   Anthem Press
Miller, Douglas Colin Cameron and Jonah Galbech (2009) "Robust Inference with Multi-way
   Clustering" UC Davis Discussion Paper 09
Milward, Alan (1977) War, Economy and Society Berkeley: University of California Press
Miralles, Débora (2004) "The European Security and Defense Policy under Aznar's administration,"
   Observatory of European Foreign Policy, Special Issue: Spain in Europe 1996­2204, EE10/2004.
Moretti, Enrico (2004) "Workers' Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-Level
   Production Functions", American Economic Review 94(3)
Moretti, Enrico (2019) "The Effect of High-Tech Clusters on the Productivity of Top Inventors" NBER
   WP




                                                  37
Moretti, Enrico and Daniel Wilson (2014) "State Incentives for Innovation, Star Scientists and Jobs:
   Evidence from Biotech", Journal of Urban Economics, 79: 20­38.
Mowery, David (2010) "Military R&D and Innovation" in Bronwyn Hall and Nate Rosenberg (eds) The
   Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume 2. Elsevier, London.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions"
   American Economic Review 2014, 104(3): 753­792
National Science Foundation (2006) National Patterns of R&D Resources (Annual Series). Division of
   Science Resources Statistics, Washington DC
National Science Foundation (2020) National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2017­18 Data Update,
   January 8 2020, https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf20307/
National Science Board. (2018). Science & Engineering Indicators. Washington DC
OECD (1999) ISDB 98, International Sectoral Data Base, User's Guide, OECD, Paris.
OECD (2010) Measuring Innovation: A New Perspective, OECD, Paris.
Olley G. Steven and Ariel Pakes (1996) "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
   Equipment Industry" Econometrica 64(6) 1263-1297
Perotti, Roberto (2014) "Defense Government Spending Is Contractionary, Civilian Government
   Spending Is Expansionary" NBER Working Paper No. 20179
Pless, Jacqueline (2019) "Are 'Complementary Policies' Substitutes? Evidence from R&D Subsidies in
   the UK" MIT mimeo
Pottelsberghe De La Potterie, Bruno Van and Frank Lichtenberg (2001). "Does Foreign Direct
   Investment Transfer Technology Across Borders?" Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3), 490-
   497.
Ramey, Valerie (2011) "Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's All in the Timing", Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 126(1), 1-50
Rao, Nirupama (2016) "Do tax credits stimulate R&D spending? Revisiting the effect of the R&D tax
   credit in its first decade." Journal of Public Economics, 140, 1-12
Romer, Paul (1990) "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), 71-102.
Ruttan, Vernon W. (2006) Is War Necessary for Economic Growth? Military Procurement and
   Technology Development Oxford: Oxford University Press
Scarpetta, Stefano and Thierry Tressel (2002) "Productivity and Convergence in a Panel of OECD
   Industries: Do Regulations and Institutions Matter?" OECD Economics Department Working
   Papers 342, Paris: OECD Publishing.
Sengupta, Somini "The Pentagon as Incubator", New York Times, 8/23/2013.
Senor, Dan and Saul Singer (2009) Start-up Nation, Washington DC: Council on Foreign Relations.
Shleifer, Andrei (1986) "Implementation Cycles" Journal of Political Economy 94 (6): 1163-1190.
Slavtchev, Viktor, and Simon Wiederhold (2016) "Does the Technological Content of Government
   Demand Matter for Private R&D? Evidence from US States." American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics, 8(2): 45-84.
Thomson, Russell (2012) "Measures of R&D tax incentives for OECD countries", mimeo, Melbourne
   Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research
Van Reenen, John (1996) "The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel of U.K.
   Companies," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 95-226.
Wallsten, Scott (2000) "The effects of government-industry R&D programs on private R&D: the case
   of the Small Business Innovation Research program" RAND Journal of Economics, 31, 82-100.




                                                38
                               FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY
APPENDIX A: DATA

(A1) OECD DATA
        Main Variables. R&D data was obtained from the OECD database Main Science and
Technology Indicators (MSTI). This dataset contains industry level R&D conducted by businesses
("Business Enterprise R&D" or "BERD") for 26 countries between 1987 and 2009. This is our main
R&D variable, but note that BERD is the main component of general R&D ("GERD") which also
includes R&D conducted by non-businesses such as universities and government R&D labs (it is not
possible to break this down by industry).
        The panel is unbalanced as some data is not available for some countries especially in the early
years. Note that BERD is R&D conducted by business but can be financed from several sources. The
OECD breaks BERD into three sources of funding: government, business and abroad. Our main variable
is BERD that we generally refer to simply as "R&D". The variable "Public R&D" is the government
funded part of BERD (S). We used the OECD's PPP US$ values to deflate all nominal variable such as
GDP, output and R&D. From the same dataset, we also obtained the total number of R&D personnel by
industry and country (all measured in full-time equivalent on R&D activities) which is broken down into
scientists ("# researchers") and other R&D personnel such as lab technicians. We also have the total
wage bill of these R&D personnel that enables a crude construction of the "R&D wage" of R&D labor
cost divided by total R&D personnel.
        For the main regressions where we use R&D as the dependent variable, we use the industry-
funded part of BERD as the dependent variable. We refer to this as "private R&D" (R). For the
regressions where we use TFP growth as the dependent variable, we use R&D as the key right hand side
variable - i.e. total BERD from all sources of funds. We take output, employment, wage bill, capital and
value added data from the OECD STAN database. We use the level of industry aggregation that
maximized the matches between the databases STAN and MSTI, ending up with 26 industries (see
below).
        Data for missing years was linearly interpolated for all variables (between the first and the last
year available per country), but no data was extrapolated forward or backwards. These imputations
accounted for between zero and 35% of the final sample, depending on the variable. The results are
robust to dropping interpolated values.
        The industry level breakdown of BERD by source of funding was missing for the United States
after 2001 in the MSTI because a change in industry classification of the OECD (to ISIC Rev. 3) required
a new crosswalk from the industry classification used in the US, NAICS. However, we obtained the
original R&D data from the National Science Foundation, Survey of Industrial Research and
Development (SIRD), and implemented the crosswalk to our data set, verifying that the totals (all source
of funds) by industry matched the totals published by the MSTI. The crosswalk is available on request.
        Total Factor Productivity, TFP. TFP growth can be measured by a superlative index derived
from the translog production function (as in Caves et al, 1982). This results in the following expression
for industry-country-year TFP:
                                 1                                   1                       
        =  (                ) - ( + -1 )  (                  ) - (1 - ( + -1 ))  (                )
                      -1         2                      -1           2                      -1
where real VAikt is value added, Likt is total employment, Kikt is the capital stock, and  is the share of
labor in value added.




                                                   39
       Value added is from the STAN database, we use the variable VALK that gives value added in
volumes. STAN uses volume indices provided by national statistical agencies that are typically derived
by applying detailed deflators based on Producer Price indices (PPIs) or Consumer price indices (CPIs)
coming from detailed surveys. Volumes for activity groups are either fixed-weight Laspeyres aggregates
or annually re-weighted chained aggregates of the volumes of detailed sectors.
       Capital stock is given in STAN in variable CPGK, "gross capital stock (volumes)". For some
countries (e.g. US, Japan, Australia, Norway, Sweden) the capital stock was not available in the STAN
database, but investment data was (variable "GFCK", gross fixed capital formation in volumes). For
these countries, we follow Scarpetta and Tressel (2002) and OECD (1999) and construct capital stock
using a perpetual inventory model, which simulates the process of capital accumulation using past
investment data that is adjusted for scrapping. Gross capital stock GCSt at time t is:

                                       =  -  (1 -  )
                                                 


where INVt-j is investment undertaken in period t-j, i.e. with vintage j at time t, and 1-j is the survival
coefficient that represents the fraction an investment of vintage j that is still in use in year t contributes
to gross capital stock in year t. The survival coefficient is between 0 and 1, and falls with vintage. We
follow the literature and assume that depreciation follows a delayed linear retirement pattern, where
scrapping starts only 5 years after the investment has been undertaken.
        Average services lives (ASL) are usually used to measure the depreciation process of an
investment. If depreciation starts after 5 year and is linear, ASL is given by
                                                            
                                                = 5 +
                                                            2
where n is the time period during which an investment has positive depreciation (and n+5 is the total
lifetime of an investment). Thus, with linear depreciation, in each year depreciation equals a constant
fraction  of past investment (starting after 5 years):
                                               1           1
                                           = =
                                                2  ( - 5)
        Gross capital stock can therefore be constructed using the recursive relationship:
                                                           1
                           = -1 +  -                              -
                                                       2  ( - 5)
                                                                       5
        Since our investment data starts only at the beginning of the sample period and we need past
investment for the construction of gross capital stock, we assume that past, unobserved annual
investment is equal to average investment across the sample years (separately for each industry within
each country). Our results are robust to assuming past investment to be equal to initial observed
investment, or average investment across the first observed years. This assumption about past investment
can then also be used to calculate the gross capital stock at the beginning of the sample period. Average
services lives (ASL) by country and industry are given in OECD (1999), p. 48. For countries without
ASL data, we use the US industry-specific ASL.
        The share of labor in value added is measured in two ways. First, we simply used the industry-
specific unweighted average of the wage bill over value added (across all countries and years).
Alternatively, we use the Harrigan (1997) smoothing method to construct the share of labor in value
added ikt, by industry, country and year. For this, we ran a pooled OLS regression of the form




                                                     40
                                                             
                                         =  +   (                 )
                                                             
        where  is the observed labor share in value added,  are a full set of industry-country pair
fixed effects and K and L are capital stock and employment as described above. We then used the
predicted values from this regression for the industry-country-year specific share of labor in value added
 . As robustness checks we also used the overall average labor share in our data, or a constant labor
share of 0.65 to construct TFP, but our results were not sensitive to the specification of the share of labor
in value added.

(A2) French Data
        We use data collected by the French Ministry of National Education, Higher Education and
Research (which for brevity we will refer to as "Ministry of Research") for their annual R&D survey
from 1980 through 2015. Firms conducting research and development activity are asked to report
detailed information on their R&D performance--R&D budget, number of R&D employees, R&D wage
bill, number of researchers--and broader firm information--SIREN (firm ID), total number of
employees, sales, main industry. The survey seeks to include all large firms that perform R&D and a
rotating sample of smaller firms that perform R&D. In particular, firms with R&D expenditures above a
threshold are surveyed every year, while a rotating sample of firms below the threshold is surveyed for
two consecutive years. The threshold varies over time. For example, in 2007 is was 250,000 and by
2011 it was raised to 400,000. For our purposes, the net effect is that there is significant turnover in the
sample that we work with among the smaller firms. We observe 40,787 firms an average of 3.9 years
each. Almost 40% of firms appear just once; and only 24% appear in five or more years. Missing R&D
data and our empirical strategy (firm fixed effects) reduce the usable sample to 12,539 firms appearing
an average of 6.5 years each, approximately 56% of which appear in more than five years. Overall, our
sample over-weights large firms that conduct significant amount of R&D.
        We observe 40,787 firms an average of 3.9 years each. However, almost 40% of firms appear
just once; and only 24% appear in five or more years. Missing R&D data and our empirical strategy
(firm fixed effects) reduce the usable sample to 12,539 firms appearing an average of 6.5 years each,
approximately 56% of which appear in more than five years.
        Defense R&D subsidies. Importantly, the survey asks about R&D subsidies granted under the
authority of individual ministries, i.e. Ministry of Research or Ministry of the Armed Forces. We treat
all R&D subsidies originating from Ministry of the Armed Forces and its agencies as defense R&D
subsidies.
        Total R&D subsidies. We define total R&D subsidies as the sum of all R&D subsidies
(including defense R&D subsidies) originating from any French ministry or government agency.
        Privately funded R&D. We call the firm's R&D budget less total R&D subsidies privately
funded R&D.
        Industry classification. During this period French industry codes change three times (in 1993,
2003, and 2008) so we use a combination of correspondence mappings and crosswalks, created from
firms surveyed under multiple classification systems, to harmonize all 4-digit industry codes to the NAF
revision 1 classification in use from 2003-2008. We have 689 4-digit industries, 216 3-digit industries,
and 59 4-digit industries.
        In addition to the variables mentioned above, we also use information on firm sales and
employment. In our data the mean (median) sales and employment for a firm-year are 260 million
(19.8 million) and 925 (129) workers. Similarly, in 2000 prices, the mean (median) firm-year receives




                                                     41
576,000 (0) in defense R&D subsidies, 843,000 (0) in total R&D subsidies, and expends 6 million
(710,000) on private R&D.

(A3) Instrument for Defense R&D Subsidies.

       Our IV is predicted defense R&D. The exact form of the IV depends on the dataset and level of
aggregation.

OECD data
       The endogenous variable is  , government funded R&D in industry i in country k at time t.
The IV for industry i in country k at time t is defined as

                                            
                                               
                                             = (-1)  
                                                                                                                        (A1)

                                                                    38
where        is country k's total defense R&D spending in year t and (-1) is a weighted
                                                                                 

average of one-year lagged government defense R&D in industry i as a share of all the government
defense R&D in the United States and France, where weights are country-industry-time specific and
determined by the similarity of country k's patent technology class distribution to the United States
relative to France.
        For example, for a country k like Japan our implementation of equation (A1) is:

         
             
          = ((-1)     
                    + (-1)  (1 -  ))                                                                                    (A2)

where in this case         = DefGBAORDkt, is the value of Government Budget Appropriations or Outlays
for defense related R&D by country-year from OECD MSTI.39 Note that we are not using the industry
specific values of (for example) Japanese defense R&D subsidies in equation (A2), but rather the
Japanese economy-wide expenditure, which reduces the risk that the cross-industry allocation in Japan
could be endogenous to current industry-year shock in Japan.
        The industry variation comes from the first term, a weight that varies by industry, country and
year, and that is itself a weighted average of the industry shares of defense spending for the two countries
for which we can observe it: France and the US.
        To construct the weights  for each country k, we start by measuring the similarity of
country k and the US or France, respectively, in terms of the distribution of patents across technology
classes (which we have for the year 2005 for all countries from OECD from the database "Patents by

38
    Notice that this includes not only defense related R&D subsidies spent by businesses, but also spend by sectors including
e.g., universities (called "government budget appropriations or outlays on R&D" or GBAORD by the OECD). We do not
have aggregate numbers for the business sector only component for all OECD countries (only for France). In Table 3 we
conduct robustness tests where we control for non-business R&D to make sure our affects are not being driven by defense
R&D carried out in government labs or universities.
39
    Ideally, we would like to know the part of business enterprise R&D that was solely related to defense spending and then to
break this down into the government and privately financed components, but this is unavailable. In the time series, however,
it is likely that increases in DefGBAORDkt are strongly associated with increases the part of public R&D that goes to defense.
Our first stages regressions confirm that this relationship is strong in the data. Further, for the US and for France we have a
more detailed breakdown and we confirm that the correlation is 0.73 (US) and 0.88 (France).




                                                             42
main technology and by International Patent Classification (IPC)"). More specifically, we calculate the
distance between the patent technology classes of one country and the US in the following way:
                                                                                       2
                                     = (, - , )
                                                    
        where , indicates the share of patents in technology class p in country k (and we define

        in an analogous way).
        The weight  , that determines how much weight country k gives to the industry share of
the US, is then defined as
                                                                          
                                                                     
                            = 1 -                          =                   
                                                  +                     + 
        The intuition is the following: The weight that country k puts on the US is larger, the smaller the
distance between country k and the US, relative to the distance between country k and France. According
to this definition, the US gets a weight of 1 for defense shares from the US (same for France), which
raises endogeneity concerns for these countries. However, our results are robust to dropping the US
and/or France.
        Using a combination of the specific industry breakdowns of the US and France (instead of
Japan's) should again mitigate concerns that the industry allocation of defense R&D could be
endogenous.

French Firms

         Next, consider our firm-level instrument in France. In this case the instrument is defined as

                                                     
                                                     ,4,          = 4  3,                                               (A3)

The weight, 4 , 4,(-1) , is the share of public expenditure on business conducted defense
R&D in the firm's four-digit industry ("i4") as a share of the three-digit industry ("i3") that the four-
digit industry is located in (aggregated up from the firm level data) averaged over the entire sample
period. Our preferred method uses a time invariant average because 4, can be noisy due to the
changing year by year stratified random sampling. Further, we define              3, = defi3,t-1 + 3, where
                                                                                                   
 is the first difference operator and      3, = defi3,t - deff,t is three-digit public R&D defense subsidies
leaving out firm f's defense R&D subsidies. Therefore           3, is close to the "leave-out mean. The reason
for excluding deff,t from the construction of the IV is that the endogenous variable Sf,t is partly composed
of deff,t (the other component is the firm's non-defense related part of R&D subsidies). Thus, including
deff,t in the IV would lead to a mechanical (and potentially endogenous) correlation between the
endogenous variable we want to instrument and the instrument itself.40


40
  One could also have the same concern about DefGBAORD in equation (A2) in the OECD data. It would be desirable to
remove industry-country specific defense R&D subsidies from the construction of the IV. But, as noted below, we do not
observe this for every country-industry-year cell in the OECD. However, nothing critical hinges on this. We can show in the
French data, that failing to exclude the own industry defense subsidies only increases the precision of the results to a minor
extent.




                                                             43
French Industries
       Finally, consider the French industry level analysis. When pooled in the OECD regressions we
use equation (A2). However, when we implement the more disaggregated industry analysis of (say Table
4, Panel A) we can disaggregate the IV further. In particular the instrument is:

                                              
                                              3,         = 3  2,                                      (A4)

and everything is defined analogously to equation (A3) but at the industry level. So, 3 , is the
average share of public expenditure on defense R&D in the firm's three-digit industry ("i3") as a share
of the two-digit industry ("i2"). And     2, = defi2,(t-1) + 2, is the two-digit defense R&D subsidies
                                                             
leaving out the three digit industry subsidies ( 23, = defi2,t - deff3,t ).


Other data details of the implementation of defense IV
        The instrument we use is:
                                                           
                                           = ln(1 +          )
We take logarithms as the R&D series is very skewed and we add a dollar due to zeros (there are no true
zeros in the OECD data, so this only affects the French data). We check that the arbitrary adding one did
not matter in various ways, such as considering the non-logged version, etc.
        Looking at the weight used in (A4) compared to (A2) (or (A3)), note that we could use the US
share of industry instead of the French share. We did consider this, but in order to obtain a concordance
between France and the US industry definitions we had to aggregate the industries even further, losing
much of the industry granularity of the French data.
        Note that a practical advantage of our construction of the IV in equation (A2) is that we do not
have industry and time specific variation of public defense R&D subsidies for all out countries in the
OECD sample. This was a key motivation for looking at the French data where we can observe defense
subsidies at every level from the firm upwards. However, it is also possible to calculate industry specific
R&D shares for the US.
        In the US, we can observe data on individual defense contracts that are made publicly available
because of procurement transparency rules. Draca (2013) analyses the millions of defense contracts from
the early 1960s onwards and generously shared his data with us. His dataset combines historical military
procurement data from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) with company
accounts information from COMPUSTAT. NARA procurement data contains all prime military
contracts awarded by the Department of Defense (DoD) between 1966 and 2003. Each year comprises
around 250,000 different contracts awarded for the procurement of goods and services, with a minimum
reporting threshold of 25,000 USD between 1984 and 2003 (the part of the dataset that we use). The data
includes a four-digit product code known as the Federal Supply Code (FSC): we use only expenses with
product code "R&D" as our measure of defense related R&D spending. Draca matched the name of the
awardee with the COMPUSTAT database. The COMPUSTAT data include a four-digit SIC industry
classification (SIC4) for each company. We aggregated the defense R&D expenses by industry and
match the SIC4 industry codes to the (more aggregate) industry classification used in the OECD datasets
in order to get a distribution of R&D defense spending across industries in the US. The US defense
contracts data ends in 2003, so we assume the US weights remain the same for the last few years of the
data. The timing of the data is such that it corresponds to the mid-year fiscal year (September) so that
the data is partially lagged.




                                                    44
APPENDIX B: COMPARING OF DIRECT PUBLIC R&D SUBSIDIES TO TAX CREDITS

(B1) Baseline Case
To evaluate the magnitude of the impact of public subsidies we compare them to R&D tax credit policies.
In particular, we take the US and consider abolishing the federal R&D tax credit and allocating all these
funds to direct government R&D grants.
The latest official estimated cost of the US federal R&D tax credit was $11.3 billion per annum (National
Science Board, 2018). Tax advantages for R&D (in particular, the Research and Experimentation tax
credit) reduced the tax-adjusted user costs of R&D capital by about 4% in 2016 according to (OECD,
2019).41 Our estimates in column (6) of Table 3 Panel B find a (long-run) elasticity of R&D with respect
to its cost of about unity similar to that of Bloom, Griffith and Van Reenen (2002) and the survey by
Becker (2015).
Using the most recent available data (2016), privately funded US R&D was $356 billion 42 , so an
elasticity of unity implies that fiscal incentives for R&D increase actual R&D by $14.2 billion
(=356*0.04*1). If we abolished the tax credit system and allocated this $11.3 billion to direct public
R&D spending, this would raise federally funded R&D by 9.7% (this stood at $116.2 billion in 2016, so
11.3/116.2 = 0.097). Given our baseline estimates of a (crowd-in) elasticity between privately funded
and publicly funded R&D of 0.56, this implies an increase in private R&D of 5.4% or $19.4 billion (=
356*0.56*0.097).
Total R&D therefore increases by $30.7 billion in the case of reallocating the R&D tax credit: $11.3
billion extra in public R&D and $19.4 billion from private R&D.
The bottom line is that the same amount of public funds spent on the current R&D tax credit system
($11.3 billion) raises private R&D by about twice as much if was allocated by the direct government
grants considered in this paper compared to the current use ($30.7 vs. $14.2 billion). These numbers are
similar orders of magnitude, but do suggest a better "bang for the buck" of direct governments grants
than fiscal incentives (25 vs. 14). The experiments below suggest that this is a qualitatively robust
conclusion.


(B2) Robustness
Years. The above calculation is for 2016, the last available year of confirmed data from the NSF. If we
can use their more preliminary forecasts for 2018, the impact of direct public funding is roughly the
same at $31.3 billion (2018 prices), but the R&D tax credit looks better value at $20.2 billion. This is


41
   https://stats.oecd.org/fileview2.aspx?IDFile=ebb21ac1-1802-4b57-9c74-68338a86a6cb. This is the modelled reduction for
a "large profitable" firm. In the case of the US, it is similar for smaller firms.
42
   This is derived from Table 1 in National Science Foundation (2020). At time of writing 2016 are the actual numbers
whereas 2017 and 2018 are forecasts.




                                                          45
because (i) the tax subsidy has become more generous (a 5% reduction instead of 4%) and (ii) private
R&D has risen by more than public R&D. Nevertheless, the qualitative statement that direct funding
delivers a better "bang for the buck" still holds.
Quality of Public R&D. We assume that the social value of public R&D is the same as private R&D.
One might argue that public R&D is spent less efficiently than private R&D. On the other hand, the
general view is that public R&D is targeted more on the high spillover areas ­ more basic, more risky,
less market stealing, etc. so is likely to be more socially (although not privately) valuable. This would
mean we are underestimating the advantage of public funding of R&D.
Note that since we assume a dollar of R&D is the same regardless of source, we do not have to take a
stand on the impact of R&D on aggregate TFP, etc.
Elasticity of R&D with respect to its user cost. The elasticity of one is common in macro studies (and is
what we estimate in the paper). However, we could use alternative estimates, and the efficacy of the tax
credit scales with this. For example, if we used a value of two (as suggested by the micro study of
Dechezlepretre et al, 2019), then the tax credit generates $28 billion more R&D, almost as much as direct
funding. One might be concerned, however, that the micro estimates incorporate business stealing and
miss the equilibrium R&D price effects ­ this means that they overestimate the policy relevant
elasticity.43 On the other hand, our OLS estimates in Panel A of Table 3 are as low as 0.62, suggesting
that the tax credits only boost R&D by $8.8 billion. This suggests that direct governments grants are at
least no worse than tax credits.
Level of the User Cost. We use the latest OECD estimates of the impact of tax credits. The OECD uses
"Warda's B", which is the tax price element of the user cost (also used in our paper). To convert Warda's
B into a user cost we need to multiply it by the sum of the real interest rate plus depreciation (r + d).
However, a 1% fall in Warda's B holding interest rates and depreciation constant is the same as a 1%
fall in the user cost, so this is a valid calculation.
The value of B in our paper (Table 3) is from Thomson (2012). This takes a value of 1.4% in 2006
instead of the OECD's 4%. It is unclear why there is such a difference, but seems better to go with the
most recent methods. Clearly, if we use the lower figure then the tax credit becomes even less valuable.
Administrative Costs. Tax credits have lower administrative costs than direct grants, but compared to the
amounts given out, it is unlikely that these differences would make a material difference to the
conclusion.




43
  Having said this, business-stealing effects are modest in the well-identified micro literature, which seeks to deal with them
(Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen, 2013). In addition, estimates of the equilibrium price effects in our paper (industry
level) or macro level appear quantitatively small.




                                                             46
APPENDIX C: SIMULATION OF A US DEFENSE R&D SHOCK ON R&D AND
PRODUCTIVITY (INCLUDING INTERNATIONAL SPILLOVERS)

        Appendix Figure A2 describes the linkages between an R&D shock in the US (calibrated to the
9/11 events) and the way this reverberates throughout the domestic US economy in terms of changes to
public and private sector R&D as well as the international economy. We estimated that, on net, such a
shock increases US TFP growth by 2.6% and the following calculations explain how this was calculated.
        9/11 shock in the US. Between 2001 and 2004 US defense R&D spending (DefGBAORD)
increased by 52%, from $46b to $70b. This represents an increase of US defense R&D spending as a
proportion of GDP from 0.45% to 0.60%: by 0.15 percentage points.
        Effect on US public R&D. Using the elasticity of public R&D with respect to defense R&D
estimated in Table A4, column (3), the first stage of Table 3, column (3), the 9/11 shock generates a
4.8% increase in US public R&D.
        Effect on US private R&D ("crowding in"). The increase in public R&D leads to an increase
of US private R&D by 2.5%, using the elasticity of public R&D on private R&D as estimated in Table
3, column (3), panel B.
        Effect on US total R&D. From Table 1 we can see that in the United States the share of public
R&D in total R&D is on average 15.5%. The growth of US public R&D and US private R&D therefore
translates into a growth of US total R&D of 2.9%. Since total business conducted R&D (BERD) as a
proportion of GDP was 1.95% in the United States in 1997-2001, this increase is equivalent to an
increase of BERD/GDP by 0.06 percentage points.
        Effect on US TFP growth. Using Table 6, column (3), the increase of R&D/GDP translates into
an increase of the TFP growth rate by 0.005 percentage points. Since the US TFP growth rate in 2000
was 0.4%, this represents an increase of around 1.5%.
         Alternatively, a simpler method is to take the number can be directly from the reduced form
estimates of Table 6, column (4) which has the effect of defense R&D on TFP growth. This produces an
estimate of 3.2%.
        Taken together, this suggests that the increased in military R&D on the scale of the 9/11 shock
increased TFP growth by about 1.5% to 3%.
        So far we have considered only the effect of the 9/11 defense expenditure shock on the US.
However, our regressions show that this shock also influences foreign countries. On one hand, there is a
displacement effects, lowering private R&D in foreign countries (Table A11).44 On the other hand, there
are direct spillover effects, increasing TFP growth in foreign countries (Table A10). The spillover effects
dominate in all our estimations, leading to a net positive increase of TFP growth in the foreign country.
        Effect on foreign private R&D (displacement effect). The increase in US total R&D reduces
foreign private R&D by the elasticity on the international spillover pool (Table A11, column (3); using
geography as distance measure) multiplied by the distance weight of the US to the foreign country. For
example, the average geographic distance weight of the US to other countries is 0.02; which translates
into reduced private R&D on average of around -0.02% (=2.9%*(-0.325)*0.02).
        Effect on foreign total R&D. Assuming that public R&D is unchanged in the foreign country,
this reduction in private R&D is multiplied by the share of private R&D in total R&D (= 1 minus the
share of public R&D in total R&D as given by Table 1; for the average country, the share of public R&D

44
   Table A11 is a simplified version of Table 5, which combines the international public and business R&D into one
international total R&D spillover pool. This simplifies the calculations in this section.




                                                       47
in total R&D is 9.5%) for the foreign country to yield the effect on foreign total R&D, which yields a
decrease in total R&D by 0.017%. Table A2 helps again to translate this percentage increase of foreign
total R&D into a percentage point increase of foreign total R&D/GDP; for the average country we get a
reduction by 0.0002 percentage points in terms of total R&D/VA.
         Effect on foreign TFP growth. As discussed above, there is both a displacement effect as well
as a positive spillover effect. The displacement effect reduces foreign total R&D as shown above. Using
Table A10, reduced foreign R&D/value added leads to reduced foreign TFP growth (given by the
estimated coefficient on R&D/value added in column (3) of panel A). For example, in the case of the
average country, the TFP growth rate falls by 0.00001 percentage points. However, the increase of US
total R&D/VA by 0.06 percentage points (as shown above) has positive spillover effects, as given by the
coefficient on the international spillover pool estimated in Table A10, panel A, column (3), again
multiplied by the distance weight of the US with respect to the foreign country. In the case of the average
country, this leads to an increase in the TFP growth rate by 0.0002 percentage points. Since the positive
spillover effect dominates the displacement effect, this is also roughly the same as the net increase in the
TFP growth rate; and equivalent to the TFP growth rate increasing by 0.028%.
         So in conclusion, a 9/11 type shock raises TFP growth by 1.5% in the US and an average of
0.028% in the rest of the OECD. This shock, which raised US defense R&D spending by 52%, would
result in an additional $37 billion (nominal, PPP adjusted) if it happened again in 2013. According to
our estimated increase in the US TFP growth rate, this then leads to an additional $0.9bn GDP per annum
in the US, and an additional $0.2bn GDP per annum in the rest of the world.




                                                    48
             FIGURE 1: DEFENSE R&D AS PERCENT OF GDP IN THE US, GERMANY, JAPAN AND FRANCE




Notes: This figure shows the defense related, government funded total R&D as a share of GDP. The defense R&D in this figure refers to
"all public R&D" which includes all government budget appropriations or outlays of total R&D, i.e. not just the government-funded part
of business conducted R&D, but also the government funded part of R&D conducted outside of enterprises




                                                                  1
                                                                                                  FIGURE 2: PUBLIC R&D AND TOTAL DEFENSE R&D ­ BY COUNTRY


                                Australia                                                                       Austria                                                                         Belgium                                                                                 Canada                                                                             Czech Republic                                                                   Denmark




                                                     18.8 19 19.2 19.4 19.6




                                                                                                                                                             19.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19.2 19.4 19.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              18.1 18.2 18.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17.1 17.2 17.3 17.4 17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19.3
  19.5




                                                                                                                                    10 10.5 11 11.5 12
                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19.9
                                                                               19.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15.5
                   19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14.8 15 15.2
                                                                                                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19.8
  18.5




                                                                                                  19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19.7
                                                                                                                                                             18.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                               18.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18
                   18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19.5
  17.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17.9
                                                                                                  18




                                                                                                                                                                                   18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19
                        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                        1990 1995 2000 2005 2010                                                        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                              1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                              2002     2004   2006    2008                                                    1985   1990   1995   2000


                                Estonia                                                                         Finland                                                                          France                                                                                Germany                                                                                Greece                                                                        Hungary
  16.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              21.4 21.5 21.6 21.7 21.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20.6 20.8 21 21.2 21.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        17.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15.115.215.315.415.515.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              18.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13.5 14 14.5 15 15.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22.4
                                                                                                  19




                                                                                                                                    16 16.5 17 17.5 18

                                                                                                                                                                                   22
                                                     14.5
                                                                               18.5




                                                                                                                                                             21.2 21.4 21.6 21.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                   16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18
                                                     14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16.5
  15.5




                                                                                                  18
                                                     13.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22
                                                                               17.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16
                   15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15.5
                                                     13
  14.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     21.8
                                                                                                  17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                        20032004 20052006 20072008                                                     19851990 19952000 20052010                                                       1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                              1990    1995    2000   2005                                                           1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                        2005   2006   2007    2008


                                  Italy                                                                         Japan                                                                         Netherlands                                                                            New Zealand                                                                              Norway                                                                         Poland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18.72
  21.2




                                                     18 18.5 19 19.5 20 20.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19.2 19.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16.616.8 17 17.217.417.6
                                                                                                                                                             19.2 19.4 19.6 19.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17.6 17.8 18 18.2 18.4
                                                                                                  21




                                                                                                                                    21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15.2
                                                                               20.220.420.620.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18.7
                   21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14.9 15 15.1
                                                                                                                                    20.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18.68
  20.4 20.6 20.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18.66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18.6 18.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16.2
                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   18.64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17.8
                                                                                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                  20




                        1985   1990   1995   2000                                                      1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                         1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                               1990          1995     2000                                                          19851990 19952000 20052010                                                      2004   2005   2006    2007


                                Portugal                                                                   Slovak Republic                                                                    South Korea                                                                               Spain                                                                                 Sweden                                                                       Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                             21.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              21.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16 16.5 17 17.5 18 18.5
  17.5




                                                     17




                                                                                                                                    17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             22

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20.6 20.8 21 21.2 21.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              18.2 18.4 18.6
                                                                                           17.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19.519.619.719.819.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         21
                                                                                       17.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             21
                                                                                                                                    16.5
                   17




                                                                                                                                                                                   21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19.5
                                                     16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20.5
                                                                                   17.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
  16.5




                                                                               17.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                             20.5
                                                                                                                                    16
                                                     15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                  17
                   16




                                                                                                                                    15.5
                                                                               16.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   18.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17.8
                                                     14




                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18
                        1990   1995   2000   2005                                                      1990 1995 2000 2005 2010                                                         19982000 20022004 20062008                                                            19851990 19952000 20052010                                                            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                                                        1990 1995 2000 2005 2010


                            United Kingdom                                                                  United States
  21.6




                                                     21.8 21.9 22 22.1 22.2
                                                                               24.2 24.4




                                                                                                                                    24.4 24.6 24.8 25 25.2
  21.4




                                                                                                  24
  21.2




                                                                               23.6 23.8
                   21




                        19851990 19952000 20052010                                                     19851990 19952000 20052010




                                                                                                          --                                                     ln(government funded and business conducted R&D)
                                                                                                          -- --                                                  ln(defense related total government funded R&D)

Notes: Solid line is the log of the government funded and business conducted BERD, which is scaled on the left axis. The dashed line is
the log of government funded total defense R&D (which includes all government budget appropriations or outlays of total R&D, i.e. not
just the government funded part of business conducted R&D, but also the government funded part of R&D conducted outside of
enterprises), which is scaled on the right axis.




                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
 TABLE 1: PUBLIC R&D AS A PROPORTION OF TOTAL BUSINESS CONDUCTED R&D (BERD) - BY COUNTRY

                                         All years                      1987-1991       1992-1996      1997-2001       2002-2006       2007-2009
      Country              Mean         Standard        Maximum-          Mean            Mean           Mean            Mean            Mean
                                        deviation       Minimum
 Australia                  3.32          0.78             2.76              3.29          2.52            3.43            4.03
 Austria                    7.56          2.22             4.75              5.63          9.81            5.53            7.22           10.28
 Belgium                    5.52          1.16             5.05              6.00          4.89            5.86            5.52
 Canada                     8.84          2.85             9.38             10.42          8.54                                            2.18
 Czech Rep.                10.81          4.10            11.92                            4.72           11.43           13.28           13.78
 Denmark                    7.21          3.07             8.76             10.54          6.09            4.16
 Estonia                    8.86          4.12            13.76                                           10.06            7.67           8.23
 Finland                    3.92          0.97             3.58              3.91           5.85           3.92            3.53           3.00
 France                    13.64          4.60             13.9             20.88          14.09           9.53           10.86           9.78
 Germany                    7.96          2.24             6.25             10.06          10.39           7.65            5.42
 Greece                     5.91          2.60            10.03              8.44           6.15           3.72            5.02
 Hungary                    9.54          4.79            19.01              8.17          14.70           8.37            6.01           9.11
 Italy                     14.36          3.25            10.42             17.83          13.12          12.57           12.16
 Japan                      1.39          0.28             1.24              1.40           1.28           1.53            1.32
 Netherlands                7.44          3.34            11.62             11.60           7.13           5.05            3.84
 New Zealand                7.85          1.35             3.82              6.62           7.14           9.08            9.98
 Norway                    12.52          3.98            11.43             18.52          13.93          10.32            9.96            9.24
 Poland                    23.11          8.77            22.25                            32.00          29.01           14.15           11.68
 Portugal                   5.94          2.46             7.26             5.00            7.97           6.47            4.30
 Slovakia                  17.59          6.20            19.93                            11.90          20.91           23.30           10.11
 South Korea                5.53          1.18             4.51                             3.96           6.31            5.17            6.06
 Spain                     11.34          2.96            11.33             12.78           9.93           8.12           12.24           17.12
 Sweden                     8.25          2.80             8.09             11.38          10.13           7.10            5.20            4.68
 Switzerland                1.91          0.40             0.91                             2.07           2.28            1.50            1.65
 United Kingdom            11.54          3.96            13.42             17.10          10.68           9.67            7.07            6.69
 United States             15.53          7.00            23.53             26.61          17.16          11.08            9.31           12.13
Notes: Our database comprises of an unbalanced panel of yearly values between the years 1987 and 2009. "Maximum-minimum" is the difference between
       the highest and the lowest value within a country across all years.

                                                                        3
                           TABLE 2: DEFENSE SHARE OF TOTAL PUBLIC R&D
                        All          All years         1987-            1992-            1997-            2002-            2007-
                       years                           1991             1996             2001             2006             2009
    Country            Mean         Standard           Mean             Mean             Mean             Mean             Mean
                                    deviation
 Australia               8.09         1.87              11.18            8.40             6.70              6.86            7.34
 Austria                 0.01         0.01               0.01            0.01             0.01              0.01            0.00
 Belgium                 0.38         0.20               0.57            0.31             0.40              0.31            0.24
 Canada                  5.08         1.32               6.86            4.88             5.08              3.86            3.24
 Czech Rep.              2.70         0.44                                                                  3.02            2.33
 Denmark                 0.60         0.21              0.44             0.61             0.53              0.88            0.55
 Estonia                 0.96         0.55                                                                  0.92            1.04
 Finland                 1.97         0.58               1.54             1.97             1.43             2.56            2.32
 France                 28.98         6.19              37.26            32.36            23.10            23.37           28.56
 Germany                 8.47         2.58              12.46             9.22             8.36             6.01            5.92
 Greece                  1.21         0.60               1.91             1.54             0.92             0.58            0.55
 Hungary                 0.38         0.25                                                                  0.10            0.56
 Italy                   4.47         2.83              7.65             6.45             2.62              3.29            2.16
 Japan                   5.03         0.74              5.27             6.01             4.74              4.57            4.44
 Netherlands             2.43         0.61              2.81             3.20             2.33              1.90            1.86
 New                     0.91         0.41              1.50             1.07             0.73              0.95            0.00
 Zealand
 Norway                  6.15           1.30            7.77             5.64             5.77              6.55            4.82
 Poland                  1.91           0.85                                                                1.42            2.64
 Portugal                0.93           0.81            0.14             1.45              1.52             1.18            0.27
 Slovakia                5.65           2.06                             3.58              6.65             7.40            4.96
 South Korea            16.59           2.69                                              19.59            14.52           17.22
 Spain                  17.63           7.83            15.19            11.79            27.63            20.41           10.11
 Sweden                 18.08           6.28            25.11            21.69            10.27            18.65           12.41
 Switzerland             4.10           3.92            10.17             4.84             2.29             0.50            0.59
 United                 35.00           8.16            44.27            39.08            36.10            28.97           20.93
 Kingdom
 United                 57.20           4.98            64.84            56.34            52.94            55.50           55.83
 States
Note: Our database comprises of an unbalanced panel of yearly values between the years 1987 and 2009. The defense share of public
      R&D in this table refers to "all public R&D" which includes all government budget appropriations or outlays of total R&D, i.e. not
      just the government funded part of business conducted R&D, but also the government funded part of R&D conducted outside of
      enterprises; while public defense R&D is the defense related part of "all public R&D".




                                                                   4
TABLE 3: EFFECT OF PUBLICLY FUNDED R&D ON PRIVATELY FUNDED R&D ­ OECD
                                 DATA
                           (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
Dependent variable: ln(Privately funded business R&D)
Panel A: OLS
ln(Public R&D)t-1       0.128**          0.147**             0.143**           0.144**          0.144**          0.145**
                         (0.028)         (0.027)             (0.027)           (0.028)          (0.028)          (0.028)
R&D tax creditt-1                                                              0.641**          0.725**          0.790**
                                                                               (0.295)          (0.300)          (0.307)
ln(Non-bus. public                                                                               -0.328           -0.313
R&D)t-1                                                                                         (0.246)          (0.243)
(Corp. tax                                                                                                        -3.305
revenue/GDP)t-1                                                                                                  (3.006)
ln(output)t-1                                                0.691**           0.700**          0.630**          0.616**
                                                             (0.171)           (0.170)          (0.184)          (0.178)
ln(GDP)t-1                                                    -0.184            -0.201           -0.101           -0.080
                                                             (0.458)           (0.457)          (0.484)          (0.483)
Panel B: IV
ln(Public R&D)t-1         0.561**          0.492**           0.518**           0.476**          0.508**          0.477**
                          (0.140)          (0.199)           (0.204)           (0.190)          (0.203)          (0.196)
R&D tax creditt-1                                                               0.885*          0.993**          1.092**
                                                                               (0.470)          (0.496)          (0.485)
ln(Non-bus. public                                                                               -0.334           -0.305
R&D)t-1                                                                                         (0.237)          (0.230)
(Corp. tax                                                                                                       -6.312*
revenue/GDP)t-1                                                                                                  (3.406)
ln(output)t-1                                                 0.412            0.458*            0.364            0.360
                                                             (0.268)           (0.255)          (0.285)          (0.276)
ln(GDP)t-1                                                    0.092             0.036            0.161            0.177
                                                             (0.534)           (0.521)          (0.567)          (0.551)
 Observations                 5,026            4,459          4,459             4,459            4,459            4,459
 First stage F-               14.66            10.30          10.17             10.66            10.02            10.96
 Statistic
 Anderson-Rubin               9.630            5.316            5.918             5.503            5.516           5.345
 Wald F-test p-value         0.00208          0.0218            0.0156           0.0196           0.0195          0.0215
Notes:. Two-way clustered standard errors at the industry-country and country-year level. The dependent variable is private
R&D, i.e., R&D conducted in the business sector (BERD) that is also financed by the private sector (i.e., excludes government
financed R&D). "Public R&D" is government-financed R&D performed by private firms. "R&D tax credit" is Warda's B-
Index from Thomson (2012) and the coefficient can be interpreted as the elasticity of R&D with respect to its tax adjusted
user cost (see Appendix B). "Non-business public R&D" is government-financed R&D performed not by the private sector,
e.g. universities or other institutions. "Corporate tax revenue/GDP" is tax revenue from taxes on income, profits, and capital
gains of corporates divided by GDP (from OECD). All columns include a full set of country*industry fixed effects and
industry*year fixed effects, as well as linear country time trends. Models in Panel B use predicted government funded defense
R&D as an instrument for government-financed R&D (see text). "First stage F" is the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-statistic.
The Anderson-Rubin Wald F-test tests the null hypothesis of weak instruments. All regressions are weighted by the industry-
country pair's initial share of employment in total country employment. ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level.




                                                              5
    TABLE 4: EFFECT OF PUBLICLY-FUNDED R&D ON PRIVATELY-FUNDED R&D ­
                               FRENCH DATA

                                           (1)           (2)                                   (3)                   (4)
                                          OLS            IV                                    OLS                   IV
Dependent variable: ln(Privately funded business R&D)
Panel A. 3-digit industry
ln(public R&D+1)t-1                     0.069***      0.346**
                                         (0.011)      (0.092)
ln(defense R&D+1)t-1                                                                        0.047***              0.150**
                                                                                             (0.009)              (0.041)

Observations                                         4,444               4,444                4,444                4,444
Number of industries                                  169                 169                  169                  169
First stage F                                                            11.56                                     23.23
p(firm =ind )                                        0.000               0.014                0.000                0.000

Panel B. Firm-level
ln(public R&D+1)t-1                                0.011***             0.119*
                                                    (0.002)             (0.069)
ln(defense R&D+1)t-1                                                                          0.006               0.374*
                                                                                             (0.005)              (0.215)

Observations                                         80,692             80,692               81,201               81,201
Number of firms                                      12,429             12,429               12,586               12,586
First stage F                                                            13.76                                     12.12
p(firm  = industry )                                 0.000               0.001                0.000                0.298
Notes: The dependent variable is private R&D, i.e., R&D conducted in the business sector (BERD) that is also financed by
the private sector (i.e., excludes government financed R&D). "Public R&D" is government-financed R&D performed by
private firms. All columns include year fixed effects; Panel A (B) includes 3-digit industry (firm) fixed effects. All variables
in Panel B are winsorized at the 0.5% tails. "First stage F" is the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-statistic. We use predicted
government funded defense R&D as an instrument for government-financed R&D (see text). Standard errors in Panel A (B)
are clustered at the 2-digit (3-digit) industry level. ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level. "p(firm =ind )" is
a test of whether the coefficient in Panel A (industry level) is equal to that in Panel B (firm level).




                                                               6
          TABLE 5: INTERNATIONAL SPILLOVERS ­ IV ESTIMATES ­ OECD DATA

  Method of                    (1)                (2)              (3)                   (4)                  (5)              (6)
  calculating               Baseline         Per-capita           Geo-                  Skill               Tech-             R&D
  spillovers from                               GDP             graphy               Intensity             nology           Intensity
  neighbors
  Dependent variable: ln(Privately funded business R&D)
  Panel A. Effect of Public R&D
  ln(public R&D)t-1         0.561**            0.633**          0.578**              0.562**               0.693**          0.629**
                             (0.140)           (0.147)          (0.150)               (0.187)              (0.222)           (0.165)
  ln(int. public                               0.151**          0.408**                0.074               0.909**          0.192**
  R&D)t-1                                      (0.053)          (0.136)               (0.076)              (0.211)           (0.088)
  Observations                5,026             5,022            5,022                 4,582                5,022             5,022
  First stage F               14.66             11.08            11.97                 9.369                9.141             11.12
  Panel B. Effect of Business R&D
  ln(public R&D)t-1         0.561**            0.566**          0.575**              0.566**               0.541**          0.476**
                             (0.140)           (0.159)          (0.144)               (0.174)              (0.165)           (0.144)
  ln(int. business                              0.007            -0.186                -0.057             -0.633**          -0.269**
  R&D)t-1                                      (0.045)          (0.121)               (0.068)              (0.228)           (0.103)
  Observations                5,026             5,022            5,022                 4,582                5,022             5,022
  First stage F               14.66             13.54            13.77                 10.96                14.19             13.48
  Panel C. Effects of Public and Business R&D
  ln(public R&D)t-1         0.561**            0.554**          0.620**              0.586**               0.689**          0.524**
                             (0.140)           (0.137)          (0.157)               (0.182)              (0.239)           (0.163)
  ln(int. public                               0.249**          0.569**                0.123               1.086**          0.300**
  R&D)t-1                                      (0.060)          (0.170)               (0.094)              (0.304)           (0.094)
  ln(int. business                            -0.167**         -0.431**                -0.135             -0.959**          -0.462**
  R&D)t-1                                      (0.058)          (0.151)               (0.091)              (0.253)           (0.113)
  Observations                5,026             5,022            5,022                 4,582                5,022             5,022
  First stage F               14.66             12.73            11.92                 9.578                9.182             11.08
Notes: Each colum in each panel presents a separate regression. Two-way clustered standard errors at the industry-country
and country-year level. All columns include a full set of country*industry fixed effects and industry*year fixed effects, as
well as linear country trends. All regressions are weighted by the industry-country pair's initial share of employment in total
country employment. The dependent variable is private R&D. Public R&D is government-financed R&D performed by
private firms. "Int. public R&D" is the weighted average of other countries' public R&D in the same industry and year, where
each column uses different weights. Weights kl are a "distance" measure between country k and country l measured by: (2)
GDP per capita. kl = 1/|GDPcapk - GDPcapl|; (3) Geographic distance. kl = 1/distkl where geographic distance is measured
in kilometers between capital cities; (4) Skill intensity. kl = 1/|tertk ­ tertl| with tertl being the share of population with tertiary
education in country l; (5) Patent similarity. kl = ( -  )2 , patik and patil are patent share of a specific technology
class I (out of 15 patent technology classes) in country k or l (of total patents in that country); (6) R&D intensity. kl =
     &            &
1/|            -           |. ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level.
                   




                                                                   7
                       TABLE 6: EFFECT OF R&D GROWTH ON TFP GROWTH

                                   (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)                  (5)                 (6)
                                   OLS         OLS          IV        Reduced               OLS                 OLS
                                                                       Form
                                             Annual TFP growth                         Annual labor productivity growth
       (Total R&D/value          0.095**     0.098**   0.097**
       added)t-1                 (0.040)     (0.041)    (0.031)
       (Predicted Defense                                             0.083**
       R&D/value added)t-1                                            (0.030)
       (Total R&D/                                                                        0.026**             0.040**
       sales) t-1                                                                         (0.004)             (0.004)

       Observations              6,102        6,102       6,102        6,102              4,404                82,743
       Dataset                   OECD         OECD        OECD         OECD          French Industries      French Firms
       First stage F                                      14.42
       Country FE                  NO          YES         YES          YES                 N/A                 N/A

Notes: Columns (1)-(4) are OECD data and (5)-(8) are French data. Total R&D is the sum of private R&D, public R&D and
R&D from any other source. Columns (1) through (4) use two-way clustered standard errors at the industry*country and
country*year level, and are weighted with weights equal to the industry-country pair's initial share of employment in total
country employment. Columns (5) through (8) use clustered standard errors at the 3-digit industry. All regressions include a
full set of year fixed effects. Column (3) presents IV estimates using (defense R&D)/value added as an instrument for
R&D/value added. Column (4) presents the reduced form estimate for column (3). ** significant at 5% level, * significant
at 10% level.




                                                             8
                 APPENDIX FIGURE A1: PUBLIC R&D AND PREDICTED DEFENSE R&D ­ BY INDUSTRY




                      -- ln(government funded and business conducted R&D)
                      -- -- ln(predicted defense related government funded R&D)


Notes: The solid line is the log of the government funded and business conducted BERD, which is scaled on the left axis. The dashed line
is the log of predicted defense R&D, our instrumental variable as explained in the text, which is scaled on the right axis. These are averages
across all countries in our data set. Agriculture, hunting and forestry has zero predicted defense R&D in all years. Wood and cork has zero
predicted defense R&D in all years but one.




                                                                      9
 APPENDIX FIGURE A2: THE EFFECTS OF A 9/11 SHOCK OF US DEFENSE R&D ON US
         AND FOREIGN TFP GROWTH AND PUBLIC AND PRIVATE R&D




Note: This describes the links from an exogenous increase in US defense R&D (calibrated to the increase after 9/11) to TFP
growth in the US and overseas. Details are in Appendix B.




                                                           10
APPENDIX TABLE A1: VARIABLE DEFINITION AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
PANEL A ­ OECD DATA

Variable        Code    Construction                                   Source         Unit          Mean     Median    SD
R&D             R       Business enterprise R&D (BERD): Total R&D      MSTI     2000$ PPP adj, mn    876       82     2,847
                        conducted by businesses from any funding
                        source (government, business, overseas)
Public R&D      S       Government funded part of business conducted MSTI,      2000$ PPP adj, mn    70        3       447
                        R&D (BERD)                                     SIRD
IV for defense DRIV     Predicted public subsidies for Defense R&D MSTI         2000$ PPP adj, mn    153       0      1,620
R&D subsidies           (see Appendix A for details)
# Scientists            Number of R&D scientists                       MSTI           FTE           5,564     498     16,770
                    R
R&D personnel   L       Total R&D workers                              MSTI           FTE           4,959     793     14,034
R&D wage bill   (WL)R   Labor costs of all R&D personnel               MSTI     2000$ PPP adj, mn    266       38      777
R&D wage        WR      BERD labor cost/number of R&D personnel        MSTI      2000$ PPP adj      50,165   50,406   20,481
Output          Y       Total production (gross output)                STAN        volumes, bn      7,138      34     27,396
GDP             GDP     Total production (gross output) of a country   STAN     2000$ PPP adj, bn   1,157     411     2,021
Wage bill       WL      Total cost of all employees                    STAN     2000$ PPP adj, mn   11,632   1,710    61,589
Employment      L       Number      of    persons      engaged    (total STAN   thousand, persons    497      101     1,842
                        employment)
Value Added     VA      Value added                                    STAN        volumes, bn      2,169      10     11,888
Capital         K       Gross capital stock; if missing in STAN own    STAN        volumes, bn      4,453      34     49,493
                        estimation based on investment




                                                                 11
PANEL B ­ FRENCH DATA

                                                                                       Firms                        Industries
 Variable         Code    Construction                                       Mean     Median      SD       Mean     Median         SD
 R&D              R       Business enterprise R&D (BERD):
                                                                             8.3m      0.8m      56.9m     62.1m     4.7m        226.5m
 Public R&D       S       Government funded part of business conducted
                          R&D (BERD)
                                                                             0.84m      0.0      13.4m     6.3m       0.0        49.0m
 Defense R&D      DR      Defense R&D
                                                                             0.6m       0.0      12m       4.3m       0.0        42.8m
 # Scientists             Number of R&D scientists (FTE)                      29        5        171       218        19          776
 R&D              LR      Total R&D workers (FTE)
 personnel                                                                     62        10       363       463        49         1526
 R&D wage         (WL)R Labor costs of all R&D personnel
 bill
                                                                             3.5m      0.5m      20.9m     26.3m     2.5m        90.0m
 R&D wage         WR      BERD labor cost/ number of R&D personnel
                                                                            55,313    50,656    30,070    53,370     50,341      31,086
 Output           Y       Sales
                                                                             260m      19m      6,766m    1,945m      282        18,753m
 Employment       L       Number of persons engaged (total employment),
                          FTE                                                 925       129       7348      6,939     1,376       21,991
Notes: Summary statistics are based on the sample used in Table 2 (OECD data in Panel A) and Table 4 (French data in Panel B). All values
in 2000 US dollars (Panel A) and 2000 Euros (Panel B) unless otherwise stated. All data is from the Research Ministry R&D survey.




                                                                   12
  APPENDIX TABLE A2: BUSINESS CONDUCTED R&D (BERD) AS A PROPORTION OF
                            GDP - BY COUNTRY

                                   All years                         1987-       1992-         1997-      2002-   2007-
                                                                     1991        1996          2001       2006    2009
   Country           Mean        Standard Maximum-                   Mean        Mean          Mean       Mean    Mean
                                 deviation Minimum
 Australia            0.78         0.24      0.74                    0.48         0.73          0.88      1.04
 Austria              1.27         0.39      0.96                    0.81         0.73          1.11      1.57    1.50
 Belgium              1.26         0.27      0.95                    1.13         1.04          1.52      1.31
 Canada               0.85         0.16      0.43                    0.74         0.99                            0.92
 Czech                1.64         0.35      1.50                                 1.84          1.81      1.54    1.27
 Republic
 Denmark              0.89          0.36             1.06            0.63         0.72          1.19      1.65
 Estonia              0.51          0.18             0.53                                       0.36      0.58    0.69
 Finland              1.58          0.64             1.87            0.77         1.15          2.10      2.14    2.00
 France               1.25          0.18             0.62            1.17         1.16          1.41      1.28    1.07
 Germany              1.52          0.29             0.95            1.50         1.19          1.66      1.70
 Greece               0.19          0.06             0.20            0.12         0.14          0.23      0.23
 Hungary              0.72          0.14             0.50            1.07         0.67          0.74      0.69    0.69
 Italy                0.63          0.07             0.23            0.67         0.57          0.63      0.68
 Japan                1.53          0.34             1.14            1.42         1.17          1.61      2.03
 Netherlands          1.02          0.16             0.50            1.09         0.85          1.16      0.98
 New                  0.38          0.13             0.41            0.30         0.33          0.46      0.55
 Zealand
 Norway               0.69          0.10             0.36            0.66         0.68          0.81      0.69    0.58
 Poland               0.44          0.16             0.45                         0.58          0.56      0.30    0.25
 Portugal             0.23          0.11             0.43            0.17         0.14          0.25      0.37
 Slovakia             1.01          0.67             2.49                         1.58          1.39      0.61    0.27
 South                2.71          0.47             1.71                         1.87          2.67      2.88    3.26
 Korea
 Spain                0.56          0.13             0.38            0.46         0.42          0.61      0.68    0.71
 Sweden               2.03          0.60             2.33            1.37         1.84          2.68      2.21    1.88
 Switzerland          1.44          0.21             0.51                         1.22          1.71      1.52    1.54
 United               1.24          0.19             0.77            1.43         1.26          1.18      1.23    0.90
 Kingdom
 United               1.87          0.09             0.34            1.89         1.78          1.95      1.81    1.97
 States
Note:   Our database comprises of an unbalanced panel of yearly values between the years 1987 and 2009.




                                                                13
  APPENDIX TABLE A3: BUSINESS CONDUCTED R&D AS A PROPORTION OF VALUE
                           ADDED - BY INDUSTRY

                                                           All        All      1987- 1992- 1997- 2002- 2007-
                                                          years      years     1991 1996 2001 2006 2009
 Industry                                                 Mean        SD       Mean Mean Mean Mean Mean
 Agriculture, hunting and forestry                         0.30       0.36      0.23  0.26  0.34  0.35  0.29
 Basic metals                                              3.81      14.25      2.19  1.98  7.36  3.17  1.35
 Construction                                              0.18       0.27      0.10  0.14  0.22  0.25  0.21
 Chemicals and chemical products                          10.84       6.63      8.92  9.38 11.65 12.29 13.67
 Coke, refined petroleum products and                      5.60      18.74      3.73  4.23  4.35  4.73 29.73
 nuclear fuel
 Community, social & personal services,                    0.04       0.08       0.04      0.03       0.05        0.04    0.06
 etc.
 Electricity, gas and water supply                         0.54       0.89       0.61      0.48       0.52        0.39    1.22
 Electrical machinery and apparatus n.e.c                  8.68      17.02       5.98      6.92      12.26        8.70    5.22
 Finance, insurance, real estate and                       1.17       2.69       0.42      0.87       1.10        1.38    3.21
 business activities
 Fabricated metal products, except                         0.99       0.79       0.89      0.94       1.01        1.01    1.40
 machinery and equipment
 Food, beverages and tobacco                               1.23       1.63       0.92       0.90      1.27         1.41    2.88
 Mining and quarrying                                      0.98       1.25       0.88       1.01      1.09         0.96    0.59
 Machinery and equipment, n.e.c.                           4.91       4.08       3.66       4.31      5.21         5.56    7.42
 Manufacturing n.e.c. and recycling                        1.17       1.28       1.15       0.90      1.22         1.31    1.54
 Medical, precision and optical                           11.85      11.98       8.32      10.64     12.37        13.15   17.98
 instruments, watches and clocks
 (instruments)
 Motor Vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers               10.16      10.01      11.15       8.99      9.85        10.15   14.55
 Non-metallic mineral products                             1.31       0.94       1.24       1.14      1.43         1.44    1.19
 Office, accounting and computing                         25.12      56.00      32.57      19.76     15.91        36.31   24.35
 machinery
 Other Transport Equipment                                11.36      11.27      11.01      11.50     12.80        10.47   8.78
 Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and                 0.59       0.51       0.48       0.58      0.61         0.63   0.60
 publishing
 Radio, TV, communications equipment &                    23.67      15.96      24.49      21.85     24.80        24.34   20.20
 apparatus
 Rubber and plastic products                               2.65       2.26       1.69      2.69       3.00        2.74    3.52
 Textiles, fur and leather                                 1.00       0.86       0.58      0.74       1.06        1.32    1.93
 Transport, storage and communications                     0.47       0.95       0.24      0.31       0.57        0.44    1.33
 Wholesale and retail trade; restaurants                   0.24       0.34       0.11      0.16       0.26        0.29    0.42
 and hotels
 Wood and cork (not furniture)                             0.47       0.71       0.45      0.36       0.49        0.47    0.93
Note: Our database comprises of an unbalanced panel of yearly values between the years 1987 and 2009. These are
      averages across all countries in our dataset. SD is for standard deviation.




                                                                14
                    APPENDIX TABLE A4: FIRST STAGE OF TABLE 3, PANEL B

                                      (1)        (2)                        (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
Dependent variable: ln(Privately funded business R&D)

ln(predicted defense R&D)t-1                 0.092**       0.092**       0.092**       0.096**       0.096**        0.101**
                                             (0.023)       (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.030)        (0.030)
R&D tax creditt-1                                                                       -0.820        -0.814         -1.012
                                                                                       (0.695)       (0.693)        (0.677)
ln(Non-bus. public R&D)t-1                                                                            -0.025         -0.074
                                                                                                     (0.276)        (0.266)
(Corp. tax revenue/GDP)t-1                                                                                          9.871*
                                                                                                                    (5.425)
ln(output)t-1                                                            0.716*        0.703*        0.698*         0.738*
                                                                         (0.385)       (0.385)       (0.397)        (0.392)
ln(GDP)t-1                                                               -0.657        -0.633        -0.625          -0.683
                                                                         (0.524)       (0.524)       (0.559)        (0.555)

Observations                                  5,026         4,389         4,389         4,389         4,389          4,389

Notes: Two-way clustered standard errors at the industry*country and country*year level. All columns include a full set of
       country by industry fixed effects and a full set of industry by year fixed effects, as well as linear country trends. All
       regressions are weighted by the industry-country pair's initial share of employment in total country employment.
       ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level.




                                                              15
                APPENDIX TABLE A5: EFFECT OF PUBLIC R&D ON PRIVATE R&D ­ ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

                          (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)               (8)
                         OLS                IV               OLS                IV               OLS                IV               OLS                IV
ln(Public              0.144**           0.491**           0.127**           0.683**           0.188**           0.555**           0.182**           0.498**
R&D)t-1                (0.027)           (0.168)           (0.027)           (0.241)           (0.025)           (0.282)           (0.037)           (0.250)
ln(output)t-1          0.683**            0.421*            -0.110            -0.094           0.736**            0.388            0.858**            0.648
                       (0.153)           (0.225)           (0.256)           (0.366)           (0.143)           (0.330)           (0.342)           (0.416)
Left wing              0.129**            -0.038
govt.t-1               (0.054)           (0.114)
Right wing             0.188**             0.051
govt.t-1               (0.073)           (0.103)

Observations            4,654             4,654             4,056             4,056             5,534              5,534             2,108            2,108
Number of                412               412               374               374               456                456               265              265
ind*ctry
IV                                       Defense                             Defense                             Country                             Defense
                                                                                                                 Defense
1st Stage F                               14.99                               8.363                               6.039                               4.628
Anderson-Rubin                            7.079                               6.726                               3.175                               3.724
Wald F-test
p-value                                  0.00820                             0.0100                             0.0758                               0.0558
 Notes: All columns include a full set of country*industry fixed effects and industry*year fixed effects as well as linear country trends unless otherwise
          noted. Columns (1) and (2) present OLS and IV estimates using dummies to control for chief executive's party orientation, where "center" is the
          omitted category. Columns (3) and (4) present OLS and IV estimates controlling for ln(output) and ln(GDP) in times t through t+3. Columns (5)
          and (6) present OLS and IV estimates using only country*year variation in the defense instrument. Columns (7) and (8) present OLS and IV estimates
          controlling for ln(non-R&D military expenditure) in times t through t+3. All regressions are weighted by the industry-country pair's initial share of
          employment in total country employment. ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level.




                                                                              16
                  APPENDIX TABLE A6: EFFECT OF PUBLIC R&D AND PRIVATE R&D ON PLACEBO IVS

                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
                         ln(public   ln(BERD     ln(BERD     ln(public   ln(BERD      ln(BERD       ln(public   ln(BERD     ln(BERD     ln(public   ln(BERD     ln(BERD
                          R&D)t-1    excl. gov   excl. gov    R&D)t-1    excl. gov    excl. gov      R&D)t-1    excl. gov   excl. gov    R&D)t-1    excl. gov   excl. gov
                                      funded)     funded)                 funded)      funded)                   funded)     funded)                 funded)     funded)

ln(defense proc.          0.488        -0.123
excl. R&D)t-1            (0.461)      (0.210)
ln(defense proc. excl.                                        0.615        -0.058
R&D and other)t-1                                            (0.484)      (0.250)
ln(military wagebill                                                                                 0.139        0.156
excl. R&D)t-1                                                                                       (0.292)      (0.110)
ln(mil. wagebill excl.                                                                                                                   0.113        0.139
R&D and other)t-1                                                                                                                       (0.291)      (0.102)
ln(public R&D)t-1                                  -0.252                                  -0.095                              1.119                               1.227
                                                  (0.564)                                 (0.443)                            (1.742)                             (2.444)
ln(output)t-1            1.327**     1.177**      1.511*     1.309**     1.140**          1.264*    1.397**     1.216**       -0.347    1.415**     1.195**       -0.541
                         (0.596)     (0.315)      (0.817)    (0.608)     (0.320)          (0.666)   (0.638)     (0.341)      (2.462)    (0.649)     (0.338)      (3.471)
ln(GDP)t-1                -0.967      -1.015       -1.259     -1.196      -0.982           -1.096    -0.663      -1.006       -0.264     -0.663      -0.984       -0.170
                         (1.134)     (0.698)      (0.921)    (1.166)     (0.734)          (0.839)   (1.028)     (0.616)      (1.332)    (1.019)     (0.598)      (1.706)

Observations              2,950       2,950        2,950      2,929       2,929           2,929      2,405       2,405        2,405      2,338       2,338        2,338
R-squared                 0.131       0.164       -0.119      0.124       0.162           0.080      0.165       0.181       -1.185      0.160       0.181       -1.541
Number of ind*ctry         331         331          331        326         326             326        298         298          298        275         275          275
1st Stage F                                        0.933                                  1.337                               0.193                               0.127
Anderson-Rubin Wald                                0.284                                  0.0453                              1.689                               1.555
F-test
p-value                                           0.595                                   0.832                              0.196                               0.215

Notes: All columns include a full set of country*industry fixed effects,industry*year fixed and linear country trends. All regressions are weighted by the
       industry-country pair's initial share of employment in total country employment. "Defense procurement excluding R&D and other" excludes R&D,
       civil defense and foreign military aid. "Military wagebill excluding R&D and other" also excludes R&D, civil defense and foreign military aid. **
       significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level.




                                                                                     17
              APPENDIX TABLE A7: FIRST STAGE OF TABLE 4 ­ FRENCH DATA


                                                                   (1)                 (2)
                                                                ln(public          ln(defense
                                                               R&D + 1)t-1         R&D + 1)t-1
                          Panel A. 3-digit industry
                          ln(predicted defense                    0.120***           0.278***
                          R&D)t-1                                  (0.035)            (0.057)

                          Observations                             4,444               4,444

                          Panel B. Firm-level
                          ln(predicted defense                    0.018***           0.006***
                          R&D)t-1                                  (0.005)            (0.002)

                          Observations                             80,692             81,201


Notes: Standard errors in Panel A are clustered at the 2-digit industry level; in Panel B are clustered at the 3-digit industry
level. All columns include year fixed effects; Panel A includes 3-digit industry fixed effects. Panel B includes firm fixed
effects. Variables in panel B are winsorized at the 0.5% tails. The instrument is defense R&D subsidies. ** significant at 5%
level, * significant at 10% level.




                                                             18
                APPENDIX TABLE A8: EFFECT ON EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES

                             (1)           (2)                   (3)                (4)                      (5)
                       ln(BERD excl. ln(BERD excl.            ln(R&D           ln(employment           ln(R&D labor
                         gov funded)   gov funded)           personnel)       excluding R&D)             cost/R&D
                                                                                                         personnel)
                                                   PANEL A: OLS
OECD country-industries
ln(public R&D)t-1   0.128**                  0.088**            0.099**           0.007**                  0.066*
                     (0.028)                 (0.032)            (0.042)           (0.003)                  (0.040)

Observations                5,026             3,817              3,817              3,817                   3,817

French 3-digit industries
ln(public R&D)t-1      0.069***             0.403***         0.394***             0.324***                0.006***
                        (0.011)              (0.090)          (0.069)              (0.086)                 (0.002)

Observations                4,444             3,982              3,982              3,982                   3,982

French firms
ln(public R&D)t-1         0.011***          0.011***         0.013***               0.001                 0.004***
                           (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.001)              (0.001)                 (0.001)

Observations               80,692            80,044      80,044                    80,044                  80,044
                                                   PANEL B: IV
OECD country-industries
ln(public R&D)t1    0.561**                 0.400**              0.142            0.087**                   0.167
                    (0.140)                 (0.105)             (0.183)           (0.030)                  (0.138)

Observations               5,026              3,817              3,817              3,817                   3,817
First stage F              14.66              9.099              9.099              9.099                   9.099

French 3-digit industries
ln(public R&D)t1       0.346***             0.403***         0.394***             0.324***                  0.009
                        (0.092)              (0.090)          (0.069)              (0.086)                 (0.013)

Observations               4,444              3,982              3,982              3,982                   3,982
First stage F              11.56              10.40              10.40              10.40                   10.40

French firms
ln(public R&D)t1          0.119*              0.114             0.114**             0.019                   0.033
                          (0.069)            (0.071)            (0.049)            (0.057)                 (0.043)

Observations               80,692            80,044             80,044             80,044                  80,044
First stage F               13.76             13.51              13.51              13.51                   13.51
Notes: The dependent variable is private R&D, i.e., R&D conducted in the business sector (BERD) that is also financed by
the private sector (i.e., excludes government financed R&D). "Public R&D" is government-financed R&D performed by
private firms. Regresions using OECD data are weighted by the industry-country pair's initial share of employment in total
country employment. ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level.




                                                           19
      APPENDIX TABLE A9: DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL SPILLOVERS ­ OLS
                                ESTIMATES


  Measure of neighbor                (1)          (2)                    (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
  for spillover                    Baseline   Per-capita                Geo-            Skill           Tech-            R&D
                                                 GDP                   graphy         Intensity         nology         Intensity
  Dependent variable: ln(Privately funded business R&D)
  Panel A. Effect of Public R&D
  ln(public R&D)t-1            0.128**         0.133**                0.140**          0.129**         0.155**          0.130**
                                (0.028)        (0.029)                (0.025)          (0.030)         (0.029)          (0.029)
  ln(int. public                                0.058*                 0.150            -0.007         0.286**           0.022
  R&D)t-1                                      (0.031)                (0.091)          (0.051)         (0.120)          (0.052)

  Observations                      5,026             5,022             5,022           4,582            5,022           5,022

  Panel B. Effect of Business R&D
  ln(public R&D)t-1           0.128**                0.128**           0.119**         0.130**         0.116**         0.126**
                               (0.028)               (0.028)           (0.029)         (0.029)          (0.029)         (0.028)
  ln(int. business                                    -0.014          -0.327**          -0.046         -0.779**        -0.286**
  R&D)t-1                                            (0.039)           (0.090)         (0.068)          (0.155)         (0.096)

  Observations                      5,026             5,022             5,022           4,582            5,022           5,022

  Panel C. Effects of Public and Business R&D
  ln(public R&D)t-1            0.128**      0.137**                    0.138**         0.131**         0.158**         0.139**
                               (0.028)      (0.028)                    (0.026)         (0.029)          (0.028)         (0.029)
  ln(int. public R&D)t-1                    0.128**                    0.294**          0.011          0.464**         0.144**
                                            (0.051)                    (0.124)         (0.067)          (0.158)         (0.045)
  ln(int. business R&D)t-1                  -0.103*                   -0.455**          -0.053         -0.926**        -0.379**
                                            (0.062)                    (0.127)         (0.090)          (0.179)         (0.102)

    Observations                     5,026               5,022             5,022           4,582           5,022           5,022
Notes: ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level. Each colum in each panel presents a separate regression. Two-
way clustered standard errors at the industry-country and country-year level. All columns use a full set of country*industry
fixed effects and industry*year fixed effects as well as linear country trends. All regressions are weighted by the industry-
country pair's initial share of employment in total country employment. The dependent variable is private R&D, i.e., R&D
conducted in the business sector (BERD) that is also financed by the private sector (i.e., excludes government financed R&D).
"Public R&D" is government-financed R&D performed by private firms. "Int. public R&D" is the weighted average of other
countries' public R&D in the same industry and year, where each column uses different weights. "Int. total R&D" is the
weighted average of other countries' public and private R&D in the same industry and year, where each column uses different
weights. Weights kl are a "distance" measure between country k and country l measured by: (2) GDP per capita. kl =
1/|GDPcapk - GDPcapl|; (3) Geographic distance. kl = 1/distkl where geographic distance is measured in kilometers between
capital cities; (4) Skill intensity. kl = 1/|tertk ­ tertl| with tertl being the share of population with tertiary education in country
l; (5) Patent similarity. kl = ( -  )2 , patik and patil are patent share of a specific technology class I (out of 15
patent technology classes) in country k or l (of total patents in that country); (6) R&D intensity. kl =
     &             &
1/|            -            |.
                   




                                                                 20
 APPENDIX TABLE A10: INTERNATIONAL SPILLOVER EFFECTS OF R&D SUBSIDIES
                            ON TFP GROWTH

  Measure of neighbor              (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
  for spillover                  Baseline      Per-capita          Geo-           Skill         Tech-           R&D
                                                 GDP              graphy        Intensity       nology        Intensity
  Dependent variable: TFP Growth
  Panel A. OLS
  (R&D/value           0.095**    0.053                            0.029         0.046           0.017          0.042
  added)t-1            (0.040)   (0.032)                          (0.023)       (0.033)         (0.020)        (0.030)
  (International R&D/            0.170**                          0.214**       0.207**         0.253**        0.168**
  value added) t-1               (0.051)                          (0.039)       (0.043)         (0.049)        (0.054)

  Observations                    6,102           6,096            6,096          5,280          6,096          6,096

  Panel B. IV
  (R&D/value                     0.094**          0.026            0.004         0.033           -0.032         0.021
  added)t-1                      (0.033)         (0.033)          (0.023)       (0.083)         (0.023)        (0.028)
  (International R&D/                            0.201**          0.237**       0.219**         0.304**        0.188**
  value added) t-1                               (0.078)          (0.055)       (0.088)         (0.070)        (0.068)

  Observations                    6,102           6,096            6,096          5,280          6,096          6,096
  First stage F                   14.93           6.434            8.772          8.659          6.768          8.333

Notes: ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the industry*country
and country*year level except for column (4) in Panel B, where they are clustered only at the industry*country level due to
computational problems for the former. All regressions include a full set of country and year fixed effects, as well as linear
country trends. All regressions are weighted by the industry-country pair's initial share of employment in total country
employment. The dependent variable is TFP growth over 1 year. "International R&D/value added" is the weighted average
of other countries' total R&D/value added in the same industry and year, where each column uses different weights. "R&D"
is the total R&D conducted in the business sector (both financed by the private sector and by government). Weights  are
a "distance" measure between country k and country l and measured by: (2) GDP per capita.  = 1/( -
 ); (3) Geographic distance.  = 1/ where geographical distance is measured in kms between capital cities;
(4) Skill intensity.  = 1/( -  ) with  being the share of population with tertiary education in country
                                                      2
l; (5) Patent similarity.  =  ( -  ) ,  and  are patent share of a specific technology class i (out
of 15 patent technology classes) in country k or l (of total patents in that country); (6) R&D intensity.  =
         &             &
1/ (              -          )
                       




                                                             21
APPENDIX TABLE A11: INTERNATIONAL DISPLACEMENT EFFECTS OF PUBLIC R&D
             ­ FOR ILLUSTRATION OF MAGNITUDE OF EFFECTS

                                    (1)             (2)                      (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
Measure of neighbor            Baseline         Per-capita                  Geo-          Skill        Tech-           R&D
for spillover:                                     GDP                     graphy       Intensity      nology        Intensity
Dependent variable: ln(Privately funded business R&D)
ln(Domestic Public R&D)t         0.235**         0.243**                   0.242**       0.247**       0.239**       0.244**
                                  (0.038)         (0.038)                  (0.038)       (0.040)       (0.037)        (0.037)
ln(Int. Total R&D)t-1                              0.001                  -0.325**        -0.086      -0.850**       -0.278**
                                                  (0.064)                  (0.102)       (0.086)       (0.277)        (0.086)

Observations                           6,671              6,479             6,479         5,674         6,479         6,479

Notes: ** significant at 5% level, * significant at 10% level. Each column in each panel constitutes a separate regression.
Two-way clustered standard errors at the industry*country and country*year level. All columns include a full set of
country*industry fixed effects and industry*year fixed effects, as well as linear country trends. All regressions are weighted
by the industry-country pair's initial share of employment in total country employment. The dependent variable is private
R&D, i.e. R&D conducted in the business sector (BERD) that is also financed by the private sector (i.e. excludes government
financed -R&D). "Public R&D" is government financed R&D performed by private firms. "Int. Total R&D" is the weighted
average of other countries' public and private R&D in the same industry and year, where each column uses different weights.
Weights  are a "distance" measure between country k and country l and measured by: (2) GDP per capita.  =
1/( -  ); (3) Geographic distance.  = 1/ where geographical distance is measured in kms
between capital cities; (4) Skill intensity.  = 1/( -  ) with  being the share of population with tertiary
                                                                              2
education in country l; (5) Patent similarity.  =  ( -  ) ,  and  are patent share of a specific
technology class i (out of 15 patent technology classes) in country k or l (of total patents in that country); (6) R&D intensity.
                 &             &
 = 1/ (                   -          );
                               




                                                              22
