                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             FINANCING ENTREPRENEURSHIP THROUGH THE TAX CODE:
                        ANGEL INVESTOR TAX CREDITS

                                       Sabrina T. Howell
                                       Filippo Mezzanotti

                                      Working Paper 26486
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26486


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




Howell's research on this project was funded by the Kauffman Foundation and the Kenan
Institute Frontiers of Entrepreneurship grant program. We are grateful to Abhishek Bhardwaj,
Nick McMonigle, Danye Wang, Grant Goehring, and Jun Wong for excellent research assistance.
We thank Will Gornall for data assistance. For helpful comments, we thank Tania Babina, Greg
Brown, Ryan Decker, Will Gornall, Arpit Gupta, Simone Lenzu, Arnobio Morelix, Holger
Mueller, Andrea Passalacqua, David Robinson, and participants at the NYU Stern Corporate
Governance seminar and the Kenan Institute Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Conference. Filippo
Mezzanotti thanks Kellogg School of Management for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sabrina T. Howell and Filippo Mezzanotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financing Entrepreneurship through the Tax Code: Angel Investor Tax Credits
Sabrina T. Howell and Filippo Mezzanotti
NBER Working Paper No. 26486
November 2019
JEL No. G0,G18,G24,G38,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

A central issue in public finance is the tradeoff between maintaining tax revenues and using the
tax code to incentivize particular economic activities. One important dimension of this tradeoff is
whether incentive policies are used in practice as policymakers intend. This paper examines one
particular tax program that many U.S. states use to stimulate entrepreneurship. Specifically, angel
tax credits subsidize wealthy individuals' investments in startups. This paper finds that these
programs have no measurable effect on local entrepreneurial activity or beneficiary company
outcomes, despite increasing some measures of angel activity. This appears to reflect the
programs failing to screen out financially unconstrained firms and often being used for tax
arbitrage. Over 90 percent of beneficiary companies fall into at least one of three categories: a
corporate insider received a tax credit; the company previously raised external equity; or the
company is not in a high-growth sector. Notably, at least 33 percent of beneficiary companies
include an investor receiving a tax credit who is an executive at the company.


Sabrina T. Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

Filippo Mezzanotti
Kellogg School of Management
4389 Global Hub
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60201
filippo.mezzanotti@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1         Introduction
Many local governments are eager to encourage high-growth entrepreneurship as a means
to create high-skill jobs and foster economic growth. Subsidies could be e ective if financial
frictions leave promising early stage startups financially constrained, which may be more
often the case outside of major hub cities (Kerr & Nanda 2011).1 One readily available
policy tool for a local government is the tax code, which can be deployed to subsidize angel
investment in local ventures. Angel investors are high net worth individuals who provide
private capital to startups ­ they are often a startup's first source of outside capital.2 Since
the 1990s, 30 U.S. states have implemented angel investor tax credits, which are applied via
deductions from income taxes owed (not from taxable income).
        Subsidizing investors through the tax code has several attractive features relative to
alternatives such as direct grants to firms. First, there is no need for government to "pick
winners," which might lead to regulatory capture (Lerner 2009). Tax credits retain market
incentives, leaving expert investors with some skin in the game. Second, the administrative
burden of tax subsidies is relatively low. Keuschnigg & Nielsen (2002) theorize that by
lowering the cost of starting a new business, investment subsidies should increase
entrepreneurship and success conditional on entry. Finally, as a targeted subsidy, angel
investor tax credits avoid the blunter instrument of lowering capital gains taxes, which
applies to a much broader set of investments (Poterba 1989).
        Existing literature on related programs provides additional reasons to think that angel
investor tax credits will be successful. There is a great deal of evidence, summarized in Becker
(2015), that R&D tax credits have large positive e ects on innovation among both large and
small firms.3 Lower corporate and income taxes spur new business formation and superstar
inventor mobility, respectively.4 Lach (2002), Bronzini & Iachini (2014) and Howell (2017)
    1
     See also Chen, Gompers, Kovner & Lerner (2010) and Krishnan, Nandy & Puri (2014)
    2
     See The American Angel, a report from the Angel Capital Association, for details on angel investing.
https://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/data/Documents/TAAReport11-30-17.pdf?rev=DB68
   3
     Specific papers include Hall (1993), McCutchen (1993), Mamuneas & Nadiri (1996), Hall & Van Reenen
(2000), Bloom, Gri th & Van Reenen (2002), Billings et al. (2001), Klassen et al. (2004), Wilson (2009),
Clausen (2009), Agrawal, Rosell & Simcoe (2014), Dechezleprêtre et al. (2016), and Balsmeier, Kurakina &
Fleming (2018).
   4
     On the former, see Mukherjee et al. (2017), Serrato & Zidar (2018), and Curtis & Decker (2018) in
the U.S., and Da Rin et al. (2011) in Europe. Relatedly, Zwick & Mahon (2017) show that small firms


                                                   1
demonstrate positive e ects of grant programs for high-tech startups. Finally, accelerator
participation and winning new venture competitions ­ both of which often benefit from
public funds ­ are also useful for startups (McKenzie 2017, Gonzalez-Uribe & Leatherbee
2017, Howell Forthcoming). The above policies are diverse, yet they have key features
that distinguish them from state angel investor tax credits: Rather than targeting financial
intermediaries, they either target firms that are likely to be constrained (e.g. high-tech
startups) or target specific economic activities (e.g. R&D investment).
    Despite significant take-up and widespread use, we find that state angel investor tax credit
programs have no measurable e ect on local economic growth. However, the programs do
lead to more angel deals and investors. To interpret these facts, we begin by recognizing
that there are challenges to implementing angel tax credits. First, a tax credit will only
be e ective if the company whose investor received it (henceforth "beneficiary company")
would not otherwise receive as much financing.5 If the company would obtain the financing
regardless and would not change its investment behavior, the policy is simply a transfer from
taxpayers to investors or other company stakeholders. In such a case, the subsidy crowds
out alternative funding sources. Second, the tax credit must target investors in companies
with the potential to grow or innovate, especially in order to generate positive spillovers for
the local economy. In sum, to be useful, angel tax credit programs must reach companies
presenting good investment opportunities that nonetheless face financing frictions.6 We
document that beneficiary firms often do not appear particularly constrained ex-ante and
that tax arbitrage considerations appear to be important in explaining take-up. In line with
this interpretation, we document that the increase in state-level AngelList activity is driven
are especially sensitive to temporarily lower investment tax rates. On the latter, see Akcigit, Baslandze &
Stantcheva (2016) and Moretti & Wilson (2017).
   5
     The main motivation for subsidizing angel investment is that financing frictions inhibit optimal
investment (Jensen & Meckling 1976, Stiglitz & Weiss 1981, Myers & Majluf 1984). Information asymmetry
and agency conflicts between managers and investors reduce the investor's willingness to provide capital
despite the company having deserving investment opportunities. Information asymmetry is especially severe
among startups (Gompers & Lerner 1997, Gompers & Sahlman 2001). Longstanding research shows these
financing frictions can translate into reduced real expenditure on investment by the company (Hoshi, Kashyap
& Scharfstein 1991, Hubbard 1998). This literature suggests that subsidies should target those young,
entrepreneurial firms facing the most severe information asymmetries.
   6
     Tax credits could also be e ective if they target firms that are unconstrained and induce them to invest
more in areas with large spillovers. However, this requires that firms increase real investment, not simply
substitute among liabilities.



                                                     2
by investors who are less likely to be professional.
   We begin the paper by providing comprehensive and systematic information about all
30 state programs, based on examination of each state's tax codes (Table 1 and Appendix
Table A.1). The programs are quite generous, as the share of qualified investment that can
be deducted from the investor's income taxes, or reimbursed as a cash grant to out-of-state
investors, is 33 percent on average and 28 percent at the median. Suppose an angel invested
$100,000 with the expectation of a "2x multiple," or 200 percent cash-on-cash return (a
standard industry return metric). The median tax credit transforms this into a 2.8x multiple.
There is wide variation in the amount of money states allocate to the programs, with the
smallest program at $0.75 million and the largest at $50 million. Across all program-years
with available data, take-up totals $8.13 billion (see Figure 1). This is 88 percent of allocated
funding. While these numbers are a small share of total tax revenue, they are large relative
to state funding for entrepreneurship, both public and private, as well as to total state angel
investment (see Section 2.1).
   Our first analysis asks whether the angel tax credit programs are associated with growth
in entrepreneurial activity at the state level. Using a di erence-in-di erences model that
exploits the staggered introduction of these programs across states post-2001, we find no
impact on the real economy. This is true using employment at young firms overall or in
relevant sectors, and using the number of small firms in relevant sectors. For example, the
estimated e ect of a tax credit on employment at firms zero to five years old is 0.5 percent,
with a 95 percent confidence interval upper bound of three percent. Similarly, the coe cient
for the number of high-tech firms with less than 20 employees is -0.1 percent, with an upper
bound of one percent. These null e ects persist across a range of reasonable specifications.
   While there is no exact parallel, the real outcomes of alternative programs can serve as
useful benchmarks. Balsmeier, Kurakina & Fleming (2018) find that an California R&D tax
credit increased measures of patents, citations, and the stock market value of patents by
between five and 12 percent, and Dechezleprêtre et al. (2016) find that an R&D tax credit
for small firms in the UK increased patenting by 60 percent. In both cases, the R&D credit
value relative to payable taxes is smaller than the average angel credit in our data. Howell
& Brown (2019) find that small business grants that are about five times the average tax


                                               3
credit amount increase employment by 27 percent.
       We also assess the tax credit programs' relationship to angel investment in the state.
Using data from AngelList, where individuals self-identify as angel investors, we find that
the programs are associated with more deals and more unique investors. We find positive but
smaller and insignificant e ects on funding amounts from the commercial datasets, where
an aggregator determines what "counts" as angel investment. Both the investment and
employment results are persistent across a wide range of reasonable specifications.
       One way to explain the results thus far is that the programs have a positive e ect, but
it is too small to detect in state-level analysis. To assess this hypothesis, we use detailed
data on applicant companies from 10 states between 2005 and 2018 to compare beneficiary
companies to companies that were certified to receive a tax credit but for which no tax credit
was ever issued ("failed applicants"). For an investor to receive a tax credit, the company
must be certified by the state as eligible (e.g., must have the majority of its employees in the
state). Failed applicants are a useful comparison group to the beneficiary companies because
they are in the same state and indicated interest in the tax credit. However, they are likely
to be lower quality, leading us to expect any bias to be positive.7 Consistent with positive
bias, beneficiary companies are on average more successful subsequently than their rejected
counterparts. Yet this relationship disappears after controlling for previous financing.8 In
our preferred models, we find fairly precise zero e ects of getting a tax credit on financing,
employment, and exit. For example, the e ect on having at least 25 employees in the second
year after the tax credit year is -0.021 percentage points in our preferred specification, with
a 95 percent confidence interval ranging from -0.5 to 0.5 percentage points, relative to a
mean of about three percent. As a robustness test, we find similar results using a matching
estimator in which control companies are those that received similar amounts of previous
financing but are in a di erent state in the same Census division that never had a tax
   7
     A company that is certified would fail to receive an actual tax credit because: (a) no investment deal
occurred, in which case the company may have sought but failed to raise angel investment or raised money
from a source that did not claim the state tax credit; or (b) the company applied after the state ran out of
funding. In either case, there is no reason to think that a failed applicant would be an intrinsically better
company, if anything it is likely to be worse. Indeed, failed applicants raised less previous financing and they
had lower pre-application employment.
   8
     These results help explain the aggregate results of increased angel investment but limited real e ects of
the policy.



                                                       4
credit program. Thus, the small size of the programs is not the main reason for the limited
state-level e ects.
       An alternative explanation for the null e ects on real activity is that the tax credit
programs do not successfully target companies with investment opportunities that will
respond to the subsidy.           Within this program design explanation, there are two
mechanisms. First, perhaps the program did motivate new seed investment, but there was
no pass through to investment on the part of the beneficiary company. This might happen
if, for example, beneficiary companies were relatively unconstrained ex-ante and the angel
investment substitutes for other sources of financing (e.g.               bank loans).      The second
mechanism is that the program is used for tax arbitrage.                  For example, it may have
incentivized existing investors to label themselves "angels" in order to make use of the
credit. In both cases, real company investment is unchanged after the credit, but we may
observe some increase in state-level angel activity.
       To explore whether the data are consistent with these channels, we examine company and
investor characteristics in 12 states. We document three facts. First, beneficiary companies
tend to be well-financed ex-ante : 37 percent of beneficiary companies previously received
equity financing, with large dollar amounts relative to the average angel deal. This contrasts
with a common perception that angel investor tax credits target a company's initial external
investment and suggests that many beneficiary companies could have raised similar amounts
of funding in the absence of the program.
       Second, beneficiary companies do not appear to be the type that typically face financing
frictions yet have high-growth potential. For example, they are much less likely to be in
the IT/web/computer sector than VC-backed startups in general. This sector is important,
as it is strongly associated with innovative, high-tech, high-growth firms.9 This makes it
less likely that the additional investment is "angel" in the sense of funding potentially high-
growth startups. Indeed, we show that the state-level increase in angel activity is primarily
explained by one-o investors rather than professional angels with a track record of exits
and repeated transactions.
   9
    Lower spillovers in more traditional sectors could also help explain the absence of an aggregate e ect
(Griliches 1992, Acs et al. 1994).



                                                    5
   Third, we show that investors benefiting from the tax credit are often insiders of the
beneficiary company. For five states, we observe the identities of investors who received a
tax credit linked to the beneficiary company. We find that 33 percent of these companies have
at least one investor who is also a company executive. This rate is likely an underestimate,
as it is not straightforward to a rmatively identify insiders. Insider investors by definition
do not face information asymmetry, which may help explain why subsidizing them would
have a limited impact. Furthermore, insiders are more likely to be in a position to enjoy tax
credits without altering investment policy. This evidence is consistent with the tax arbitrage
channel.
   These outcomes appear to be the result of program design. Angel investor tax credit
programs appear not to target companies that would greatly benefit from the subsidy.
Instead, firms receiving the tax credit are often not especially constrained, and investors
are often company insiders. In a similar vein, Bell et al. (2018) conclude that policies to
induce innovation that focus on financial returns, such as cutting top income taxes, are
unlikely to be successful. The reasons are parallels to what we find here among angel
investors: Such policies target individuals who are already at high likelihood of innovating,
and whose e ort will be relatively unresponsive to marginal changes in incentives.
   However, our results should be interpreted with caution.        A null e ect conclusion,
particularly in a small sample, prevents us from definitively establishing whether or not
angel investor tax credit programs are useful.       It is possible that with hundreds or
thousands of policy changes, we would be able to identify a positive e ect. In the analysis,
we emphasize the magnitude we can rule out based on the upper bound of 95 percent
confidence intervals. These bounds suggest that ­ perhaps surprisingly ­ there are no
economically meaningful positive e ects. We believe that it is important for economists to
report null results concerning widely used policies, if only to indicate that further research
is needed to a rmatively establish whether these policies are or are not a useful
application of taxpayer dollars.
   Our paper contributes to work on tax arbitrage and avoidance (e.g. McDonald 2001,
Graham 2003, Jacob & Michaely 2017, Landoni 2018). A second related literature examines
how taxes a ect VC and has come to disparate conclusions. While Cullen & Gordon (2007)


                                              6
and Bock & Watzinger (2017) find that higher capital gains taxes reduce investment, Jeng &
Wells (2000) find no e ect and Da Rin et al. (2006) find economically small e ects. Poterba
(1989) points out that most investors in VC funds, such as endowments and pension funds,
are in any event tax exempt.
       Our paper joins a growing new literature focusing on angel investment, which includes
Kerr, Lerner & Schoar (2011), Bernstein, Korteweg & Laws (2017), Ewens & Townsend
(2018), Lerner, Schoar, Sokolinski & Wilson (2018), and Lindsey & Stein (2019).10 In
addition to analyzing angel tax credits, our paper sheds light on the characteristics of over
5,600 individuals who receive angel tax credits, including gender and occupation.11
Understanding the angel investor ecosystem is important, as angel investors fund far more
new ventures than venture capital firms. For example, in 2018, angels invested $23.1 billion
in 66,110 U.S. startups, while VCs invested in just 8,948 U.S. firms.12
       Our results are also consistent Gonzalez-Uribe & Paravisini (2019), who study of a UK
tax subsidy for equity investments in small firms. Despite finding that investments are very
elastic to changes in the cost of external equity among firms that issue equity, they also
document extremely low take-up, with only one percent of eligible firms taking advantage
of the subsidy. The apparent di erence with our finding of high take-up but relatively low
impact is easily explained once we compare the eligibility rules. Unlike many U.S. state tax
credit programs, the UK programs exclude insiders from claiming credits. In both studies,
the cost of adding new external investors appears to be a significant constraint on growth.
This comparison highlights our view that specific design choices explain the unexpectedly
limited e ects we find. Our analysis suggests that altering eligibility rules might enable state
  10
     In a contemporaneous paper, Denes et al. (2019) also study angel investor tax credits, providing a
complementary but consistent view on these programs. Our paper is di erent along a number of dimensions.
In terms of data, we observe angel investor identities and failed applicant companies, both of which permit
unique analyses that we see as crucial to identifying the key mechanism. Relative to our work, Denes et al.
(2019) exploits SEC Form D filings as an additional data set. We do not use these data because as far as
we are aware they do not permit a distinction between angel investors and other types of investors who
use Form D, such as venture capital and hedge funds. The only disclosure requirement in Form D about
investors is "number of accredited investors participating in the o ering."
  11
     The majority of the data on beneficiary companies and their investors have not previously been public
and were hand-collected, but we can make complete, identified data available for future use. Complete data
with firm and investor identities will be available on the authors' websites.
  12
     Statistics from the UNH Center for Venture Research Angel Market Report 2018 and
Pitchbook (see https://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/default/files/resource/files/2018-analysis-report.pdf and
https://pitchbook.com/news/articles/18-charts-to-illustrate-us-vc-in-2018).


                                                    7
angel investor tax credit programs to generate outcomes more in line with their stated goals
of creating skilled jobs through high-growth entrepreneurship.
    Research in entrepreneurial finance and the broader financial sector has demonstrated
the importance of frictions, especially information asymmetry (Drucker & Puri 2008, Duchin
et al. 2010, Acharya & Subramanian 2009, Bottero, Lenzu & Mezzanotti 2015, Bernstein,
Giroud & Townsend 2016, Hombert & Matray 2016, Howell Forthcoming). These frictions
appear to be unevenly distributed, with some areas benefiting from innovation clusters and
others su ering from an absence of new firms (Baumol 1990, Foster, Haltiwanger & Syverson
2008, Gennaioli et al. 2012, Haltiwanger et al. 2013, Decker et al. 2014). Public policies to
promote entrepreneurial activity have the potential for large social welfare gains and come
with opportunity costs, so designing them well is important.



2     Angel Tax Credit Programs
This section describes our data. First, we use comprehensive characteristics of each state
angel investor tax credit program to explain how they operate (Section 2.1). We then discuss
characteristics of the angel investors in our data, an important contribution of this study
(Section 2.2). Third, we describe the firm-level data we use that will permit us to compare
tax credit beneficiary companies with rejected applicants (Section 2.3). Last, we summarize
the state-level outcome data we use in our aggregate analysis (Section 2.4).


2.1    State Angel Tax Credit Programs

Since 1998, 30 states have deployed angel investor tax credit programs to encourage local
high-growth entrepreneurship. The rise of Silicon Valley and the Dotcom boom appear to
be important motivating factors, and to our knowledge there were no similar programs in
earlier years. The explicit motivation is almost always to increase local economic activity,
in particular through an increase in firms employing high-skill, high salary workers. For
instance, a typical version is as follows:

      "Wisconsin established the Qualified New Business Venture (QNBV) Program in


                                             8
         2005 to drive investment into early-stage companies with the promise of creating
         next-generation economic opportunity in Wisconsin...the QNBV Program helps
         companies create high-paying, high-skill jobs throughout Wisconsin."13

As nearly all programs cite job creation and additional investment as the central goals, the
analysis in subsequent sections focuses on employment and financing outcomes.
       A contribution of this paper is to provide ­ to our knowledge ­ the first systematic and
comprehensive documentation of U.S. state angel tax credits, based on examination of the
original legislation. Table 1 contains four key variables: The year that the program went
into e ect, the expiration year, the share of an investment the investor may claim as a
deduction from his tax liability (note these are not deductions from taxable income), and
the total allocated funding. The investment share varies dramatically, from 10 percent in
New Jersey to 100 percent in Hawaii. Some programs are larger than others; for example,
Wisconsin permits 50 percent of the investment to be deducted and allocates $30 million
to the program, while New Mexico permits 25 percent to be deducted and allocates just $2
million. There appears to be some competition across states; for example, Iowa increased its
investment deduction from 20 to 25 percent for most investors in part to achieve parity with
nearby Minnesota and Wisconsin.14 Supporting this motivation, Wilson (2009) shows that
while state R&D tax credits do increase local R&D, the e ect largely reflects reallocation
from other states.
       The average individual investment amount benefiting from a tax credit is $376,000 (shown
in Table 3, based on hand-collected data described below). This is similar to the average
angel deal size in the U.S., but much larger than survey data on the average individual angel
investment.15 Take-up is high, at 88 percent of allocated funding by the state legislature.
Summed across all program-years with available data (there are no take-up data for New
York or Oklahoma), take-up totals $8.13 billion (see Figure 1).
       While the programs are typically small relative to overall state budgets, they are
  13
     Wisconsin Economic Development Corporation 2013 Qualified New Business Venture Program Report.
  14
     Based on an interview with a senior program o cial.
  15
     The average angel deal size in recent years is about $390,000,                      according to
the UNH Center for Venture Research Angel Market Report 2017.                             available at
https://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/default/files/resource/files/2017-analysis-report.pdf. Huang et al.
(2017) find in survey data that the average angel check is around $35,000.


                                                  9
significant portions of the funding allocated to supporting entrepreneurship or small
businesses. For example, funding in Ohio, Minnesota, and Wisconsin are respectively 19,
58, and 86 percent of annual state funding for high-tech jobs or small businesses, most of
which takes the form of grants.16 The state funding amounts are also in many cases large
relative to the total annual angel investment in the state, averaged across years where the
program is in force (Appendix Table A.1 column 6). For example, dedicated funding is 47
percent of total angel investment in North Carolina and 163 percent in Maine. Most U.S.
angel investment takes place outside of states with angel tax credit programs, largely
because the major entrepreneurial finance hubs of California and Massachusetts have never
had such a program. To illustrate, in 2016 angel investment in tax credit states totaled
$1.97 billion, with a state average of $70 million, compared to a total of $4.89 billion and
average of $223 million in non-tax credit states. This di erence appears to have been
growing over time. For example, in 2013 states with tax credits averaged $65 million in
angel investment, compared to $158 million in non-tax credit states.17
       Complete rules and eligibility requirements are listed in subsequent columns of Appendix
Table A.1. Where a cell is blank, it means that the state's rules do not explicitly address the
criterion. Most states allow angel groups or VCs to benefit as well as individuals. Further,
many states use a refundable credit, such that investors may receive a cash grant in lieu of
a tax liability deduction if they are out of state or otherwise do not qualify. Most programs
have a first-come-first-serve policy in the event funding runs out. In many states the tax
credit can be transferred, sold, or carried forward. All but two programs have a maximum
company size, defined in terms of revenue, assets, employees or some combination. Fourteen
have a maximum firm age for eligibility. Importantly, these programs should not directly
relax investor financing constraints, because investors do not receive the credit until after
they have completed the investment.18 This is di erent than programs such as direct grants
  16
     The other programs considered for Ohio are the Pre-Seed/Seed Plus Fund Capitalization Program,
The Technology Validation and Start-up Fund, The Ohio Third Frontier initiative and the JobsOhio
Research and Development Center Grant Program. The other programs considered for Wisconsin are the
Seed Accelerator Program, SBIR/STTR Matching Grant Program, Entrepreneurial Micro-Grant, Capital
Catalyst, Entrepreneurship Support Program. The other programs considered for Minnesota are the
Innovation Voucher Program and the Minnesota Job Creation Fund.
  17
     Statistics based on angel and seed financing compiled from CB Insights and Crunchbase.
  18
     In principle, investors could borrow against the future tax credit. However, this is very unlikely because



                                                      10
that provide companies with money upfront.
    Programs consistently require the business to be tied to the local economy. For instance,
Illinois requires that at least 51 percent of a company's employees be located in-state and
the "principal place of business" to be in Illinois. About two thirds of states have some
industry or "innovation" condition, but these are often broad and subjective, potentially
including nearly any business that is willing to be creative in its application for certification
of eligibility (see Appendix Table A.1 columns 16 and 19). For example, Illinois demands that
a beneficiary company have "the potential for increasing jobs, increasing capital investment
in Illinois, or both" and be "principally engaged in innovation." In some cases, there is an
explicit industry target, usually in manufacturing and/or high-tech sectors. Some features
may be surprising; for example, 22 programs explicitly permit the investor to be employed
by the company, while only six programs forbid this. We will return to this in Section 4.2.


2.2     Angel investor characteristics

For seven states, we collected complete information about angel investor identities (though
the start year of data varies across states). They are described in Table 3. In total, there

are 5,637 unique individual investors (this excludes group investors, such as VC firms). Note
that Minnesota comprises 39 percent of the data. Subsequent statistics in the table have
sample sizes that reflect the number of investors for which the variable could be identified

on LinkedIn.
    We find that 79 percent of subsidized angel investors are located in the same state as
the tax credit program; this varies from 23 percent in New Jersey to 91 percent in Illinois.
This may reflect the well-known fact that information asymmetry between startups and
their investors is more severe when investors are geographically far away (Chen et al. 2010,
Bernstein, Giroud & Townsend 2016). We find that 87 percent of the angel investors are male.
This gender ratio is in line with existing research on angel investors. Ewens & Townsend
(2018) find that 92 percent of angel investors on AngelList are male. In a wide survey of
in any case the investment has to be completed before the tax credit is issued. Anecdotal evidence seems to
confirm this hypothesis.



                                                    11
U.S. angel investors, most of whom are members of the Angel Capital Association, Huang
et al. (2017) report that 80 percent are male. Gompers & Wang (2017) find that around
90 percent of VCs are male. We coded the ethnicity or race using pictures, and found that
95 percent of investors appear to be white.19 In Huang et al. (2017)'s data, 87 percent of
respondents are white. Panel 2 of Table 3 shows that the average angel investors is 42 years
old. The average age is higher in Huang et al. (2017)'s data, at 58 years old.
       We also categorized job titles or descriptions: The majority of investors are corporate
executives (e.g., the Vice President of a company). The next-largest group is doctors, at
7.3 percent. There are relatively few professional investors or entrepreneurs. Among survey
participants in Huang et al. (2017), 55 percent report being executives at for-profit

companies, and 55 percent also report experience with entrepreneurship. Therefore, our

data appear more heavily weighted towards executives at older companies and away from
entrepreneurs.
       Together, these statistics paint a novel portrait of angel investors in non-hub states. This
provides an alternative window into the sector, contributing to existing survey evidence
in Huang et al. (2017) and data about AngelList platform participants in Bernstein et al.

(2017) and Ewens & Townsend (2018). Specifically, angel investors who receive tax credits
in non-hub states appear younger, less entrepreneurial, and whiter than the average U.S.

angel investor.




2.3       Data on applicant companies

We obtained data on beneficiary companies for 12 states either from public records or from
privately from state o cials (which include the seven with investor data in Section 2.2).
For 10 of these states, we also observe companies that were certified to have an investor
benefit from a tax credit, but for which no investor actually was awarded a tax credit. We
term these "failed applicants." The data for the 10 states span 2005-2018. Within a given
  19
   We also coded as Hispanic individuals that our web researchers identified as "white" but who had names
among the top 20 Hispanic names in the U.S. (https://names.mongabay.com/data/hispanic.html).


                                                   12
year, the data are comprehensive, though we do not always observe all years from program
inception. Table 2 Panel 1 shows the number of unique companies by state. The state with
the largest number of companies is Ohio, with about 900, and the smallest is New Mexico,
with 72. In total, there are 1,823 beneficiary companies (for which an investor received a
tax credit), and 1,404 failed applicants (certified yet no investor claimed a credit).
       There are two reasons that a company would be in the "failed applicant" category. First,
it is possible that no investment deal occurred.20 Second, the company may have applied
after the state ran out of funding but before it closed its application portal (many states
have a first-come first-served policy). If no deal occurred, the company may have sought
but failed to raise angel investment or raised it from some other source that is not eligible
or chose not to claim the state tax credit. If the company was later than other startups in
applying and the state had run out of money, there is no reason to expect that it is better
quality. If anything, we may expect "late" companies to be worse. Therefore, it is reasonable
to assume that if there is bias in comparing these groups it should be in the direction of
beneficiary companies performing better than failed applicants. We will come back to this
discussion as we present the tests later in the paper.
       We merged unique tax credit recipients to two external datasets. The first is a dataset
of angel and VC equity financing events, which we refer to as the "financing data." These
financing data combine deal-level data from VentureXpert, Crunchbase, and CB Insights.21
We match startups in the tax credit data to the financing data by name and state location.
The second external dataset is Dun & Bradstreet (D&B), which is a panel dataset at the
company-year level.22 Startups in the tax credit data are matched to startups in the D&B
data by name, state, and city of headquarters location (if available). We matched 808
companies to D&B and 1,227 to the financing data. There are 608 firms that matched to
both. We developed startup sector classifications based on market and industry variables in
  20
     In some states there is no time limit on when a qualified business can receive a investment that can
claim a tax credit, while in other states it is limited to one year (see column 25 in Appendix Table A.1).
  21
     We do not include AngelList in the financing data because there are no funding amounts and no specific
dates for many investments. That is, there is a year but not the exact date to ascertain when the investment
occurred relative to the tax credit award.
  22
     The original D&B is at the establishment level. We merge the tax credit data to establishment names,
then aggregate to the company-level for analysis. Most companies in the tax credit data have only one
establishment in D&B.



                                                    13
the financing and D&B data, as well as hand-coding.
      Table 2 Panel 2 shows that beneficiary companies are on average more successful than
their rejected counterparts. Any Financing Pre-TC indicates whether a startup received
financing before its tax credit year. Any Financing 2 Years Post-TC indicates whether a
startup received financing within two or three years after its tax credit year, including the
tax credit year. The amount of financing is defined analogously. Beneficiary companies
raise previous financing at nearly twice the rate of failed applicants. The dollar amount of
previous financing is $3.3 million for beneficiary companies, relative to $2.5 million for failed
applicants. We return to the subject of past financing in Section 4.2.1, where we discuss the
mechanisms behind our results. After the tax credit year, beneficiary companies are more
likely to raise additional financing, raise more money, and are more likely to exit than failed
applicants. These features are discussed in detail in Section 4.1.
      Employment data comes from D&B. We are primarily interested in whether the number
of employees at a startup exceeds various thresholds during a tax credit year and in the
years that follow. We create indicators for whether startups employ greater than 10 or 25
employees, which are reasonable benchmarks for small businesses, and whether the number
of employees exceeds the sample's 75th percentile. One reason we bin the employment
outcomes is that not all D&B is precise, and imputation can create bias (Barnatchez et al.
2017). D&B provide flags for the source of employment data: true value, range, impute.
In our data, employment is "true" data for 72 percent of firms.23 Emp > x in Credit Yr
indicates whether the number of employees exceeds x in the company's first tax credit year.
Thirteen percent of companies have more than 10 employees and 4 percent have more than
25 employees. These numbers rise somewhat in the second year after its first tax credit year
(Emp > x 2yrs Post-TC). Table 2 Panel 2 shows that there is no di erence in employment
between beneficiary companies and failed applicants either before or after the tax credit year.


2.4       State-level outcome data

We use four datasets to examine the e ects of the policy at state level. First, we construct
state-level annual time series on the activity of angel investors. We use the total number
 23
      Given the potential noise in the data, we use binned categories.


                                                      14
of angel investor deals in the state and the number of unique investors in a comprehensive
dataset representing the entire AngelList platform as of July 2019. While AngelList is in
large part self-reported, it is the most comprehensive source available about specific angel
investments such that both the investor and company location are both observed. However,
a downside of AngelList is that there is no information on the deal amount. For the amount
of investment, we rely on the financing data (from several standard commercial databases,
described in Section 2.3). One issue with amount variables is that they may reflect one or two
firms receiving a large amount of money, rather than the overall number of new, potentially
high-growth firms that is the main goal of the policy.
       Statistics on our outcomes of interest are in Appendix Table A.2. Specifically, "Number
of Angel Deals" is the number of unique deals in the state-year. "Number of Angel Investors
in Local Companies" is the number of unique individuals that have at least one investment
in that year in a company located in the state. Similarly, "Number of Angel Investors from
State" is the number of unique individuals who are themselves located in the state and made
at least one investment in any company in the year.
       Our primary outcomes of interest to capture the ultimate goal of the tax credit programs
­ real e ects of local new firm growth ­ come from public use Census data. First, we use
information on the aggregate employment in young entrepreneurial firms using data from
the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI). The QWI allows us to measure both aggregate
and industry employment for firms of di erent ages and sizes. We construct the data at
annual state level (end-of-year) since the policy variation is at the state-level. Appendix
Table A.2 reports a summary of the QWI data. We consider firms less than five years old
in our main outcome variables as five years old is typically the maximum age for eligibility
in states that have an age criterion (see Section 2.1). We also focus on startup employment
in manufacturing or high-tech industries, which are the focus of the tax credit programs.24
       Unfortunately, the QWI does not include the number of firms. To consider this dimension,
we use the County Business Patterns dataset. As these data have no breakdown by age, we
  24
    QWI data is provided with a breakdown by industry and we define high-tech industry. To be clear, our
main employment variable is the sum of employment in young firms that is either in manufacturing or in
the high-tech industry. Following the definition in Appel et al. (2017), which use similar data, the high-tech
industry covers both life-science and IT and it contains the following NAICS: 3254 3341 3342 3344 3345,
3346, 3353, 3391, 5112, 5141, 5171, 5172, 5179, 5182, 5191, 5413, 5413, 5415, 5416 and, 5417.


                                                     15
proxy for the activity of target firms by focusing on the number of establishments of small
businesses with less than 20 employees in the high-tech and manufacturing industries.25
These real e ect outcomes are also summarized in Appendix Table A.2.



3      Tax Credit programs and state-level activity
State tax credit programs aim to increase local employment and economic activity by
encouraging higher volumes of early stage investment in high growth companies. The first
step in our analysis is to examine state-level data for evidence of success. After describing
the empirical approach (Section 3.1), we describe the results for angel investment and real
economic outcomes (Sections 3.3 and 3.2).


3.1     Empirical Approach

To test for a possible positive e ect of these programs, we use a di erence-in-di erences
model, which exploits variation across time and states in the program availability. Variation
across states comes from the programs' staggered introduction and closure.26 In particular,
we estimate the following equation:


                                yst = ­t + ­s + -- T Cst + Xst1 + Ást .                                    (1)

Here, s identifies the state, and t is the year. The coe cient of interest is -- on an indicator
for whether or not a state has a tax credit program in a given year (T Cst ). In the main
specifications, we use a set of state-by-year controls, Xst1 , which include the log of
population, the log of personal income, the level of corporate income tax, and the
unemployment rate, all of which are lagged by one year.27 As the outcome data for both
  25
     According to the UNH 2017 Angel Market Report, 30 percent of all angel deals are in software, and 29
percent are in life sciences; see https://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/default/files/resource/files/2017-analysis-
report.pdf.
  26
     We identify the start year based on information contained in state program documentation, where we
define the beginning of a program as the year the program starts, or the year after if the start date is in the
second half of the year (see Table 1 and Appendix Table A.1).
  27
     We discuss later also results without controls, to address issues related to endogenous controls in panel
analysis (e.g. Angrist & Pischke 2008).



                                                      16
angel investments and employment (QWI) is sparse in earlier years, we restrict to the years
from 2002 to 2016.      All outcome variables Yst are transformed to log plus one (i.e.
yst = ln(Yst + 1), both to linearize skewed variables and to ease interpretation.
   In the main analysis we exclude Massachusetts and California, because they are outliers
in terms of both angel investment and high-tech job growth during our period and never used
angel tax credits. This raises the concern that their inclusion would bias against finding an
e ect of the policy. In a robustness test discussed below, we show that this restriction does
not significantly a ect the magnitude of our results, and if anything, it actually increases
the noise in the estimates. Last, standard errors are clustered at state level, which is the
level of the treatment. In the first part of our analysis, we report confidence intervals rather
than standard errors to be more transparent about the possible upper bounds of the e ects,
as part of our findings are null e ects.
   In general, a causal interpretation of these results requires that the staggered introduction
to the programs is exogenous to the development in the local start-up and angel ecosystem.
While this hypothesis is fundamentally untestable, there are a few steps we take to provide
evidence consistent with it. First, a qualitative analysis of the introduction decisions does
not suggest any systematic patterns in the adoption of these policies. Given the type of
intervention, this result is not surprising. As we discussed before, these programs tend to
be small relative to the overall budget of the state. Therefore, they appear to respond more
to idiosyncratic political pressure rather than any systematic change in the economy of the
state. Also, to the extent that these policies respond to changes in state-level economic
activity, our lagged controls directly control for them. Finally, we conduct two tests. The
first examines timing of e ects around the program introduction. The second adds Census
division by year fixed e ects, which restricts control states to those that are located nearby
and plausibly in more similar conditions. More discussions on these tests is provided later.
   While we believe that this approach is a reasonable first step towards estimating the
e ects of these policies, we want to emphasize that a more descriptive interpretation is also
valuable. This is because while we find no meaningful e ects on the real economy, the most
likely sources of endogeneity should bias estimates upward. States tend to employ them when
they are more broadly trying to encourage the development of entrepreneurial ecosystems.


                                              17
Also, the policies are not on average implemented during business cycle contractions, as we
discuss later when we examine the timing of our e ects.


3.2       E ects on Aggregate Employment

The programs' main objective is to increase local economic activity. In Table 4 Panel 1, we
show e ects on two measures of employment among firms no more than five years old: total
employment and employment in the industries that are sometimes targets of the programs,
manufacturing and high-tech. We prefer the total employment outcome, because in practice
beneficiary companies tend not to be high-tech or manufacturing (Section 4.2), and total
employment will include any potential spillover to the rest of the state economy in cases
where a program does target specific sectors.
       We find no evidence that the tax credit had a meaningful impact on economic activity.
Not only are the measured e ects not significantly di erent from zero, but they are also
small in size. Here the 95 percent confidence intervals are especially useful. In column 1, the
coe cient on total employment of 0.005 implies a 0.05 percent increase, with an upper bound
of 3 percent. Column 2 finds a slightly noisier but also insignificant e ect for high-tech and
manufacturing employment. The results are similar when these two economic areas (high-
tech and manufacturing) are considered separately. Since we do not have data on number of
establishments by age, we next look at the e ect on number of small business establishments,
focusing on manufacturing and high-tech.28 Column 3 finds an e ect of -0.9 percent, with
an upper bound of one percent for manufacturing. The result is similar for high-tech.
       Altogether, our evidence fails to provide support to the claim that tax credit programs
were associated with meaningful increases in local entrepreneurial activity.29 This null e ect
is not driven by trends around the decision. To establish this, we estimate a separate
coe cient for each year around the implementation year and graph these coe cients in
Figure 2.30 The plots show a null e ect before and after the policy implementation year. The
  28
      The results are similar for all firms, though these seem less relevant as they will include many old
subsistence businesses (old and small firms).
   29
      If we use an alternative clustering - i.e. state by year - we generally get smaller standard errors, though
still finding non significant e ect. Therefore, our choice of state-level clustering, on top of being conceptually
the right approach also provides more conservative estimates of the errors.
   30
      States that never introduce a tax credit program are always recorded in the pre-shock period, in the


                                                       18
absence of a negative trend in pre-period suggests that the programs were not systematically
implemented during troughs in the business cycle.


3.3     E ects on Angel Activities

We next turn to angel activity in the state. We consider four dimensions of the state's angel
ecosystem as outcome variables, and continue to use Equation 1 for estimation. The results
are presented in Table 4 Panel 2. The introduction of the tax credit is associated with a 30
percent increase in the number of angel deals and number of investors in local companies
(columns 1 and 2). When we consider the number of unique angel investors that are from
the state, we find an e ect of about 19 percent (column 3). This is not surprising since most
of angel investors tend to invest in the same state.31 These positive e ects exist in variables
derived from the AngelList platform, which relies on individuals self-identifying as angel
investors. That is, while we call these time series "angel", they do not necessarily imply
angel investment in the sense of being seed investment in a potentially high-growth startup
that does not have access to traditional sources of financing. The coe cient on the amount of
angel investment (column 4) is positive but insignificant.32 We also find insignificant e ects
when we include all types of early investment, including incubators and grants, and when
we include early stage (Series A) VC investment.
    It appears that the tax credit programs may increase the number of deals and investors
involved. We examine the timing of e ects to shed some light on what is happening, as
previously discussed. As shown in Figure 2, there is no significant trend in the pre-period
number of deals or number of investors, which suggests that these policies are not introduced
when the state is experiencing the negative part of the economic cycle. Consistent with the
positive results discussed above, the coe cients are above zero starting in the year the
program was introduced. However, the e ect is only significant at the 5 percent level in the
year of implementation.33
earliest time group.
  31
     From a policy perspective, the preferred variable is the number investing in local companies, which
includes individuals out of state. In particular, it is important to recall that they may still benefit from the
credits, as most states will o er cash if there is no state income tax liability.
  32
     We restrict analysis with the financing data to post-2008, as earlier deals are relatively rare.
  33
     In regressions, the e ect is significant at the 10 percent level for the coe cient on the indicator for at


                                                      19
    We conclude that the tax credits likely positively impact the number of new deals
happening in the state as well as on the number of investors that are involved in angel
investment. However, to the degree these results are robust, they appear to have been
temporary.


3.4     Robustness

We conducted a wide variety of robustness tests to confirm the null e ects. Here we will
show critical tests and briefly describe others.
    In Appendix Table A.3 we report three additional specifications for the key outcomes.
The first omits all controls, in case they bias estimates towards finding no e ect. Instead,
there continues to be no e ect even on the measure of employment that had yielded the
largest magnitude in our main specification (column 1), and the positive e ects on angel
investment grow slightly larger (columns 4 and 7). Second, we also show that our results
remain similar with Census division by year fixed e ects, which compares states within the
same Census division (columns 2, 5 and 8). The intuition is that states in the same division
likely have similar economic characteristics. Finally, in columns 3, 6, and 9 we include
California and Massachusetts, which have never had tax credit programs and have much
larger entrepreneurial ecosystems than other states. The results are noisier, with the e ect
on angel investment activity becoming insignificant. However, the magnitude of the key
parameters is similar.
    In Figure 3, we use simulations to better benchmark the size of our main results to the
e ect we would estimate under the assumption that tax credit had no impact. For each of
our four main outcomes ­ employment in young firms, employment in young firms in high-
tech or manufacturing, number of deals, and number of investors in local companies ­ we
create 1,000 placebo trials by assigning the tax credit dummy at random among states and
years.34 We conduct this procedure across the three specifications discussed in the paper so
far: the baseline model, a model without controls, and a model augmented with division by
least three years after introduction.
  34
     The only constraint we impose is that the number of tax credit active (state and year level) is the same
as in the real data.



                                                     20
year fixed e ects. In Figure 3, the black dots represent the placebo coe cients, and they
show that as expected, on average a policy induced at random has no e ect on any of the
outcomes. At the same time, as expected, for some of the random draws the placebo policies
do have large e ects.
    Our main objective is to compare our estimates of the true e ect to the placebo
distribution.     In general, this comparison confirms our main results.       The estimated
parameters for real outcomes is generally close to zero, rather than in the tails of the
placebo distribution. The one exception is the baseline specification for employment in
high tech or manufacturing. However, this result is not robust, because the estimated true
coe cient in both the other two specifications is close to zero relative to the placebo
distribution.     In contrast, for angel financing outcomes, the estimated coe cients are
consistently in the top one percent of the distribution, across both measures and all the
specifications.
    In unreported tests, we found no e ects on economic activity at the Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) level, which might have increased precision of a positive e ect. For
both MSA and state-level analysis, we find no meaningful heterogeneity. For example,
there is no e ect when we interact the tax credit with measures of the quality of the
entrepreneurial ecosystem (e.g. level of preexisting angel investment). We also find no
e ects on a number of other outcome measures, including VC investment, other types of
early investment (e.g. grants and accelerators), and economic activity in other specific
sectors such as IT or life sciences. Finally, we find no e ects by intensity of the program;
that is, the e ects are not larger when allocated funding or take-up is large relative to local
angel investment.



4     Mechanisms
For these programs to be e ective, the tax credit needs to induce firms to make investments
that would have not happened otherwise. The results in Section 3 suggest that the state angel
investor tax credit programs have failed to achieve the primary objective of increasing real
economic activity, though we find some evidence of increased angel activity. The first and


                                              21
more positive interpretation is that these programs were too small to generate a positive e ect
that is detectable in aggregate (scale hypothesis). A second mechanism is that the program
did motivate new seed investment, but there was no pass through to real firm investment in
human or physical capital, and therefore no growth e ects. This could occur, for example,
if the company substitutes bank debt with angel investment. In other contexts, there is
evidence that increases in credit or other types of financing do not yield pass through to
investment (Dharmapala et al. 2011, Yagan 2015). In this channel, we expect that beneficiary
companies are not especially financially constrained.
   A third and related mechanism is tax arbitrage. Here, the programs induce little or no
new angel investment in the sense of being additional seed investment in startups. While
investors receive a benefit as a result of the credit, beneficiary company activity is unchanged.
This could occur in a number of ways. For example, an investor who is a family member
of the entrepreneur may now use the tax credit and label himself an angel investor. Both
the explanations of low pass-through and tax arbitrage point to faulty program design, in
the sense of failing to screen out firms with low sensitivity to the subsidy. We refer to this
interpretation as the "design hypothesis."
   In this section, we proceed in three steps. First, we use firm-level evidence to show that
even among beneficiary companies, there is no apparent e ect of the tax credit on growth.
As we discuss below, this result would be hard to square with an explanation that only
relies on the small size of the program. Second, we examine characteristics of companies
and investors who make use of the tax credits. This analysis will provide direct evidence
in line with our design hypothesis. Third, we discuss why firms that may have actually
benefited from the programs ­ constrained firms with good investment opportunities ­ did
not participate to it.


4.1    Firm-level analysis

If the small scale explains the result, then we may think that the programs are working well
and - if anything - states should simply increase their scale. To explore whether scale might
be the problem, we ask whether the companies that specifically benefited from having an
investor receive a credit appear to have been more successful as a result. We use data at the

                                               22
firm level about the specific beneficiary companies relative to certified applicants for which
no investor received a credit. We expect that if the tax credits enable them to raise more
seed money than they would have otherwise or raise money where they would not have been
able to at all, they will subsequently perform better in terms of follow-on VC financing and
employment. In this section we use two estimation approaches to analyze the relationship
between being a beneficiary company and outcomes (Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2).


4.1.1   Within-program analysis

This section uses data only on certified companies ­ companies that demonstrated interest
in having an investor receive a state angel investor tax credit ­ to assess whether being a
beneficiary company is associated with better outcomes. Specifically, we estimate the e ects
of angel investment tax credits on startup success by comparing financing and employment
outcomes for beneficiary companies and companies that were certified but failed to have an
investor receive a tax credit ("failed applicants", see Section 2.3 for details). The intuition
behind this test is simple: as discussed above, there is no reason to think that companies that
applied for the tax credit but failed are of better quality than recipient firms. If anything,
the "failed" companies are likely worse quality. As a result, if the tax credit has any positive
impact on firms' activity, we should expect to find that recipient firms outperform the control
group in the future.
   We use variants of the following equation:

                              Yi,t+k = ­tc + ­ts + -- T C i + " Õ Xit + Ái,j                    (2)


The dependent variable Yi,t+k is a financing or employment outcome for startup i in year t + k ,
for k = 1, 2, 3, where year t is the "tax credit year" -- the year the startup either received its
first tax credit or first unsuccessfully applied for a tax credit. T Ci is an indicator for whether
startup i received a tax credit or was denied a tax credit. In Xit , we control for the pre-
existing level of the outcome variable, which is either previous financing or employment in the
application year. Our most stringent specification further includes sector-year fixed e ects
(­tc ) and state-year fixed e ects (­ts ). In all cases, we cluster standard errors by state-year.



                                                   23
The sample is restricted to the 10 states in which we observe all certified companies.35
       The relationship between receiving a tax credit and subsequent financing is shown in
Table 6. For an angel-funded startup, a useful proxy for subsequent success is raising VC.
Therefore, our preferred outcome is an indicator for raising VC within two years following
the tax credit application year (Panel 1). As predicted in the summary statistics, with no
controls beneficiary companies are about ten percent more likely to raise VC (column 1).
However, this relationship disappears when previous financing is controlled for (columns
2-5). In our preferred specification with state-year and sector-year fixed e ects in column
5, the coe cient is -0.88 percentage points, with a 95 percent confidence interval ranging
from -4 to 2 percentage points. The average rate of subsequent VC is 21 percent, so even
the top of the confidence interval would be just 10 percent of the mean. Table 6 Panel 2
considers other financing outcomes: the log amount of external financing raised in the two
years after the tax credit year (columns 1-2), the level amount (column 3), and the chances
of an exit through IPO or acquisition (columns 4-5). In all cases, we find e ects that are not
significantly di erent from zero after controlling for previous financing.
       We next turn to employment. Table 7 Panel 1 examines our preferred outcome, which
is an indicator for having at least 25 employees in the second year after the tax credit year,
which has a mean of about three percent. The e ect is 1.1 percentage points with no controls
(column 1), but is -0.021 percentage points in our preferred specification, with a 95 percent
confidence interval ranging from -0.5 to 0.5 percentage points (column 5). Across the range
of specifications with alternative controls, we find persistently negative coe cients that are
very close to zero. Panel 2 demonstrates that the same is qualitatively true using alternative
outcomes: at least 10 employees (columns 1-3), and employment greater than the 75th
percentile among certified companies (columns 4-6). We conducted a range of robustness
tests for these results, including alternative control specifications and interactions with state
characteristics.36
  35
      In general, there are too few clusters to take seriously errors clustered by state, as this sample includes
only 10 states. However, the results are very similar with other approaches, including robust standard errors.
   36
      We find no e ects in obvious subsamples, such as states that tend to run out of money. In these cases,
firms that did not receive the tax credit are more likely to be comparable to recipient companies, since the
time in which money runs out could be thought as as-good-as random. Also in this case, for both financing
and employment, we can rule out economically meaningful positive e ects of being a beneficiary company.



                                                       24
       In sum, tax credits for investors do not lead beneficiary companies to raise more money
or grow more than certified companies for which no investor received a tax credit. These
results are surprising because bias should push toward a positive e ect among beneficiary
companies relative to failed applicants.          However, the findings are consistent with the
aggregate results above. The unconditional increase in future funding is in line with the
programs' positive impact on local angel activity. At the same time, the null e ect once we
control for previous funding is consistent with the absence of real aggregate e ects, and
points towards a crowding-out mechanism. Indeed, a large share of the companies receiving
the tax credit were already able to raise money. That is, while firms receiving the tax
credit seem to outperform the control group, this is entirely driven by positive selection.
We will come back to this later.


4.1.2      Matching estimator

This section provides an alternative approach to assessing the performance of beneficiary
companies. Instead of comparing them to failed applicants, we compare them to control
firms in nearby states without tax credit programs, which therefore couldn't plausibly apply
for a tax credit. Here, we can use all tax credit recipients in the potential treatment group.
First, we restrict the sample to startups observed in both the financing data and the D&B
data. Then we match each treatment group startup with up to five similar control group
startups through a nearest neighbor matching procedure (e.g. Bernstein et al. 2018). To
match with a treatment group startup, the control group startup(s) must be located in a
di erent state but the same census division, belong to the same sector/market, have a similar
age, and have a similar amount of previous financing relative to the year of the treatment
startup's first tax credit.37 After this match, the age of each control group startup must
be within two years of the treatment group startup's age, and each startup belongs to one
of eighteen narrowly defined sectors. Covariates before and after matching are shown in
Appendix Table A.4.
       Within the nearest neighbor match group consisting of one treatment startup and up to
  37
    Based on the within-program analysis above, it is clear that having raised a similar amount of previous
investment is a crucial control, so we match on this rather than using it as an outcome.



                                                    25
five control group startups, we measure outcomes with respect to the year of the treatment
group startup's first tax credit; we refer to this as the "tax credit year" for both treatment
and control group startups in a match group. We use variants of the following equation,
where variables are defined analogously to Equation 2 above.

                                   Yi,t+k = ­ + --1 T C i + --2 Yi,t + " Õ Xit + Ái,j .                         (3)


Note that we control for startup i's pre-tax credit year performance with Yi,t , and in some
models startup-specific characteristics with Xi . These include sector-year fixed e ects as
well as an indicator for whether the startup previously raised private investment.
      Like the within-program analysis, the matching estimator finds near-zero and often
negative coe cients on the relationship between receiving a tax credit and subsequent
employment or startup exit. The results are in Table 8. Our preferred specification for
employment, in Panel 1 column 4, finds an e ect of -0.64 percentage points relative to a
mean of three percent, again indicates the absence of a meaningful positive e ect, though
the result is somewhat less precise than the within-program analysis. In this case, the 95
percent confidence interval ranges from -2.5 to 1.2 percentage points. The rest of the table
confirms these findings, showing near-zero e ects on employment higher than ten or higher
than the 75th percentile (Panel 1 columns 1-2 and Panel 2 columns 1-2), and on the
chances of exit (Panel 2 columns 4-5).


4.2       Explaining the Null Result: The Nature of Take-up

The analysis in Section 4.1 demonstrates that absence of a state-level e ect does not reflect a
small e ect size, allowing us to rule out the scale hypothesis. As discussed above, the second
possible mechanism is that the programs were taken up by firms that did not conduct
real additional investment after having an investor receive a credit. If this mechanism is
the primary driver, we should expect that beneficiary firms are less likely to be financially
constrained ex-ante and operate in areas where raising traditional funding is relatively easy.38
Another alternative is that low responsiveness may reflect firms using the credits solely for
 38
      The intuition is that if a firm is unconstrained, then it should be less responsive to cost of capital.




                                                           26
tax arbitrage and rent seeking. If this is the case, we expect to find that a large share of
investors are insiders of the firm, who are in a privileged position to undertake this strategy.


4.2.1      Pre-existing investment

Our first observation is that beneficiary companies tend to already be well-financed, a result
that would help explain the relatively low pass-through. As shown in Table 2, nearly forty
percent of the beneficiary companies previously received external financing, with an average
of $3.7 million conditional on having received previous financing. These dollar amounts are
large relative to the average angel deal size, which was $390,000 in 2017.39 Startups seeking
financing on AngelList request on average $700,000, and just 2.6 percent of these startups are
successfully funded (Ewens & Townsend 2018). Our rate of matching to external financing
may be biased downward as the financing data do not comprehensively cover early stage,
especially angel, investment. Furthermore, the average investment amount that benefits
from a tax credit is $376,000, also much higher than the average U.S. angel check, which
according to Huang et al. (2017)'s survey is $35,000. This evidence suggests that a sizable
share of firms that received the tax credit may have been able to raise funding independently
from the program.
       If these firms were indeed able to raise funding independently from the program, then the
tax subsidy should not have any real e ect for the business.40 Rather than being the "first
money in," the investment that benefits from the tax credits tends to come after substantial
funding. Consistent with previous financing helping to explain a crowding out mechanism,
we found in Section 4.1 that null e ects depend on a control for previous financing.


4.2.2      Sector composition

Our second observation concerns industry composition. We expect that subsidies will be
most useful for financially constrained companies, which are typically those characterized by
high information asymmetry (Howell 2017, Howell Forthcoming). We also expect that the
  39
     See UNH Center for Venture Research Angel Market Report 2017,                                available at
https://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/default/files/resource/files/2017-analysis-report.pdf.
  40
     It seems unlikely that there are no financially constrained and eligible startups in states that adopt the
tax credits, given the abundant evidence of constraints (e.g. Kerr & Nanda 2011, Howell Forthcoming).


                                                      27
programs will increase growth if they target potentially high-growth startups, rather than
the average small business that does not tend to grow very much (Schoar 2010, Haltiwanger,
Jarmin & Miranda 2013).
       We explore this hypothesis by comparing the industry composition of beneficiary
companies to that of VC-backed companies. Figure 4 groups beneficiary companies into
five sectors and compares their sector distribution to that of VC-backed companies.41 Since
the tax credit data span 2005-2018, this is the same period we use to identify unique
VC-backed companies. We require them to have a first VC deal date in the same period.
The sector most strongly associated with VC backing and Silicon Valley is what we term
"IT/Web/Computer," which includes companies whose activities are primarily related to
software, mobile, web, or computer hardware. Sixty-five percent of VC-backed companies
are in this sector, according to their primary categorizations in the financing data. We try
to be as generous as possible in assigning applicant companies to this sector, assigning
them if there is any evidence of activity in this area from any of the sector/market/industry
variables in the financing and D&B data, as well as by manual search.
       Among beneficiary companies, just 27 percent are in the IT/Web/Computer sector.42 The
other sector with a large di erence is "Other," with 25 percent of companies. This includes
local businesses in sectors that are not typically associated with growth, innovation, or angel
investment. Examples of companies in this category include a hoof trimming business in Ohio
and an art store in Wisconsin. Our sector evidence may appear to contrast with program
rules in many states that seek to limit eligibility to high-growth industries. It seems that a
wide variety of companies successfully claim in their application that some aspect of what
they do is, for example, "IT-related." Operating in more traditional sectors also implies that
these firms may be also able to access traditional financing, such as bank loans, and thus
should have less need for subsidized angel investment.
       Many companies in our data ­ including some in the "Other" category ­ are potentially
high-growth businesses. However, these businesses tend to have raised previous financing
before the round in which they had an investor benefit from a tax credit. When the sample is
  41
    We use the Crunchbase and CB Insights databases.
  42
    Table 2 shows that beneficiary companies are somewhat more likely to be in this sector than failed
applicants, again pointing to the potential for positive bias in the within-program analysis.


                                                 28
restricted to companies without previous financing, the share in IT/Web/Computer declines
to just 16 percent, while the share in Other rises to 35 percent. Furthermore, applicant
companies in the high growth sectors are much more likely to have had previous financing,
and thus are likely less constrained than companies seeking to raise a first round. Among
all applicant companies, 26 percent had previous financing before their tax credit year.
Among IT/Web/Computer companies, 51 percent raised previous financing. The analogous
percentages for beneficiary companies are 37 and 64 percent. In sum, it appears that the tax
credit programs tend to be used by companies that are either not in especially high growth
sectors or had previous financing.


4.2.3      Insider investment

The third observation is that a large share of investors receiving tax credits are employees
or executives of the beneficiary companies. These insider investors face smaller financing
frictions than external investors; specifically, they have no information asymmetry or agency
problems in the conventional senses. For an insider investor, it is not clear how the tax credit
might address market failures. Instead, high take-up by insiders also points to crowding out,
where the subsidy serves as a transfer from the local government to the investor.43
       We conduct this analysis in the five states where we observe the identities of tax credit
beneficiary companies, the names of investors that were awarded tax credits, and the link
between these two pieces of information (Ohio, New Jersey, Maryland, New Mexico and
Kentucky). There are 628 unique companies in this group, and 3,560 investors. We took three
approaches to identifying insiders among tax credit recipient investors. The first examines
whether the investor reports being employed at the company on LinkedIn. Among investors
for whom we observe LinkedIn employment histories, 20 percent identify as employed at the
company they invested in during the time period in which they received the tax credit, of
which almost half are the CEO (shown in Panel 1 of Table A.5).
       The second approach to studying owner-manager investment examines whether investors
also appear as executives on SEC Form D filings. Private equity issuers must file Form D with
  43
    It is important to point out that subsidizing insiders is not always and necessarily a bad idea. To the
extent that private would invest less than the social optimal amount, then the subsidy could potentially raise
welfare. However, this mechanism would also require some respose in terms of real activity.


                                                     29
the SEC to be exempt from registering the issue as a security, which would essentially require
an IPO. For this reason, the vast majority of angel and VC investments are accompanied by
a Form D filing. We were able to find Form D filings in the year of the tax credit for 186 of
the companies, and we matched executive o cers from the Form D to investors in the tax
credit data.44
       The third approach was to use last names. We first identified the 61 companies that
had at least three investors with the same last name (see Panel 2 of Table A.5). For these
investors, we searched websites to identify if they or a family member were an executive.
Based on this process, 61 percent of these 61 companies were identified as having an insider
investor (Panel 3 of Table A.5).
       After eliminating duplicate owner-managers across the three methods, our final results
are in Table 5. We find that 35 percent of the companies for which we observe the investor-
company link have at least one investor who is an executive or family member of an executive,
and 33 percent have an investor who is an executive. The share is 24 percent or above in
all states but Kentucky, where it is just four percent. Interestingly, most states explicitly
permit the investor to be employed at the company (see Appendix Table 1 column 27).
Given the di culty of identifying insider investors, we believe that our calculations likely
underestimate the true magnitude of the phenomenon.
       One further sign that the policies may not be targeting the "right" investors is the
discrepancy between professional backgrounds in our data and characteristics that Huang
et al. (2017) find to be associated with investment success. The majority of angels in their
survey have past entrepreneurial experience (i.e., founded a company). They find that these
"entrepreneurial" angels invest in more companies, take a more active role in their portfolio
companies, and have superior returns. In our data, only six percent of investors benefiting
from tax credits identify themselves in their LinkedIn career history as an entrepreneur or
  44
     A company must list its executive o cers and board members in its Form D. We matched our companies
to SEC Form Ds available on https://disclosurequest.com, which are those post-2010 when the Form Ds are
available in HTML (rather than PDF). Of the 628 unique companies, we were able to match with certainty
(i.e. no false positives) 186. We use the Form D filed in the year of the tax credit. There are 407 unique
executive o cers on these Form Ds, and of them, there are 38 with the same full name as an investor who
received a tax credit, and an additional 24 with the same last name as an investor. Of the 186 matched
companies, 39 have at least one investor who is an executive or family of an executive. The share of investors
implicated is small, as the companies that match tend to have a large number of investors.



                                                     30
co-founder (Table 3).
   The high prevalence of owner-managers benefiting from the tax credit sheds helps explain
the absence of an e ect, as these insiders seem likely to have invested in the absence of the
program. Our findings relate to existing work on tax avoidance (Slemrod & Yitzhaki 2002).
Gordon (1998) suggests that one explanation for entrepreneurial entry may be tax avoidance,
as individuals with high incomes have an incentive to reclassify income as corporate rather
than personal. In our setting, owner-managers may identify as angel investors in order to
benefit from angel tax credits.


4.3    Discussion

The channels above of insider investment, low-growth companies, and pre-existing
investment are consistent with the idea that individuals and firms who took advantage of
the tax credit programs were not meeting the two requirements for an impactful program:
making additional investments relative to would have happened anyway, and investing in
new, constrained firms with the potential for growth. Note that the three channels are not
mutually exclusive and, indeed, overlap in the data. It is useful to consider the share of
companies that they encompass. Among beneficiary companies, 63 percent of companies
had not already raised equity based on the match to external financing data. Of these, the
majority are either not in the high growth potential sectors of Biotech and Computer/Info
Tech or have an investor who is a company manager.           Just 9.5 percent of beneficiary
companies have the characteristics we expect a successful high-growth startup subsidy
would target:      no insider investment,      in the IT/Web/Computer sector (which
disproportionately receives VC and generate high-growth, innovative companies), and with
no previous external equity.
   These results point towards the design hypothesis. However, there are two puzzles that
remain. The first one is that we observe an increase in angel activity using AngelList data.
This points to the possibility that "true" angel seed investment increased but there was no
pass-through to real activity. The alternative is a re-labeling explained by tax arbitrage. To
explore this, we assess whether our estimates are in large part explained by an increase in
investors that are less likely to be considered as "true" angels in the sense in which they are

                                              31
usually described in the literature (e.g. Lerner et al. 2018).
   To investigate the type of investor driving the increase, we divide the number of angel
investors in local companies (the dependent variable in Panel 2 column 2, where we see
the largest e ect) into two types: professional and non-professional. If the programs are
driving new "true" angel investment in startups, we expect professional investors to drive
the increase. In contrast, if one-o    investments by individuals who are often themselves
executives or family members of executives are driving the increase, and they are labeling
themselves angels on AngelList, we expect non-professional investors to drive the increase.
   The results are in Table 4 Panel 3. Professional investors in columns 1-2 are defined as
having at least two deals in the year. In columns 3-4, they are defined as having at least
one exit (IPO or acquisition) in the data and at least two deals in the year. In both cases,
we observe a larger coe cient for non-professional investors (about 33 percent in column 1).
The coe cient on professional investors is itself large in magnitude (22 percent) but is not
statistically significant. The coe cients are not statistically di erent from one another. For
this reason, as well as the somewhat arbitrary definition of "professional", this evidence is
only suggestive. However, taken together with the rest of the results, it suggests that the
tax credit programs did not motivate additional seed investment in potentially high-growth
startups, implying that tax arbitrage and rent seeking considerations were likely at the core
of the response to the policy.


4.4    Where are the constrained firms?

The second remaining puzzle is why constrained startups fail to select into the tax credit
programs. As mentioned in Section 4.1.1, we observe the same null e ects in state-years that
run out of money and in those that do not run out of money. In the latter case, constrained
startups could not have been "left out."
   One explanation for the lack of "constrained startups" is provided by Gonzalez-Uribe &
Paravisini (2019). They find low take-up in a UK angel subsidy program, where insiders are
explicitly excluded. They argue that the high cost of adding new external investors, which
emerges from asymmetric information or governance frictions, explains the low take-up. This
high cost could explain why, in our context, constrained firms do not use the credit, while

                                              32
those that do seem to have deals that would have been likely to happen anyway.
      This explanation could be reinforced by the presence of informational frictions. True
startups that are financially constrained may often be unaware of the programs because
their managers are younger, less sophisticated about government policy, or have spent less
time in the state. The types of investors interested in potentially high-growth startups may
also not know about the programs, especially if they are not local.45 True angel investors
may also find the administrative burdens of a tax credit too cumbersome. Paradoxically,
cost considerations could be more important for professional angels. In selecting investments,
they may focus on the "fat tails" of the startup outcome distribution. If the investment is
very successful (e.g., culminates in an IPO), the marginal value of the tax credit may be
perceived as second order relative to the ex-ante administrative costs.
      A second mechanism that could reinforce the initial di erence in the cost of accessing
the tax credit is the presence of coordination frictions: Taking advantage of the tax credit
may require the company to already have established connections with the investor. The
programs typically require both parties to register in advance of the deal, often at a particular
time of year. In this context, the prevalence of insider investors is consistent with needing to
have established the investment in advance. Coordination costs could be high for professional
investors, especially to the degree that they view angel investments as call options on the
small chance that the startup becomes a home run. To the degree angel investing has this
binary character, even a large marginal incentive may not a ect decision-making, particularly
in the presence of administrative and coordination costs. Information and coordination
frictions may both be at play, and our data do not permit us to distinguish between them.
      Two pieces of descriptive evidence are consistent with these frictions.                          First, a
disproportionate share of tax credit recipient investors is located in the state. Table 3
shows that 80 percent of investors are located in-state, which seems much higher than
would be the case if the beneficiary companies were targeting a random sample of U.S.
angel investors. For example, 90 percent of investors who receive tax credits in New Mexico
are in-state, but according to Huang et al. (2017), only 3.8 percent of all U.S. angel
investors are in the entire Southwest region, which encompasses five states. Second, social
 45
      Note most programs allow out of state investors to receive cash in lieu of income tax credits.


                                                      33
ties seem to play a role in explaining selection into the programs. Pre-existing social ties
could both mitigate coordination frictions and help information flow about the credits
between firms and investors. To test for pre-existing social ties, we looked for attendance
at the same university. Among the investors where we observe at least one university from
which they graduated, we examined whether an executive who isn't related by last name
attended the same university. For 22 percent of companies where we observe both investor
and executive universities, at least one investor shared a university with an unrelated
executive.46 They are dominated by out-of-state MBA degrees; for example, there are four
Wharton instances, two Kellogg, and a variety of other top schools, including Stanford
GSB, Columbia GSB, and Duke Fuqua. Of course, there is no obvious benchmark for how
often it should be the case that an angel investor attended the same university as an
executive.



5        Conclusion
A public subsidy for investors could help compensate for the information frictions that create
financial constraints for potentially high-growth startups, frictions thought to be especially
severe outside the major entrepreneurship hubs. Angel investor tax credits, relative to direct
programs such as grants, have the attractive feature of being relatively market-based tools
that do not require the government to identify which companies deserve subsidy. While state-
level subsidies could simply reallocate investment from one region to another, the subsidies
could also be a means to directly address concerns that there may be insu cient angel
investment, especially outside of hub cities.
       In this paper, we look for evidence that angel investor tax credits positively a ect
entrepreneurial activity. At the state level, we find some evidence that the programs had a
positive impact on angels' activity in the state, but no evidence that this also translated
into more employment growth in the area. Firm-level analyses confirm this result. We
interpret these results as emerging from program design: the programs are taken up by
  46
    This is 27 out of 122 companies. At the investor level, the rate is of course lower: out of 675 investors
in these companies there are 35 cases for which we observe an executive who attended the same university.



                                                     34
firms that do not appear to use the subsidy for real investment. As a result, the credits
often appear to go towards tax arbitrage and have a limited real impact on the economy.
   To provide evidence in line with this mechanism, we document three characteristics of
the data. First, 37 percent of companies have previous outside equity, therefore suggesting
that a large share of the a ected firms are not really companies that are completely unable
to raise external funding. Second, just 27 percent of beneficiary companies are in the high-
growth IT/Web/Computer sector, which disproportionately receives VC and generates high-
growth, innovative companies. This fact again suggests that the tax credit is not really used
by industries where financing frictions are larger. Third, many beneficiary companies have
insider investment, which eliminates the information asymmetry that might cause financial
constraints. When we put these three channels together, we find that just 9.5 percent of
beneficiary companies have no insider investment, are in the IT/Web/Computer sector, and
also did not previously raise external equity.
   It seems likely that the tax credit program implementation could be improved to align
more closely with the stated goal of encouraging high-growth, innovative entrepreneurial
activity. We cannot assess how investor tax credits might operate outside our context, but
our findings are at a minimum relevant to U.S. state-level policymakers. We document that
U.S. state-level angel investor tax credit programs have no discernible e ect on local high-
growth entrepreneurship. The funding dedicated to these programs is small relative to total
state budgets, but there are meaningful opportunity costs: the programs are typically a
large share of state entrepreneurship funding and there are well-established positive e ects
of other policy tools.




                                                 35
References
Acharya, V. V. & Subramanian, K. V. (2009), `Bankruptcy codes and innovation', The Review of
  Financial Studies 22(12), 4949­4988.

Acs, Z., Audretsch, D. & Feldman, M. (1994), `R&D spillovers and recipient firm size', The Review
  of Economics and Statistics 76(2), 336­340.

Agrawal, A., Rosell, C. & Simcoe, T. S. (2014), Do tax credits a ect R&D expenditures by small
  firms? Evidence from Canada, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Akcigit, U., Baslandze, S. & Stantcheva, S. (2016), `Taxation and the international mobility of
  inventors', American Economic Review 106(10), 2930­81.

Angrist, J. D. & Pischke, J.-S. (2008), Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's companion,
  Princeton university press.

Appel, I., Farre-Mensa, J. & Simintzi, E. (2017), Patent Trolls an Small Business Employmeny,
  Harvard Business School.

Balsmeier, B., Kurakina, M. & Fleming, L. (2018), `R&D tax credits: Mechanisms of private and
  public value'. Working Paper.

Barnatchez, K., Crane, L. D. & Decker, R. (2017), `An assessment of the national establishment
  time series (nets) database'.

Baumol, W. J. (1990), `Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive', Journal of
  political economy 98(5, Part 1), 893­921.

Becker, B. (2015), `Public r&d policies and private r&d investment: A survey of the empirical
  evidence', Journal of Economic Surveys 29(5), 917­942.

Bell, A., Chetty, R., Jaravel, X., Petkova, N. & Van Reenen, J. (2018), `Who becomes an inventor
  in america? the importance of exposure to innovation', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  134(2), 647­713.

Bernstein, S., Giroud, X. & Townsend, R. R. (2016), `The impact of venture capital monitoring',
  The Journal of Finance 71(4), 1591­1622.

Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A. & Laws, K. (2017), `Attracting early-stage investors: Evidence from a
  randomized field experiment', The Journal of Finance 72(2), 509­538.

Bernstein, S., Lerner, J. & Mezzanotti, F. (2018), `Private equity and financial fragility during the
  crisis', The Review of Financial Studies 32(4), 1309­1373.

Billings, A., Glazunov, S. & Houston, M. (2001), `The role of taxes in corporate research and
  development spending', R&D Management 31(4), 465­477.

Bloom, N., Gri th, R. & Van Reenen, J. (2002), `Do r&d tax credits work? evidence from a panel
  of countries 1979­1997', Journal of Public Economics 85(1), 1­31.

Bock, C. & Watzinger, M. (2017), `The capital gains tax: A curse but also a blessing for venture
  capital investment', Journal of Small Business Management .

                                                 36
Bottero, M., Lenzu, S. & Mezzanotti, F. (2015), `Sovereign debt exposure and the bank lending
  channel: impact on credit supply and the real economy', Bank of Italy Temi di Discussione
  (Working Paper) No 1032.

Bronzini, R. & Iachini, E. (2014), `Are incentives for r&d e ective? evidence from a regression
  discontinuity approach', American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4), 100­134.

Chen, H., Gompers, P., Kovner, A. & Lerner, J. (2010), `Buy local? the geography of venture
  capital', Journal of Urban Economics 67(1), 90­102.

Clausen, T. H. (2009), `Do subsidies have positive impacts on R&D and innovation activities at
  the firm level?', Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 20(4), 239­253.

Cullen, J. B. & Gordon, R. H. (2007), `Taxes and entrepreneurial risk-taking: Theory and evidence
  for the us', Journal of Public Economics 91(7-8), 1479­1505.

Curtis, E. M. & Decker, R. (2018), `Entrepreneurship and state taxation'.

Da Rin, M., Di Giacomo, M. & Sembenelli, A. (2011), `Entrepreneurship, firm entry, and
  the taxation of corporate income: Evidence from europe', Journal of public economics 95(9-
  10), 1048­1066.

Da Rin, M., Nicodano, G. & Sembenelli, A. (2006), `Public policy and the creation of active venture
  capital markets', Journal of Public Economics 90(8-9), 1699­1723.

Dechezleprêtre, A., Einiö, E., Martin, R., Nguyen, K.-T. & Van Reenen, J. (2016), Do tax incentives
  for research increase firm innovation? An RD design for R&D, Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. & Miranda, J. (2014), `The role of entrepreneurship in us
  job creation and economic dynamism', The Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 3­24.

Denes, M., Wang, X. & Xu, T. (2019), `Financing entrepreneurship: Tax incentives for early-stage
  investors', Available at SSRN 3454633 .

Dharmapala, D., Foley, C. F. & Forbes, K. J. (2011), `Watch what i do, not what i say: The
  unintended consequences of the homeland investment act', The Journal of Finance 66(3), 753­
  787.

Drucker, S. & Puri, M. (2008), `On loan sales, loan contracting, and lending relationships', The
  Review of Financial Studies 22(7), 2835­2872.

Duchin, R., Ozbas, O. & Sensoy, B. A. (2010), `Costly external finance, corporate investment, and
  the subprime mortgage credit crisis', Journal of financial economics 97(3), 418­435.

Ewens, M. & Townsend, R. (2018), `Are early stage investors biased against women?', Journal of
  Financial Economics .

Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. & Syverson, C. (2008), `Reallocation, firm turnover, and e ciency:
  Selection on productivity or profitability?', American Economic Review 98(1), 394­425.

Gennaioli, N., La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F. & Shleifer, A. (2012), `Human capital and regional
  development', The Quarterly journal of economics 128(1), 105­164.

                                                37
Gompers, P. A. & Lerner, J. (1997), `Venture capital and the creation of public companies: do
  venture capitalists really bring more than money?', The Journal of Private Equity pp. 15­32.

Gompers, P. A. & Sahlman, W. (2001), `Entrepreneurial finance: A casebook'.

Gompers, P. A. & Wang, S. Q. (2017), `Diversity in innovation', NBER Working Paper (23082).

Gonzalez-Uribe, J. & Leatherbee, M. (2017), `The e ects of business accelerators on venture
  performance: Evidence from start-up chile', The Review of Financial Studies 31(4), 1566­1603.

Gonzalez-Uribe, J. & Paravisini, D. (2019), `How sensitive is young firm investment to the cost of
  outside equity? evidence from a uk tax relief'.

Gordon, R. H. (1998), `Can high personal tax rates encourage entrepreneurial activity?', Sta
  Papers 45(1), 49­80.

Graham, J. R. (2003), `Taxes and corporate finance: A review', The Review of Financial Studies
  16(4), 1075­1129.

Griliches, Z. (1992), `The search for R&D spillovers', The Scandinavian Journal of Economics
  pp. S29­S47.

Hall, B. H. (1993), `R&D tax policy during the 1980s: Success or failure?', Tax policy and the
  economy 7, 1­35.

Hall, B. & Van Reenen, J. (2000), `How e ective are fiscal incentives for R&D? A review of the
  evidence', Research Policy 29(4), 449­469.

Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S. & Miranda, J. (2013), `Who creates jobs? small versus large versus
  young', Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2), 347­361.

Hombert, J. & Matray, A. (2016), `The real e ects of lending relationships on innovative firms and
  inventor mobility', The Review of Financial Studies 30(7), 2413­2445.

Hoshi, T., Kashyap, A. & Scharfstein, D. (1991), `Corporate structure, liquidity, and investment:
  Evidence from japanese industrial groups', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(1), 33­60.

Howell, S. (Forthcoming), `Reducing information frictions in venture capital: The role of new
  venture competitions', Journal of Financial Economics .

Howell, S. & Brown, D. J. (2019), `Do cash windfalls a ect wages? Evidence from R&D grants'.

Howell, S. T. (2017), `Financing innovation: evidence from r&d grants', American Economic Review
  107(4), 1136­64.

Huang, L., Wu, A., Lee, M. J., Bao, J., Hudson, M. & Bolle, E. (2017), `The american angel'.

Hubbard, R. G. (1998), `Capital-market imperfections and investment', Journal of Economic
  Literature 36(1), 193­225.

Jacob, M. & Michaely, R. (2017), `Taxation and dividend policy: the muting e ect of agency issues
  and shareholder conflicts', The Review of Financial Studies 30(9), 3176­3222.


                                               38
Jeng, L. A. & Wells, P. C. (2000), `The determinants of venture capital funding: evidence across
  countries', Journal of corporate Finance 6(3), 241­289.

Jensen, M. C. & Meckling, W. H. (1976), `Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs
  and ownership structure', Journal of financial economics 3(4), 305­360.

Kerr, W. R., Lerner, J. & Schoar, A. (2011), `The consequences of entrepreneurial finance: Evidence
  from angel financings', The Review of Financial Studies 27(1), 20­55.

Kerr, W. R. & Nanda, R. (2011), `8 financing constraints and entrepreneurship', Handbook of
  Research on Innovation and Entrepreneurship p. 88.

Keuschnigg, C. & Nielsen, S. B. (2002), `Tax policy, venture capital, and entrepreneurship', Journal
  of Public economics 87(1), 175­203.

Klassen, K. J., Pittman, J. A., Reed, M. P. & Fortin, S. (2004), `A cross-national comparison of
  R&D expenditure decisions: Tax incentives and financial constraints', Contemporary Accounting
  Research 21(3), 639­680.

Krishnan, K., Nandy, D. K. & Puri, M. (2014), `Does financing spur small business productivity?
  evidence from a natural experiment', The Review of Financial Studies 28(6), 1768­1809.

Lach, S. (2002), `Do r&d subsidies stimulate or displace private r&d? evidence from israel', The
  journal of industrial economics 50(4), 369­390.

Landoni, M. (2018), `Tax distortions and bond issue pricing', Journal of Financial Economics
  129(2), 382­393.

Lerner, J. (2009), Boulevard of broken dreams: why public e orts to boost entrepreneurship and
  venture capital have failed­and what to do about it, Princeton University Press.

Lerner, J., Schoar, A., Sokolinski, S. & Wilson, K. (2018), `The globalization of angel investments:
  Evidence across countries', Journal of Financial Economics 127(1), 1­20.

Lindsey, L. & Stein, L. C. (2019), `Angels, entrepreneurship, and employment dynamics: Evidence
  from investor accreditation rules'.

Mamuneas, T. P. & Nadiri, M. I. (1996), `Public R&D policies and cost behavior of the US
 manufacturing industries', Journal of Public Economics 63(1), 57­81.

McCutchen, W. W. (1993), `Estimating the impact of the R&D tax credit on strategic groups in
 the pharmaceutical industry', Research Policy 22(4), 337­351.

McDonald, R. L. (2001), `Cross-border investing with tax arbitrage: The case of german dividend
 tax credits', The Review of Financial Studies 14(3), 617­657.

McKenzie, D. (2017), `Identifying and spurring high-growth entrepreneurship: experimental
 evidence from a business plan competition', American Economic Review 107(8), 2278­2307.

Moretti, E. & Wilson, D. J. (2017), `The e ect of state taxes on the geographical location of top
 earners: Evidence from star scientists', American Economic Review 107(7), 1858­1903.



                                                39
Mukherjee, A., Singh, M. & éaldokas, A. (2017), `Do corporate taxes hinder innovation?', Journal
 of Financial Economics 124(1), 195­221.

Myers, S. C. & Majluf, N. S. (1984), `Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms
 have information that investors do not have', Journal of financial economics 13(2), 187­221.

Poterba, J. M. (1989), `Venture capital and capital gains taxation', Tax policy and the economy
  3, 47­67.

Schoar, A. (2010), `The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneurship',
  Innovation policy and the economy 10(1), 57­81.

Serrato, J. C. S. & Zidar, O. (2018), `The structure of state corporate taxation and its impact on
  state tax revenues and economic activity', Journal of Public Economics 167, 158­176.

Slemrod, J. & Yitzhaki, S. (2002), Tax avoidance, evasion, and administration, in `Handbook of
   public economics', Vol. 3, Elsevier, pp. 1423­1470.

Stiglitz, J. E. & Weiss, A. (1981), `Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information', The
  American economic review 71(3), 393­410.

Wilson, D. J. (2009), `Beggar thy neighbor? the in-state, out-of-state, and aggregate e ects of r&d
 tax credits', The Review of Economics and Statistics 91(2), 431­436.

Yagan, D. (2015), `Capital tax reform and the real economy: The e ects of the 2003 dividend tax
  cut', American Economic Review 105(12), 3531­63.

Zwick, E. & Mahon, J. (2017), `Tax policy and heterogeneous investment behavior', American
  Economic Review 107(1), 217­48.




                                                40
            Figure 1: Total Expenditure on Angel Investor Tax Credit Programs




Note: This figure shows the total annual expenditure on state angel investor tax credits (i.e. take-
up). All states in Table 1 are included except Oklahoma and New York, for which no data are
available. The total across all years is $8.13 billion. On average, take-up is 88 percent of allocated
funding.




                                                 41
   Figure 2: Angel Investor Tax Credit Program E ect by Year Around Implementation




Note: This figure shows the annual e ect of introducing an angel tax credit on key investment and
employment outcomes using a year-by-year version of the di erence-in-di erences design. Otherwise the
specification is the same as in Equation 1. The year before policy introduction is normalized to zero.
Standard errors are clustered at state-level. 95% confidence intervals are shown.




                                                   42
Figure 3: Multiple Models and Placebo Tests for the E ect of Angel Investor Tax Credit
Programs




Note: This figure shows the three models for estimating the e ect of introducing an angel tax credit on key
employment and investment outcomes. The specification in "Main" is the same as in Equation 1. We
remove controls in the middle model, and add Census division by year fixed e ects in the right-hand
model. The estimated coe cient for the actual e ect of the program introduction is denoted by a red "X"
for each model. The black dots represent the estimated coe cient for 1000 placebo tests in which
state-years are randomly assigned tax credits with the same overall distribution as the true assignment.




                                                    43
                           Figure 4: Sector Distribution Comparison




Note: This figure shows the sectoral distribution of venture capital-backed companies and tax credit
beneficiary companies. There are 19,229 venture-capital backed companies between 2005 and 2018
and 1,818 tax credit beneficiary companies between 2005 and 2018.




                                                44
             Table 1: State Tax Credit Program Summary (Details in Appendix)




Note: This table contains information on U.S. state angel tax credit programs. Additional details are in
Appendix Table A.1.




                                                    45
                     Table 2: Tax Credit Applicant Summary Statistics

                           Panel 1: Unique Tax Credit Applicants by State

                                       Received Tax Credit   No Tax Credit

                          AZ                  144                  145
                          CO                   109                  25
                          CT                   100                 70
                          KS                   199                 63
                          KY                    60                 101
                          MD                    87
                          MN                   338                 205
                          NJ                    69                  6
                          NM                    72
                          OH                   374                537
                          SC                    65                136
                          WI                   206                116
                          Total               1823                1404

                                    Panel 2: Summary Statistics

                                           Received Tax Credit    No Tax Credit   T-Test p-value

                                                 Mean                 Mean           P-value
     Tax Credit (TC) Amount ($ thou)              32                   0              0.00

     Any Financing Pre-TC                          .37                    .12          0.00
     Amt Financing Pre-TC ($ mill)                 3.7                    1.9          0.02
     Any Financing 2yrs Post-TC                    .26                    .16          0.00
     Amt Financing 2yrs Post-TC ($ mill)           2.9                     2           0.19
     Startup Exited                               .066                   .037          0.00
     Emp   in Credit Yr                            6.5                    6.2          0.85
     Emp   2yrs Post-TC                            7.2                    6.6          0.79
     Emp   > p75 in Credit Yr                      .21                     .2          0.68
     Emp   > p75 2yrs Post-TC                      .25                    .16          0.03
     Emp   > 10 in Credit Yr                       .14                   .087          0.04
     Emp   > 10 2yrs Post-TC                       .18                    .12          0.11
     Emp   > 25 in Credit Yr                      .042                   .013          0.04
     Emp   > 25 2yrs Post-TC                      .055                    .03          0.25

     Biotech                                         .084                .059          0.01
     IT/Web/Computer                                  .27                  .2          0.00
     Goods and Services                               .12                 .15          0.01
     Energy Tech                                     .043                .029          0.04
     Financial                                       .016                 .03          0.01
     Health                                           .16                .092          0.00
     Manufacturing                                    .11                 .11          0.97
     Other                                             .2                 .33          0.00

Note: This table contains summary statistics about companies that applied to be eligible for an
investor tax credit, some of which did have an investor receive a credit and some of which did not.
Panel 1 shows these two groups by state. Panel 2 compares characteristics. "Pre-TC" means before
the application year.




                                                 46
                                 Table 3: Angel Investor Information


                                      Panel 1: Categorical Variables
                                              N       Fraction                                     N   Fraction

    Number of investor-tax credit pairs      8,218                      Profession            3,286
                                                                          Corp. Exec.                   0.82
    Number of unique investors               5,637                        Doctor                       0.073
        Illinois                                       0.14               Entrepreneur                 0.062
        Kentucky                                       0.05               Lawyer                       0.041
        Maryland                                       0.16               Investor                     0.007
        Minnesota                                      0.39               Other                        0.003
        New Jersey                                     0.09
        New Mexico                                     0.03             Race                  4,446
        Ohio                                           0.14               White                         0.95
                                                                          South Asian                   0.03
    Location is in state                     4,694     0.79               East Asian                    0.02
                                                                          Black                        0.007
    Male                                     4,702     0.87               Hispanic                     0.002
                                                                          Middle Eastern               0.001


                                      Panel 2: Continuous Variables
                                       N             Mean        Median        S.d.        Min          Max

  Investment amount ($thou)          2,810           376           80          3,093       0.348       106,000
  Age                                2,363           41.9          42          13.1         18           77



Note: This table describes information gathered from LinkedIn about angel investors from four states that
publicly release the names of angel investors. Corporate Executive is an investor who lists their current
occupation as President, Vice President (SVP and VP), Partner, Principal, Managing Director, or Chief
O cer other than CEO. An individuals's approximate age is derived from adding 22 years to the di erence
between the individual's college graduation year and the median year of investment of the sample, 2013. The
number of observations (N) indicates the sample for which the variable is available; for example, we observe
the investor location (in LinkedIn data) for 4,694 unique investors.




                                                       47
                       Table 4: Tax Credit E ect on Investment and Firms
                                          Panel 1: Tax Credit E ect on Firms

 Dependent variable:    Employment All           Employment High Tech,         Num Manuf           Num High Tech
                        Firms 0-5 yrs Old        Manuf Firms 0-5 yrs Old     Firms 0-19 Emps       Firms 0-19 Emps
                                (1)                          (2)                      (3)                   (4)
 Tax Credit                   0.005                        0.024                    -0.009                -0.012
                           [-0.02,0.03]                 [-0.03,0.08]             [-0.03,0.01]          [-0.04,0.01]
 Observations                  725                          725                      686                    686
 R2                           0.821                        0.675                    0.708                  0.871
 State FE                        Y                            Y                        Y                     Y
 Year FE                         Y                            Y                        Y                     Y
 Controls                        Y                            Y                        Y                     Y

                                 Panel 2: Tax Credit E ect on Investment

    Dependent variable:    Num Angel         Num Angel Investors       Num Angel Investors      Angel & Seed
                             Deals           in Local Companies           from State              Amount
                                (1)                   (2)                       (3)                  (4)
    Tax Credit                0.205úú               0.298úú                  0.186úú                0.092
                             [0.02,0.4]            [0.04,0.6]               [0.04,0.3]           [-0.09,0.3]
    Observations                735                   735                      735                   441
    R2                         0.642                 0.613                    0.739                 0.298
    State FE                     Y                     Y                         Y                    Y
    Year FE                      Y                     Y                         Y                    Y
    Controls                     Y                     Y                         Y                    Y

                              Panel 3: Tax Credit E ect on Investors by Type

       Dependent variable:       Num Non-Prof              Num Prof          Num Non-Prof       Num Prof
                               Investors (w Exit)      Investors (w Exit)      Investors        Investors
                                       (1)                       (2)               (3)               (4)
       Tax Credit                    0.331úú                    0.223            0.296úú            0.225
                                    [0.07,0.6]               [-0.04,0.5]        [0.04,0.6]       [-0.05,0.5]
       Observations                    735                       735               735               735
       R2                             0.611                     0.499             0.549             0.506
       State FE                         Y                         Y                 Y                 Y
       Year FE                          Y                         Y                 Y                 Y
       Controls                         Y                         Y                 Y                 Y

Note: This table contains estimates of the e ect of the tax credit on firm and investment outcomes. In Panel
1, dependent variables are from the Census QWI and CBP. In Panel 2, number of deals and investors are
from AngelList. Number of deals only includes a company's first financing on the AngelList platform. Angel
Amount is from the financing data (CB Insights, Crunchbase). In Panel 3, investors in company state (from
Panel 2 column 2) are assigned to be professonal or not. Professional investors in columns 1-2 are defined
as having at least one exit in the data. In columns 3-4, they are defined as having at least one exit in the
data and at least two deals in the year. 95 percent confidence intervals are in parentheses.
ú
  p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú p < 0.01



                                                        48
Table 5: Angel Investors Serving as Executives or Manager at Company for which they
Received Tax Credit


          Panel 1: Company-level statistics (unique tax credit beneficiary companies for which
                                   observe investor-company link)


                                                                                  N       Fraction

          Ø 1 investor is executive or has family member who is executive        628        0.35
              Among Kentucky companies                                            77        0.04
              Among Maryland companies                                            81        0.38
              Among New Jersey companies                                          63        0.24
              Among New Mexico companies                                          61        0.26
              Among Ohio companies                                               346        0.44


          At least one investor is an executive                                  628        0.33



            Panel 2: Investor-level statistics (unique tax credit recipient investors for which
                                     observe investor-company link)


                                                                                  N       Fraction

          Investor is executive or has family who is executive                  3,560       0.14
          Investor is executive                                                 3,560       0.11



Note: This table describes information from the five states where we observe beneficiary companies linked
to the investors who received tax credits for investing in them. Panel 1 reports information on the share
of firms among the 628 unique tax credit beneficiary where investor is executive or has family member who
is executive. Information on whether an investor is related to an executive is collected from SEC Form D
filings, LinkedIn, and web research in cases where at least three investors share the same last name. The
investor identifies as employed at the firm that recieved a tax credit and in which he/she invested for 294
unique investors, of which the investor is the CEO/founder. Panel 2 reports the same statistic in aggregate
but using the data at investor-level, rather than firm-level.




                                                     49
                  Table 6: Within-Program Financing and Exit Outcomes

                                                 Panel 1

                   Dependent Variable: Raised VC 2 Yrs Post-TC

                                        (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)           (5)
                   Got Tax Credit    0.099úúú      0.015      -0.0091   -0.0068       -0.0088
                                      (.022)       (.019)      (.018)    (.017)        (.016)
                   Finance Pre-TC                 0.33úúú     0.18úúú   0.18úúú       0.17úúú
                                                   (.032)      (.026)    (.027)        (.028)

                   State-Year FE       No           No         No          Yes         Yes
                   Sector-Year FE      No           No         No          No          Yes
                   State FE            No           No         Yes         No          No
                   Sector FE           No           No         Yes         Yes         No
                   Year FE             No           No         Yes         No          No
                   Observations       3227         3227        3227      3227          3227
                   R2                 0.014        0.13        0.24      0.27          0.31

                                                 Panel 2

             Dependent Variable:    Log amt raised           Amt raised                Exit
                                     2yrs Post-TC           2yrs Post-TC

                                      (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)
            Got Tax Credit          1.66úúú      0.047          0.41        0.029úúú         -0.0051
                                     (.31)       (.21)          (.28)        (.0076)         (.0093)
            Log amt raised before               0.25úúú
                                                 (.03)
            Amt raised before                                  0.13úú
                                                               (.054)
            Finance Pre-TC                                                                0.086úúú
                                                                                           (.015)

            State-Year FE             No         Yes            No               No             Yes
            Sector-Year FE            No         Yes            Yes              No             Yes
            Observations            2835         2835           2835          3227            3227
            R2                      0.021        0.32           0.13         0.0040           0.11

Note: This table shows estimates of the relationship between receiving a tax credit and financing
outcomes. The dependent variable in Panel 1 is an indicator that denotes whether a startup
received VC investment within two years after first applying to have an investor benefit from a tax
credit. The dependent variables in Panel 2 are a continuous variable measuring the total amount
of financing a startup receives within two years of its first credit year, log of that variable, and
whether the startup exited, i.e. is acquired or has an IPO. In Panel 1, di erent columns report
the results under di erent combinations of fixed-e ects, going from no fixed-e ects (column 1) to
state-by-year and sector-by-year fixed-e ects and control for previous financing in column 5. In
Panel 2 we examine alternative outcomes, but report only the least restrictive (odd columns) and
most restrictive (even columns) specifications. Standard errors are clustered at state-by-year level.




                                                    50
                        Table 7: Within-Program Employment Outcomes

                                                   Panel 1

            Dependent Variable:                         Emp. > 25 2yrs Post-TC

                                         (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
            Got Tax Credit            0.011úúú     -0.00054     -0.00051      -0.00011      -0.00021
                                       (.0033)      (.0021)      (.0024)       (.0025)       (.0026)
            Emp > 25 in Credit Yr                   0.66úúú      0.65úúú       0.65úúú       0.65úúú
                                                      (.1)         (.1)          (.1)         (.11)
            Finance Pre-TC                         0.012úúú     0.014úúú      0.013úúú      0.015úúú
                                                    (.0035)      (.0041)       (.0041)       (.0046)

            State-Year FE                 No            No           No           Yes            Yes
            Sector-Year FE                No            No           No           No             Yes
            Sector FE                     No            No           Yes          Yes            No
            Year FE                       No            No           Yes          No             No
            State FE                      No            No           Yes          No             No

            Observations                3227         3227         3227            3227        3227
            R2                         0.0033        0.46         0.47            0.48        0.50

                                                  Panel 2

       Dependent Variable:           Emp. > 10 2yrs Post-TC                 Emp. > p75 2yrs Post-TC

                                     (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
       Got Tax Credit             0.034úúú      -0.0011       0.0023       0.047úúú      0.0052         0.011
                                   (.0069)       (.0043)       (.004)       (.0089)      (.0068)       (.0068)
       Emp > 10 in Credit Yr                     0.54úúú      0.53úúú
                                                  (.069)        (.07)
       Finance Pre-TC                           0.038úúú     0.041úúú                    0.053úúú      0.053úúú
                                                 (.0084)      (.0087)                     (.0096)        (.01)
       Emp > p75 in Credit Yr                                                            0.45úúú       0.45úúú
                                                                                           (.064)       (.065)

       State-Year FE                 No           No           Yes           No            No            Yes
       Sector-Year FE                No           No           Yes           No            No            Yes
       Sector FE                     No           Yes          No            No            Yes           No
       Year FE                       No           Yes          No            No            Yes           No
       State FE                      No           Yes          No            No            Yes           No

       Observations                  3227        3227         3227          3227          3227          3227
       R2                           0.0094       0.39         0.46          0.014         0.36          0.41

Note: This table shows estimates of the relationship between receiving a tax credit and employment
outcomes. The dependent variable in Panel 1 is an indicator that denotes whether a startup received
the 25 employees within two years after first applying to have an investor benefit from a tax credit.
The dependent variable in Panel 2 are an indicator equal to one if a startup reached ten employees
within two years of its first credit year (columns 1-3) and an indicator equal to one if a startup
reached the top quartile of employment within two years of its first credit year (columns 4-6).
In every specification, we control for the same measure as the outcome but measured in the year
before the tax credit. In Panel 1, di erent columns report the results under di erent combinations of
fixed-e ects, going from no fixed-e ects (column 1) to state-by-year and sector-by-year fixed-e ects
and control for previous financing in column 5. In Panel 2 we examine alternative outcomes, but
reporting only the least restrictive (odd columns) and most restrictive (even columns) specifications.
Standard errors are clustered at state-by-year level.
                                                     51
            Table 8: Di erent-State-Matched Employment and Exit Outcomes

                                         Panel 1: Employment

                   Dependent Variable:     Employment > 10         Employment > 25
                                            2yrs Post-TC            2yrs Post-TC

                                             (1)            (2)      (3)         (4)
                   Got Tax Credit          0.0071        -0.0012   -0.0064     -0.014
                                           (.017)         (.016)   (.0095)    (.0094)

                   Sector-Year FE           No            Yes        No        Yes
                   Controls                 No            Yes        No        Yes

                   Observations            2511           2511      2511       2511
                   R2                      0.50           0.52      0.44       0.46

                                  Panel 2: High Employment and Exits

                   Dependent Variable:     Employment > p75          Startup Exit
                                             2yrs Post-TC

                                             (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)
                   Got Tax Credit          0.024         0.019     -0.0054    -0.017
                                           (.017)        (.015)     (.018)    (.015)

                   Sector-Year FE           No            Yes        No        Yes
                   Controls                 No            Yes        No        Yes

                   Observations            2511           2511       4115     4115
                   R2                      0.41           0.44     0.000031   0.079

Note: This table shows nearest-neighbor matching estimates. The dependent variables are defined
within two years following the tax credit year, except for Exits (IPOs and acquisitions), which are
ever after. In Panel 1, we consider as outcomes indicators that are equal to one if the employment
is above ten workers (columns 1 and 2) or twenty-five workers (columns 3 and 4). In Panel 2, we
consider as outcomes indicators that are equal to one if the employment is above the top quartile
in the sample (columns 1 and 2) or if the firm experienced a succesful exit (columns 3 and 4).
Mirroring the previous analyses, in odd columns we do not control for any fixed-e ects, while
in even columns we control for sector-by-year and the firm-level control discussed in the paper.
Standard errors are clustered at state-by-year level.




                                                    52
          s



Internet Appendix




   Online Appendix 1
Table A.1: State Tax Credit Program Details (Continued from Table 1)




                         Online Appendix 2
Online Appendix 3
Online Appendix 4
                      Table A.2: Aggregate State-Year Summary Statistics

                                                   Panel 1
                                      States with Tax Credit Programs

                                                           Mean       SD      Min     Med       Max      Obs
 Angel & Seed Amount                                        58.01   154.13    0.00    14.95   1094.73    178
 Num of Angel Deals                                         80.15   307.79    0.00     7.00   2739.00    259
 Num of Angel Investors in Local Companies                  63.66   230.46    0.00    6.00    1980.00    259
 Num of Angel Investors from State                          42.82   140.52    0.00    6.00    1055.00    259
 Employment at Firms 0-5 Yrs Old (in 1000s)                237.62   223.67   33.23   184.88   1119.28    254
 High Tech & Manuf. Emp. at Firms 0-5 Yrs Old (in 1000s)    25.24    26.70    1.92    16.32    174.92    254
 Num of Manufacturing Firms (in 1000s)                       3.73    3.41    0.50     2.57     15.98     234
 Num of High Tech Firms (in 1000s)                           7.66    7.36    0.47     4.72     30.35     234
 Num of Non-Prof Investors (w Exit)                         24.79    90.40    0.00    3.00     731.00    259
 Num of Prof Investors (w Exit)                             38.88   142.50    0.00    3.00    1249.00    259
 Num of Non-Prof Investors                                  14.10    49.97    0.00    1.00     400.00    259
 Num of Prof Investors                                      35.54   131.49    0.00    3.00    1172.00    259

                                                  Panel 2
                                    States without Tax Credit Programs

                                                           Mean       SD      Min     Med       Max      Obs
 Angel & Seed Amount                                        94.53   374.99    0.00    12.20    4322.58   266
 Num of Angel Deals                                         96.11   698.54    0.00     1.00   11060.00   761
 Num of Angel Investors in Local Companies                 64.62    392.60   0.00     1.00    5221.00    761
 Num of Angel Investors from State                         44.56    256.35   0.00     2.00    3156.00    761
 Employment at Firms 0-5 Yrs Old (in 1000s)                323.64   436.78   21.28   192.42   2668.22    650
 High Tech & Manuf. Emp. at Firms 0-5 Yrs Old (in 1000s)    40.45    65.80    0.81    19.62    577.04    650
 Num of Manufacturing Firms (in 1000s)                      4.61     5.65    0.08     2.64      34.50    684
 Num of High Tech Firms (in 1000s)                          8.14     10.97   0.37     4.30      70.98    684
 Num of Non-Prof Investors (w Exit)                        23.62    158.51   0.00     0.00    2224.00    761
 Num of Prof Investors (w Exit)                            41.00    239.12   0.00     0.00    3077.00    761
 Num of Non-Prof Investors                                 13.94     92.22   0.00     0.00    1275.00    761
 Num of Prof Investors                                     35.94    210.55   0.00     0.00    2724.00    761



Note: This table contains summary statistics on aggregate start-up activity by state. Employment and
firm data are from the Census QWI and CBP. Angel & Seed Amount is from the financing data (CB
Insights, Crunchbase). Number of angel deals and investors are from AngelList. Investors are classified as
professional by two definitions: (1) their companies ever has an exit in the data (Num of Prof/Non-Prof
Investors (w Exit))and (2) have at least one exit and at least two deals per year (Num of Prof/Non-Prof
Investors).




                                          Online Appendix 5
                                                          Table A.3: Robustness Tests of Aggregate Tax Credit E ect


                           Dependent variable:          Employment High Tech,                              Num Angel                          Num Angel Investors
                                                        Manuf Firms 0-5 yrs Old                              Deals                            in Local Companies

                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
                           Tax Credit               0.005          0.007          0.022        0.348úú       0.286ú         0.247       0.328úú       0.272ú         0.236
                                                 [-0.05,0.06]   [-0.05,0.07]   [-0.04,0.08]   [0.06,0.6]   [-0.03,0.6]   [-0.06,0.6]   [0.06,0.6]   [-0.03,0.6]   [-0.06,0.5]
                           Observations              725            725            904           735           735          1020          735           735          1020
                           R2                       0.646          0.732          0.746         0.591         0.685         0.644        0.588         0.680         0.641
                           State FE                    Y              Y              Y            Y             Y             Y            Y             Y             Y
                           Year FE                     Y              Y              Y            Y             Y             Y            Y             Y             Y
                           Division-Year FE                           Y                                         Y                                        Y
                           Controls                                   Y             Y                           Y            Y                           Y            Y
Online Appendix 6




                           Extended Sample                                          Y                                        Y                                        Y

                    Note: This table contains Extended Sample means that the sample includes CA, MA, and all years. Standard errors are in parentheses.
                    ú
                      p < 0.10, úú p < 0.05, úúú p < 0.01
     Table A.4: Comparison of Pre- and Post-Match Covariates by Tax Credit Status

                                                       Panel 1
                                                      Pre-Match

                        Got Tax Credit                      No Tax Credit                T-Test

                    Mean         SD        Obs     Mean           SD         Obs    t-value    p-value
 Year Founded       2009.6      4.652      619    2008.6         6.549      20403   -3.797    0.000147
 Total Financing     10.17      27.77      619     14.43         158.7      20403    0.668      0.504
 Average Emp         6.221      9.838      619     23.07         563.2      20403    0.744      0.457
 Average Sales     720732.7   3111565.6    619   4554826.4    241016016.1   20403    0.396      0.692
 Exit Rate           0.107      0.309      619     0.153         0.360      20403    3.144     0.00167

                                                     Panel 2
                                     Post-Match: Di erent State, Narrow Sectors

                        Got Tax Credit                      No Tax Credit                T-Test

                    Mean         SD        Obs    Mean            SD        Obs     t-value   p-value
 Year Founded       2009.5      4.137      517    2009.3         3.803      3129    -1.282     0.200
 Total Financing     10.15      27.25      517     8.106         23.28      3129    -1.035     0.301
 Average Emp         6.450      10.55      517     7.811         88.61      3129     0.386     0.700
 Average Sales     777256.0   3390226.5    517   663930.9      3015808.0    3129    -0.661     0.508
 Exit Rate           0.110      0.314      517     0.127         0.333      3129     1.175     0.240

Note: This table compares covariates across treatment and control, both before (panel 1) and after
the matching process (panel 2) used as robustness. In each panel, we examine firms' founding year,
total financing, sales, and employment, and exit-rate. The pre-match universe of potential controls
includes all companies in the financing data that received angel or seed investment.




                                          Online Appendix 7
       Table A.5: Detailed Statistics on Insider Angel Investor Tax Credit Recipients
              Panel 1: LinkedIn Matching Statistics (where N is sample conditional on
                    observing investor-company link and matching to LinkedIn)
                                                                             N      Fraction

           Company-level
                Ø 1 investor employed at or CEO                             514      0.35
           Investor-level
                Employed at company during relevant time period            2,060     0.20
                CEO                                                        2,060     0.08

            Panel 2: SEC Form D Matching Statistics (where N is sample conditional on
                     observing investor-company link and matching to Form D)
                                                                             N      Fraction

           Company-level
                Ø 1 investor executive or family of executive               186      0.21
           Investor-level
                Executive                                                  1,416     0.03
                Family of executive o cer                                  1,416     0.02

            Panel 3: Multiple Last Name Matching Statistics (where N is sample conditional on
             observing investor-company link and having Ø 3 investors with same last name)
                                                                             N      Fraction

           Company-level
                Ø 1 investor executive or shares executive last name         61      0.61
           Investor-level
                Executive                                                   285      0.35
                Shares last name of executive                               285      0.24



Note: This table describes information from the five states where we observe beneficiary companies linked to
the investors who received tax credits for investing in them. In panel 1, we report whether an investor is an
employee of the firm, either as a CEO or not. These variables are constructed using Linkedin information.
In panel 2, we report information on whether an investor is an executive or family member of an executive.
In particular, we first report the share of firms in which at least one investor is an executive or family of an
executive and then the share of investors that are either an executive or family of an executive. Information
on the identity of executives are collected from SEC form D. We define an investor as a family member of
an executive if she has the same surname of an executive. In panel 3, we report information on whether
several investors belong to the same family. In particular, we first identify the share of firms in which there
are at least three investors with the same surname. Second, we report the share of investors that has the
same surname of at least two other investors in the same firm.



                                            Online Appendix 8
