                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  LEANING IN OR NOT LEANING OUT? OPT-OUT CHOICE FRAMING ATTENUATES
            GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE DECISION TO COMPETE

                                           Joyce He
                                         Sonia Kang
                                        Nicola Lacetera

                                      Working Paper 26484
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26484


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We are grateful for financial support from the Institute for Gender and the Economy (GATE) and
Behavioural Economics in Action at Rotman (BEAR), both research centres at the Rotman
School of Management at the University of Toronto. We are thankful for constructive feedback
from many colleagues including Ken Corts, Christine Exley, Sarah Kaplan, Mario Macis, Dilip
Soman, Justin Sydnor, and many others, as well as participants in brownbag talks and seminars.
Study 2 was registered in the AEA-RCT registry with the number AEARCTR-0004030. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joyce He, Sonia Kang, and Nicola Lacetera. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Leaning In or Not Leaning Out? Opt-Out Choice Framing Attenuates Gender Differences
in the Decision to Compete
Joyce He, Sonia Kang, and Nicola Lacetera
NBER Working Paper No. 26484
November 2019
JEL No. C91,D03,D91,J16,J24,J82,M5

                                          ABSTRACT

In most organizations, promotions often require self-nomination and competition among
applicants. However, research on gender differences in preferences for competition suggests that
this process might result in fewer women choosing to participate. We study whether changing
promotion schemes from a default where applicants must opt in (i.e., self-nominate) to a default
where applicants must opt out (i.e., they are automatically considered for promotion, but can
choose not to be considered) attenuates gender differences. In our first experiment, although
women are less likely than men to choose competitive environments under the traditional opt-in
framing, in the opt-out system both women and men have the same participation rate as men in
the opt-in system. The increase in participation of women into competition is not associated with
negative consequences on performance or well-being. In our second experiment, we show that
opt-out framing does not entail penalties from evaluators making decisions about whom to hire.
These results support the promise of choice architecture to reduce disparities in organizations.
More generally, our findings suggest that gender differences in attitudes toward completion may
be context-dependent.

Joyce He                                        Nicola Lacetera
University of Toronto - Rotman School           University of Toronto
105 St. George Street                           Institute for Management and Innovation
Toronto, ON                                     3359 Mississauga Road, Room KN 235
Canada                                          Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6
Chong.He16@rotman.utoronto.ca                   CANADA
                                                and NBER
Sonia Kang                                      nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca
University of Toronto
Institute for Management and Innovation
3359 Mississauga Road
Mississauga, ON
Canada
sonia.kang@rotman.utoronto.ca




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26484
1. Introduction
Only three women have ever received the Nobel Prize in Physics, the most recent being Donna
Strickland. Strikingly, when she was awarded the Prize, Professor Strickland held the rank of
Associate Professor. The positive reaction to her win came with puzzlement over how such an
eminent scientist was not yet a Full Professor. Responding to a question from a BBC reporter about
this, Professor Strickland explained simply: "I never applied" (BBC World Service 2018). As with
promotion from Associate to Full Professor in many universities, most types of promotions require
self-nomination via an application. However, past research shows that this process could
disadvantage women. For example, compared to men, women have a lower propensity to compete
and take risk (Flory et al. 2015, Niederle and Vesterlund 2007, Samek 2017), are less
(over)confident (Niederle and Vesterlund 2007, Reuben et al. 2012), and less likely to self-promote
or exaggerate accomplishments (Daubman et al. 1992, Exley and Kessler 2019, Moss-Racusin and
Rudman 2010). These findings suggest that women might be less inclined to apply for promotions
and competitive selection processes because of the typical requirement to self-nominate, promote,
and compete, holding constant performance and ability (Bosquet et al. 2018, Exley et al. 2016).
       In the absence of overall gender differences in ability and performance, the lack of women
choosing to apply for competitive selection processes (i.e., promotions) is costly because
organizations are unable to tap into the full pool of talent. For instance, if high-performing women
do not apply for competitive processes, organizations cannot select from the full range of high-
performing employees in advancement pools. Indeed, research finds that affirmative action (i.e.,
quotas) can boost the supply of high-performers because it corrects for lack of minority candidates
who would otherwise not have self-selected into the competition (Niederle et al. 2013).
Furthermore, gender differences in the choice to compete result in a reduction in diversity and its
associated benefits (Bernardi et al. 2006, Dezsö and Ross 2012, Weber and Zulehner 2010). More
broadly, on a societal level, the gender gap in competition contributes to and perpetuates
occupational segregation by gender, both horizontally (across fields that differ in competitiveness)
and vertically (within more senior management positions) (Flory et al. 2015, Samek 2017).
       To date, interventions to reduce gender disparities in hiring, evaluation, and promotion
have focused mainly on diversity programs, usually consisting of diversity or unconscious bias
training, and have failed to show consistent positive results (Dobbin and Kalev 2016). In fact,
diversity training can result in a host of unintended negative consequence, such as reduced

                                                 3
diversity, negative attitudes and behaviors towards minorities for which these diversity programs
are intended to benefit, and increase activation of stereotypes that are meant to be de-activated or
suppressed (Kalev et al. 2006, Leslie 2018, Macrae et al. 1994, Sanchez and Medkik 2004).
Further, even when diversity training is effective in shifting some attitudes, it often does not
translate into meaningful actions and behaviors (Chang et al. 2019).
       Another popular approach is training women to be more active and visible at work, or to
"lean in" (Sandberg 2013). Although this approach focuses on empowering women to negotiate
better, talk more in meetings, and be more assertive, existing theory and corroborating evidence
suggests that women often face backlash for adopting these more stereotypically male
characteristics and behaviors (Moss-Racusin and Rudman 2010, Rudman 1998, Rudman and Glick
2001). Further, lean-in messages attribute responsibility for both causing and fixing the problem
on women themselves (Fitzsimons et al. 2018, Kim et al. 2018).
       In this work, we depart from approaches that attempt to "fix the women" or, more
generally, change people's minds; we focus instead on structural changes to the framing of the
decision to compete for a promotion (Bohnet 2016, Chugh 2018). We apply well-established
findings in behavioral science on choice architecture, and in particular the finding that behavior is
strongly affected by defaults (Samuelson and Zeckhauser 1988, Thaler and Sunstein 2008), to the
choice of applying for a promotion.
       For promotion and the choice to enter a competition, the most typical choice architecture
is an opt-in choice: individuals must actively apply for the promotion, and the default choice is to
not to apply. We explore whether using an opt-out framing (i.e., making competition the default)
leads to greater participation in competition (Downs et al. 2009, Johnson et al. 2002). Opt-out
framing builds on the idea of a default bias by encouraging enrollment into a desired choice by
changing the default to that of participation. This choice architecture has been highly successful,
for example, in increasing enrollment in retirement savings and organ donation programs (Choi et
al. 2002, Johnson and Goldstein 2003). Importantly, this intervention tweaks the framing of the
decision, while maintaining each individual's ability to choose.
       We test the hypothesis that a choice architecture where applicants must opt-out of
competition will change gender differences in the decision to compete by introducing one
fundamental change to the choice framing of the well-established experimental paradigm
developed by Niederle and Vesterlund (2007). This paradigm has consistently identified a gender


                                                 4
difference in preference for competition (Healy and Pate 2011, Niederle et al. 2013). We examine
decisions about compensation for performance in a competitive framework because relative
performance evaluations and promotions have the same underlying "tournament" mechanism
(Lazear and Rosen 1981), whereby multiple individuals "compete" and are compared for one
single position.
       In our first experiment, participants (n = 482) completed three stages of a timed math task.
In stage 1, participants received $0.50 per correct answer in a non-competitive task with piece rate
compensation. The second stage used competitive tournament compensation; we compared the
focal participants' score to those of three other participants in the room; if the participant's score
was highest, they won the tournament and received $2.00 per correct answer; if not, they received
$0. Finally, before stage 3 (and without knowing their rank in stage 2's tournament), participants
were asked to choose how they wanted to be compensated­via non-competitive piece rate
compensation or via competitive tournament compensation. Here, we randomly assigned
participants to one of two choice architecture conditions: 1) Participants were automatically
enrolled into non-competitive piece-rate compensation, but had the option to opt-in to competitive
compensation; 2) Participants were by default in a competitive tournament-based compensation
scheme, but could opt out to non-competitive piece-rate pay. Following this choice, participants
completed stage 3 of the math task. The choice to compete in stage 3 is our main outcome of
interest. After stage 3, participants guessed their relative rank in the stage 2 tournament
compensation scheme, and filled out a brief anxiety scale.
       Under the opt-in choice frame, we replicate previous research to show that women were
much less likely than men to select the competitive tournament compensation. However, under the
opt-out frame, both men and women had roughly the same participation rate in the competition as
men in the opt-in condition, thus eliminating the gender difference in decision to compete. We
further find that nudging women to compete more in the opt-out frame did not negatively affect
their performance or their broader well-being. In a second experiment, we examined whether the
choice architecture of the decision to compete affected the likelihood that evaluators would choose
to promote a woman, and found no such difference between an opt-in and an opt-out choice
architecture.
       Our findings have implications for the design of promotion schemes in organizations.
Specifically, an opt-out promotion scheme may increase the number of women who apply for a


                                                  5
promotion; as such, it would allow organizations to take advantage of a broader talent pool.
Moreover, because this intervention focuses on removing biases built into the system rather than
targeting a specific group, these results likely have positive spillover effects, such as increased
entry of any other underrepresented group that similarly have a lower preference for competition,
and perceptions of fairness, transparency and justice (Leslie 2018).
           More broadly, our findings imply that the lower propensity of women to compete may not
be absolute, but, instead, contextual, and in particular it may depend on how organizations define
the choice architecture around the decision to compete.
           In Section 2, we describe the design and results of our first experiment where we examine
the effect of choice architecture on applicants' decisions to enter into competitive tournaments.
Section 3 describes our second experiment in which we examine how choice architecture affects
evaluators' decisions. In Section 4, we discuss the implications of our findings.


2. Study 1: Gender, preferences for competition, and choice frame
In our first experiment, we directly examine whether choice architecture affects the decision to
compete by men and women. Our design follows the paradigm of Niederle and Vesterlund (2007)
with the key addition of the random assignment of participants to an opt-in choice framework (as
in Niederle and Vesterlund) versus an opt-out framework.1


2.1 Experimental design
Participants. Participants were 482 undergraduate students from a large Canadian university
(55.4% women; Mage = 19, SD = 1.64; ethnicity: 67.4% Asian, 19.9% Caucasian, 1.45%
Hispanic/Latino, 1.24% African American, 9.96% indicated "other"). Participants received one
course credit for participating and earned financial compensation from one randomly selected
stage of the task.


Procedure. We used zTree (version 4.0) to program the experiment (Fischbacher 2007), largely
following the paradigm in Niederle and Versterlund (2007), which examined gender differences
in overconfidence and preference for competition. The experimental task consisted of adding five


1
    Detailed instructions to the participants of both Study 1 and Study 2 are in the Appendix.

                                                             6
two-digit numbers. Participants could not use a calculator, but we provided them with scrap paper;
they had up to 5 minutes to complete as many questions as they could. At the end of each stage,
participants saw their own final score (i.e., the number of correct answers) for that stage. In each
stage, participants saw only their own absolute score and did not see their relative performance
until the end of the experiment. Participants completed four stages of this same task. Following
Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) as well as many other similar experiments, participants were
informed that their monetary rewards would depend on their performance in one of the four stages,
randomly determined; this would ensure that participants had high-powered incentives in all
stages. The compensation scheme, however, was different for each stage as described below.


Stage 1 ­ Piece Rate: If stage 1 was randomly selected for compensation, participants would
receive $0.50 for each correct answer.


Stage 2 ­ Tournament: If stage 2 was selected for payment, a participant's score for that stage
would be compared to three other randomly chosen competitors' scores. If the participant had the
highest score in that stage compared to the other three competitors, they would receive $2 per
correct answer. If they did not hold the highest score, they would receive $0. In the case of a tie,
the winner was determined randomly among the top scorers. Note that the expected payoffs for
the tournament and piece-rate compensation are equal. Moreover, the participants for a given
group of four were randomly selected with replacement. Therefore, a given individual could be in
the comparison group for more than one focal participant.


Stage 3 ­ Choice: Before proceeding to the task, participants were asked to choose their
compensation scheme for the addition exercise. In the original design of the experiment (Niederle
and Vesterlund 2007), participants were told that they could choose piece-rate (50 cents per correct
answer) or tournament ($2 per correct answer if the focal participant's score exceeded that of the
other group members in the stage two tournament; winners were chosen randomly in the case of a
tie). Here, we administered our key manipulation, i.e. whether the choice to enter the competitive
environment (the tournament payment scheme) was expressed using opt-in or opt-out framing. We
randomly assigned the participants to either the opt-in or the opt-out condition.



                                                 7
Opt-In Framing Condition. In the opt-in framing condition, participants were told that by default,
if stage 3 was randomly selected for payment, they would receive $0.50 per correct answer. In
other words, the default was the non-competitive, piece-rate compensation. Participants could
choose instead to opt in to the competitive, tournament compensation scheme. Further, they were
told that if they chose to compete, their stage 3 performance would be compared with the stage 2
performance of the three other participants. We chose to compare against stage 2 performance to
avoid instances where not all competitors chose to compete for stage 3. Niederle and Vesterlund
(Niederle and Vesterlund 2007) also note that by comparing the performance of a focal participant
to the correct answers of three participants in the previous stage, one can identify preferences for
being compared separately from preferences for direct competition. If a participant wanted a
tournament-based compensation, they had to check a box to indicate this. Otherwise, they just had
to press the "next" button to proceed to the next page.


Opt-Out Framing Condition. In the opt-out framing condition, participants were told that by
default, if stage 3 was randomly selected for payment, their performance would be compared to
the same three participants' from the previous stage, and if they received the highest score they
would receive $2 per correct answer and $0 if they did not receive the highest score. In other
words, the default was the competitive, tournament compensation. Participants could choose to
opt out of the tournament and return to the non-competitive, piece-rate compensation scheme. If
they preferred to opt out of the tournament compensation scheme, again they had to check a box
to press the "next" button to proceed.


Stage 4 ­ Choice: In the final stage of the experiment, participants could re-submit their stage 1
performance for compensation. They could choose to submit their stage 1 performance to either
the piece-rate compensation or a tournament compensation, where their performance would be
compared to three other participants' stage 1 performance. Note therefore that there was not an
actual task in stage 4.


       After the four stages, we asked participants to guess their rank compared to the other
competitors. With this information, we could compare their guessed rank to their actual rank to



                                                 8
obtain a measure of (over)confidence. Participants guessed their rank (1=best, 2=second best,
3=third best, or 4=fourth best) in stage 1 as well as in stage 2.
           Finally, we measured the well-being of the participants in terms of their perceived anxiety
during the experiment. We relied on a six-item version of the State Anxiety Inventory (SAI)
(Marteau and Bekker 1992, Spielberger and Gorsuch 1983). The six-item version of the SAI is
highly correlated with the full version of the scale, and has high internal consistency (alphas above
.90) (Marteau and Bekker 1992, Tluczek et al. 2009). We asked participants to read the statements
and indicate how they felt during the experiment, on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 4 (very much).
Sample items include "During the experiment, I felt calm" (reverse scored), "During the
experiment, I was tense", and "During the experiment, I felt upset". In our sample, the six-item
scale had an internal reliability of a = .68. Upon closer examination, it appeared that the item "I
felt content" had poor item-total correlation compared to the rest of the other items. Thus, we
removed it from the scale (Johnson et al. 2008). The five-item scale had good reliability (a = .73).


2.2 Results
Figure 1 shows the cumulative distribution of correct answers by gender in stage 1 (where all
participants received piece-rate compensation), and in stage 2 (where compensation was
tournament-based for all). Although men's average performance (M = 8.86, SD = 3.44) in stage 1
was slightly higher than women's (M = 8.24, SD = 3.67) (p from two-tailed t-test = 0.06), there
was no significant difference in the overall distribution (p from Kolmogorov-Smirnov test = 0.35).
In stage 2, both men and women attained higher average performance (M = 10.24, SD = 3.75) than
under piece rate (M = 8.52, SD = 3.58, p from paired two-tailed t-test < 0.001). However, there
were again no significant differences in score between men (M = 10.43, SD = 3.80) and women
(M = 10.09, SD = 3.70; p from two-tailed t-test = 0.33). This evidence is consistent with men and
women performing similarly in the task.
           Figure 2 reports the key outcome of our study: the share of men and women who chose a
tournament-based compensation scheme in stage 3, by experimental condition. The findings from
the condition where participants had to opt-in to compete are similar to the evidence from previous
experiments using the same paradigm, with far fewer women than men choosing tournament-based
payment: 46.72% vs. 72.48% (p from two-tailed t-test < 0.001).2 In contrast, the proportions of

2
    In the experiment of Niederle and Vesterlund (2007), 73% of men selected the tournament, against 35% of women.

                                                         9
women and men choosing tournament compensation in the opt-out condition were statistically
indistinguishable, and similar to the percentage of men choosing tournament in the basic opt-in
scheme: 75.38% of women vs. 76.42% of men (p from two-tailed t-test = 0.85).
        The probit regression estimates in Table 1 confirm the descriptive evidence of Figure 2;
controlling for performance in stages 1 and 2, as well as for the guessed rank in stage 2 (see column
4 in particular), we estimate women to be 24.7 percentage points less likely to participate in the
tournament than men in the opt-in condition (p from two-tailed z-test < 0.001), whereas there is
no significant gender difference in participation in the opt-out condition (p from two-tailed z-test
= 0.85). Note also that participants who predicted better performance in stage 2 (lower guessed
rank) were significantly more likely to choose a tournament in stage 3. 3,4
        One concern with choice architecture manipulations is that they might lead individuals to
make choices that negatively affect their performance or broader well-being (Mols et al. 2015,
Selinger and Whyte 2011). Our evidence shows no such consequences from introducing an opt-
out frame. First, Figure 3 reports participants' average performance in stage 3 by condition, gender,
and compensation choice. Consistent with findings for stages 1 and 2, performance was higher for
participants choosing tournament than piece rate compensation in stage 3; however, there were no
significant differences by gender or experimental condition. In other words, women who were
"nudged" to compete in the opt-out condition did not perform worse because of our treatment.5
        Second, we examined the possibility that choosing a tournament in the opt-out condition
led more women to make a choice that was not payoff-maximizing for them, in light of recent
research finding that men tend to engage in suboptimal entry into negotiations by engaging too
often, whereas women avoid negotiations but do so correctly (Exley et al. 2016). We established
the payoff-maximizing choice of the participants as follows (see also Niederle and Vesterlund
2007). We ran a probit regression of whether a participant won their tournament in Stage 2 on the
number of correct responses in that stage, to predict the likelihood of winning a tournament in
Stage 3 given their performance in Stage 3 (recall that individuals who chose the tournament in


3
  Appendix Table A2 shows that women predicted a lower ranking in stage 2, and were slightly less overconfident,
controlling for absolute performance.
4
  Figure A2 in the Appendix show that the probability that a tournament winner in stage 3 was a woman was
substantially higher in the opt-out than in the opt-in condition. The share of female participants who chose a
tournament and won was similar in the two conditions.
5
  Appendix Table A1 reports the regression estimates. Figure A1 reports additional evidence of the absence of
underlying gender differences in ability, from a simulation exercise.

                                                      10
Stage 3 had their performance compared against three participants from Stage 2). We then
calculated the expected payoff from choosing a tournament or a piece-rate compensation for each
participant. For the piece rate, the expected payoff was $0.50 times the number of correct responses
in Stage 3. The expected payoff from a tournament was $2 times the number of correct responses
in Stage 3 times the predicted probability of winning the tournament for that participant in Stage
3. We classified a participant as having made their payoff-maximizing choice if they selected the
compensation scheme that gave them the higher expected payoff. 6 Table 2 shows that in the opt-
out condition, a higher proportion of women than men who chose tournament-based compensation
in stage 3 made a payoff-maximizing choice as compared to what they would have gained from
piece-rate compensation for the same number of correct answers. Thus, we do not find evidence
that choosing a tournament in the opt-out condition led women to make choices that were not
payoff-maximizing.
        Third, compared to the counterfactual choices, participants earned more with the
compensation method that they selected, particularly when selecting tournament. For the
participants who selected a tournament-based compensation scheme, the "counterfactual" payoff
is the number of correct responses that they gave in Stage 3 multiplied by $0.5. For the participants
who selected piece rate, the counterfactual payoff is zero if they would have not won the
tournament in the group to which they would be assigned, and equal to the number of their correct
answers multiplied by $2 had they been the winners of the groups to which they were assigned.
Figure 4 and Table 3 show the results of this analysis. Women in the opt-out condition achieved a
higher additional surplus than men did; the overall additional monetary surplus was slightly
greater, and more equally distributed between men and women, in the opt-out condition.
        Finally, we use the anxiety measures that we collected at the end of the experiment as a
measure of well-being. Figure 5 shows participants' average reported anxiety at the end of the
experiment, again by gender and condition. The graphs show higher average levels of anxiety for
women than for men (overall averages 1.73 and 1.56, respectively; p from two-tailed t-test =




6
 In cases where the expected payoffs from the two compensation scheme were close to each other (less than $1 in
absolute difference; this happened if a participant solved 12 questions correctly), we randomized the assignment to
having made the payoff maximizing decision or not, with ex-ante 50% probability (we interpreted small differences
as making a participant indifferent between the two schemes).


                                                        11
0.008); however, there was no significant average difference by condition or choice of
compensation scheme in stage 3.7
         We also further explored heterogeneity in the choice of a compensation scheme by gender
and condition, by interacting the indicators for the gender-condition pairs with the performance
(number of correct answers) in stages 1 and 2, as well as the guessed rank in stage 2. The regression
estimates in Table 4 show that the absence of a gender difference in choosing a tournament in stage
3 under the opt-out frame derives especially from women with higher positive difference in
performance between stages 2 and 1 (i.e., women who had improved in performance from stage 1
to stage 2), and those who guessed a worse rank for their performance in the stage 2 tournament. 8


2.3 Discussion
Our results support previous evidence that even when women and men perform equally, women
are less likely to select into competition. However, the aversion to competitive performance pay is
contingent on how the competition choice is presented: an opt-out framing, whereby the default is
to participate in the competitive scheme, eliminates this commonly observed gender difference.
Critiques of the "nudging" approach have argued that nudges might be associated with negative
consequences for behavior and well-being, but our additional analyses demonstrate that our
intervention did not have such effects. These results resemble those found in Niederle, Segal and
Vesterlund (2013), where they find that guaranteeing women equal representation among winners
(i.e., affirmative action) can increase the number of women who choose to apply. Rather than
introducing policy changes that specifically target women and establish a quota, however, we find
the same increase in women's participation with a change in the choice architecture for competitive
compensation schemes.
         Although we did not see unintended negative consequences for women's behavior and
well-being, one further concern arises in the potential for negative downstream consequences on

7
  Regression estimates are in Appendix Table A1.
8
  Although the compensation choices in stage 4 were not a relevant outcome of interest for this study, we report
regression estimates of that choice as a function of gender, condition, and choice made in stage 3. Recall that the
choice in stage 4 was whether to switch the compensation mode for the performance in stage 1 to a tournament,
therefore this was an opt-in frame for all participants. Appendix Table A3 shows that women were still less likely than
men to choose a tournament-based compensation, but by a smaller difference than in the opt-in condition in stage
three. This is consistent with only a partial "carry over" effect of stage 3 (at least for the women in the opt-out condition
in that stage). Women who chose the tournament in stage 3 were more likely to choose a tournament scheme in stage
4 than those who chose piece rate in stage 3, but the difference in propensity between these two groups was smaller
than for men.

                                                             12
evaluators' perceptions and decisions about whom to promote. In particular, an opt-out promotion
scheme might lead evaluators to attribute lower motivation and desire for competition and
promotions, and this may result in a lower likelihood of promoting women compared to an opt-in
promotion scheme. We address these issues in our second study.




3. Study 2: Does Competition Choice Architecture Negatively Impact
Evaluation of Women?
To rule out the possibility that an opt-out choice framework might be associated with negative
evaluations, we designed a second study using a yoked experimental design (Anicich et al. 2015,
DeCelles et al. 2019, Harmatz and Lapuc 1968) to examine how opt-out framing impacts
promotion decisions made by evaluators.


3.1 Experimental Design
Participants. We recruited 1,007 participants from Amazon's Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to
participate in our study. Research has shown that participants from MTurk are a diverse and high-
quality sample when compensated adequately and comprehension and attention checks are in place
(Buhrmester et al. 2011). In adherence to our preregistration, 9 we excluded all participants who
failed our comprehension check, because our manipulation of the choice architecture of the
competition was contingent on understanding the instructions. One hundred and eighty participants
were excluded, resulting in a final sample of 827 participants (42% women; Mage = 37, SD = 11;
primarily Caucasian (79%)). Participants received $1.50 for participating in the 15-minute survey,
and were eligible to earn a bonus of $0.75 based on their choices in the task.
Procedure. We adapted a 2-stage design used in previous research on gender and selection
decision (Bohnet et al. 2016), and programmed the experiment in oTree (Chen et al. 2016).
Specifically, we assigned participants in Study 1 to the role of applicants (henceforth we refer to
them as "applicants"), whereas participants of Study 2 assumed the role of evaluators (henceforth
referred to as "evaluators"). Specifically, we asked evaluators to make a choice to promote an
applicant to a higher position with a higher wage. We presented them brief profiles of the

9
    This experiment was preregistered at the American Economic Association's Trial Registry (number 0004030).


                                                        13
applicants from Study 1, which informed them of applicants' past absolute performance on the
math task in Stage 2 of Study 1,10 and information on the applicants' age, gender, year of study,
and major field of study. Their central task was to make a selection decision on whom to promote.
If an evaluator selected an applicant whose Stage 3 performance in Study 1 was higher than the
other applicants' Stage 3 performance in their group, then they would be eligible to receive a bonus
of $0.75.
         Evaluators were shown three groups of four applicants, and asked to make three promotion
decisions. The $0.75 bonus compensation would be based on one of the three decisions, chosen at
random (evaluators would only be eligible for the bonus if they selected a tournament winner in at
least one of the choices). This would make all three choices incentive-compatible.
         We manipulated choice architecture of the competition by randomly assigning evaluators
to one of two conditions: an opt-in condition or an opt-out condition. In both conditions, we
informed evaluators of the nature of the task, and told them that applicants had participated in
multiple stages of a math task in a previous study, and that at one point they made a decision about
whether or not to compete. In both conditions, we told the evaluators that applicants completed a
math task for 5 minutes and had a tournament compensation in the first stage of the task (Stage 2
of the actual task in Study 1), whereby if the focal applicant had the highest number of correct
answers among 3 other applicants, they would receive $2 for each correct answer; if not, they
received nothing. Then, in the opt-in condition, we informed the evaluators of the opt-in choice
architecture into competition in the second Stage (Stage 3 of the actual task in Study 2).
Conversely, in the opt-out condition, we informed evaluators of the opt-out choice frame.
         Finally, evaluators in both the opt-in and opt-out conditions received information about the
distribution of scores in their respective conditions. Specifically, evaluators in the opt-in and opt-
out conditions in Study 2 were shown a histogram of the distribution of scores, average score, and
range of scores of applicants who had been assigned to the opt-in and opt-out condition in Study
1, respectively. Following these instructions, evaluators completed two comprehension check
items that asked about the nature of the task and the nature of the choice that applicants were given.



10
  We chose to use Stage 2 scores as the measure of past performance, as there were slight gender differences in Stage
1 scores, and because Stage 2 was the Stage that immediately preceded Stage 3, which we used as our benchmark of
a) whether the applicant entered the applicant pool and b) whether the applicant had later gone on to actually win the
tournament or not.

                                                         14
       To create the applicant pools, we selected the data of applicants who had chosen the
tournament in Study 1 to be displayed in Study 2. We did this because applicants who chose the
piece-rate payment in Study 1 had self-eliminated out of the applicant pool, and in a real
promotion, would not be seen, much less considered, by the evaluator. We then split and matched
the applicant data by condition ­ evaluators assigned to the opt-in condition in Study 2 would
evaluate applicants who had been assigned to the opt-in condition in Study 1, and evaluators
assigned to the opt-out condition in Study 2 would evaluate applicants who had been assigned to
the opt-out condition in Study 1.
       There were two male and two female applicants in each of the groups. The three groups
differed in their composition of past performance of the two top scorers: a group where a male
applicant's past score clearly dominates a female applicant's past score (M-high score), a group
where a female applicant's past score clearly dominates a male applicant's past score (F-high
score), and a group whereby a male applicant's score was in a close-tie with a female applicant's
score (close-tie). We defined a close-tie as a difference of 1 or 0 between the top male and female's
scores. We presented the three groups to each evaluator in random order.
       To generate these groups, our program first split the applicant dataset by condition, then
took the total number of applicants who had selected the tournament in Stage 3 in each condition.
The program then removed applicants who had selected the tournament but whose score was in
the bottom quartile, as a way to retain only applicants who had passed a "qualification" threshold.
Then, the program randomly selected two male and female applicants from the applicant pool, and
classified the applicants into one of the three group types as defined above. The program continued
to generate these applicant groups of two men and two women without replacement until there
were no more applicants. If there were at least one group within each of the three group categories
we specified (male-dominated, female-dominated, and close-tie), the program then proceeded to
randomly select one of the groups within each group category to be presented to the evaluator. If
there was no such group in one of the three group categories, the program took the initial applicant
dataset and restarted this group creation process.
       For each group, we showed the evaluators each applicant's profiles first sequentially, then
jointly in a summary page where we presented all four applicant's profiles simultaneously. On this
summary page, we asked them to indicate whom they would like to promote. For each applicant,
we provided information on their gender, age, year of study, program of study, and score in Stage


                                                 15
2, which were taken directly from that applicant's actual demographic information that they had
filled out in Study 1. Further, for each applicant, we included a brief reminder of the choice
architecture of the competition. For evaluators and applicants in the opt-in condition, evaluators
were told that the applicant had by default enrolled in piece-rate but had opted in to compete. For
evaluators and applicants in the opt-out condition, evaluators were told that the applicant had by
default enrolled in the competition and did not opt out of the competition.
        After making the three promotion choices, evaluators completed a brief demographic
survey that included questions about their gender, age, ethnicity, social-political orientation,
economic-political orientation, and experience making hiring and promotion decisions.


3.2 Results
Our main outcome of interest is whether an evaluator chose a female applicant from each of the
three 4-participant groups that they had to consider, as a function of the type of groups (male-
dominated, female-dominated, or close-tie) and the choice frame condition to which the evaluators
were assigned. Thus each observation in this analysis is at the evaluator-group level (n=2,481).
        Figure 6 shows that the reported score (i.e., past performance on the math task as displayed
to the evaluator) of the four applicants in a group was a strong predictor of the gender of the
selected applicant. In groups where a man had a higher reported score than the best scoring woman,
women were selected in about 30% of the cases; in close-tie groups, women were slightly more
likely than men to be selected; finally, in groups where a woman had the top score, women were
chosen about 80% of the cases. In contrast, the choice architecture condition did not relate to the
gender of the chosen applicants. In the case of close-ties, the share of selected participants who
were women was a little lower in the opt-out than in the opt-in condition, but the difference is not
statistically significant.
        In Figure 7 we focus on the close-tie groups (one observation per evaluator, N=826). These
are the most interesting cases because they are the ones where gender bias is more likely to occur
(Bohnet et al. 2016). Within the close-ties, we further distinguish three cases: the top-scoring
woman in the group having a score that is lower (by one point) than the top-scoring man; the top-
scoring woman having the identical score to the top-scoring man; and the top-scoring woman
having a score that is higher (by one point) than the top-scoring man. The figure shows, again, that
the score ranking is a strong predictor of the gender of the selected applicants, whereas the


                                                 16
condition (opt-in vs. opt-out) did not affect the selection. The regression estimates in Table 5
confirm the descriptive evidence. The outcome variable is a binary indicator for whether the
evaluator chose a woman in a close-tie group; the main explanatory variables of interest are
indicator for the different subgroups within the close-tie cases, and interactions between these
indicators and an indicator for whether the particular group was assigned to the opt-out condition
in Study 1. The regressions also include indicators for the socio-demographic characteristics of the
evaluators that we collected, and their interactions with the opt-out dummy. The estimates confirm
the strong explanatory variables of the score rank, with no difference between opt-in and opt-out
choice framing. Interestingly, evaluators who self-identified as liberal on social issues were more
likely, all else constant, to select a woman, and those who identified as conservative on economic
issues were less likely (p=0.1) to select a woman in the opt-out condition. Table 6 shows that the
evaluator condition did not affect the probability that the highest scorer in the stage 2 tournament
was a woman.
       Finally, in Table 7 we report estimates of regressions at the individual participant level,
where the outcome variable is an indicator for whether a particular participant was selected from
their group. The regressors include the characteristics of the participants that we included for the
evaluators to review: gender, year of study, age, major, and score. We also add an indicator for
whether the participant had the highest score in their group of four, an indicator for whether the
participant was in the opt-out condition, and the interaction of the indicators for the female gender
and the opt-out condition. The strongest predictors of the probability to be selected are being the
top scorer in a group, and, conditional on being the top scorer, the raw score.
       Even when controlling for individual characteristics and performance of the participants,
the estimates show an evaluation bias in favor of promoting women in our sample. Some of the
previous results corroborate this overall gender bias in favor of women; for example, in cases
where there was a close or perfect tie between a man and a woman, evaluators chose the woman
in more than 50% of the cases. This slant toward selecting a woman is largely due to the large
proportion of evaluators who identified themselves as socially liberal. For example, if we split the
sample between socially liberal on the one hand, and socially moderate or conservative on the
other hand, the probability of hiring a woman is estimated to be 6.6 percentage points higher than
men in the former subset of evaluators (p<0.000), and only 2.6 percentage points higher in the



                                                 17
latter subset (p=0.073). In neither subsample, however, does the choice architecture assigned to
the evaluators have any explanatory power in the choice of a man or a woman.
       This second experiment therefore shows that the choice architecture of the decision to
compete did not affect the likelihood at which evaluators promote female applicants. This
addressed concerns about negative unintended consequences of an opt-out promotion scheme,
whereby evaluators may see women as being less motivated and desiring the promotion less.
Specifically, we find that evaluators are just as likely to promote a woman under an opt-out
promotion scheme compared to an opt-in promotion scheme.


4. Conclusions
Decades of research have investigated how to close the gender gap in high-level positions in
organizations, to limited success. Promotion processes and the ascension to the highest ranks of
an organization have the features of a competitive process, and several studies have demonstrated
that women have greater aversion to competition than men. Therefore, this discrepancy in the
propensity to compete has been put forth as an explanation for the gender gap in high-level
organizational positions. Our study suggests that women's aversion to competition may depend on
the context and, in particular, on how the option to compete is presented. Specifically, we find that
an "opt-out" framing eliminates gender differences in willingness to compete.
       One organizational implication that is amenable to empirical testing in the field is that
changing the choice frame in the definition of applicant pools for promotions may lead to more
women competing for higher positions; in turn, this would allow organizations to take advantage
of a larger talent pool. In the debate between whether to "fix the women" or "fix the system", our
study provides some support to the latter approach.
       In addition to contributing to scholarship by providing a more nuanced view of the origins
of potential aversion of women to competitive endeavors, our study also calls for further analyses
to identify the mechanisms through which an opt-out frame attenuates or even eliminates gender
differences in competitive choices. The choice frame may affect, for example, the perception of
the type of competitive environment participants are facing. Or, different choice frames, and in
particular the nature of the default option, may signal different social norms concerning
competition and participation in promotion "tournaments". Individuals may also perceive a default
choice to compete as more or less consistent with their gender identity, as opposed to an active

                                                 18
choice. Our hope is that future studies will build on the insights from our experiments to explore
these questions and, by doing so, provide further insights to organizations attempting to close the
gender gap in high-level positions.




References

Anicich EM, Fast NJ, Halevy N, Galinsky AD (2015) When the Bases of Social Hierarchy Collide: Power
     Without Status Drives Interpersonal Conflict. Organ. Sci.:orsc.2015.1019.
BBC World Service (2018) News Hour, Donna Strickland: "Nobody expects the Nobel prize."
Bernardi RA, Bosco SM, Vassill KM (2006) Does Female Representation on Boards of Directors Associate
     With Fortune 's "100 Best Companies to Work For" List? Bus. Soc. 45(2):235­248.
Bohnet I (2016) What works: Gender equality by design (Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.,
     Cambridge, MA).
Bohnet I, van Geen A, Bazerman M (2016) When Performance Trumps Gender Bias: Joint vs. Separate
     Evaluation. Manage. Sci. 62(5):1225­1234.
Bosquet C, Combes PP, García-Peñalosa C (2018) Gender and Promotions: Evidence from Academic
     Economists in France. Scand. J. Econ.
Buhrmester M, Kwang T, Gosling SD (2011) Amazon's Mechanical Turk. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6(1):3­
     5.
Chang EH, Milkman KL, Gromet DM, Rebele RW, Massey C, Duckworth AL, Grant AM (2019) The
     mixed effects of online diversity training. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116(16):7778­7783.
Chen DL, Schonger M, Wickens C (2016) oTree--An open-source platform for laboratory, online, and
     field experiments. J. Behav. Exp. Financ. 9:88­97.
Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC, Metrick A (2002) Defined Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant
     Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance. :67­114.
Chugh D (2018) Get from diversity to inclusion: ask 4 questions about your meetings. Ted. Retrieved
     (January 5, 2019), https://ideas.ted.com/how-do-you-get-from-diversity-to-inclusion-ask-these-4-
     questions-about-your-meetings/.
Daubman KA, Heatherington L, Ahn A (1992) Gender and the self-presentation of academic achievement.
     Sex Roles 27(3­4):187­204.
DeCelles KA, DeVoe SE, Rafaeli A, Agasi S (2019) Helping to reduce fights before flights: How
     environmental stressors in organizations shape customer emotions and customer-employee
     interactions. Pers. Psychol. 72(1):49­80.
Dezsö CL, Ross DG (2012) Does female representation in top management improve firm performance? A
     panel data investigation. Strateg. Manag. J. 33(9):1072­1089.
Dobbin F, Kalev A (2016) Why Diversity Programs Fail. Harv. Bus. Rev. 94(7).
Downs JS, Loewenstein G, Wisdom J (2009) Strategies for Promoting Healthier Food Choices. Am. Econ.
     Rev. 99(2):159­164.
Exley CL, Niederle M, Vesterlund L (2019) Knowing When to Ask: The Cost of Leaning In. J. Pol. Econ.,
     forthcoming.
Exley, CL, Kessler JB (2019) The Gender Gap in Self-Promotion. National Bureau of Economic Research
     WP 26345.

                                                  19
Fischbacher U (2007) z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments. Exp. Econ. 10(2):171­
      178.
Fitzsimons GM, Kay AC, Kim JY (2018) "Lean In" Messages and the Illusion of Control. Harv. Bus. Rev.
Flory JA, Leibbrandt A, List JA (2015) Do Competitive Workplaces Deter Female Workers? A Large-Scale
      Natural Field Experiment on Job Entry Decisions. Rev. Econ. Stud. 82(1):122­155.
Harmatz MG, Lapuc PS (1968) A technique for employing a yoked control in free operant verbal
      conditioning experiments. Behav. Res. Ther. 6(4):483.
Healy A, Pate J (2011) Can Teams Help to Close the Gender Competition Gap? Econ. J. 121(555):1192­
      1204.
Johnson EJ, Bellman S, Lohse GL (2002) Defaults, Framing and Privacy: Why Opting In-Opting Out.
      Mark. Lett. 13(1):5­15.
Johnson EJ, Goldstein D (2003) Do defaults save lives? Science (80-. ). 302(5649):1338­1339.
Johnson SK, Murphy SE, Zewdie S, Reichard RJ (2008) The strong, sensitive type: Effects of gender
      stereotypes and leadership prototypes on the evaluation of male and female leaders. Organ. Behav.
      Hum. Decis. Process. 106(1):39­60.
Kalev A, Dobbin F, Kelly E (2006) Best Practices or Best Guesses? Assessing the Efficacy of Corporate
      Affirmative Action and Diversity Policies. Am. Sociol. Rev. 71(4):589­617.
Kim JY, Fitzsimons GM, Kay AC (2018) Lean in messages increase attributions of women's responsibility
      for gender inequality. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 115(6):974­1001.
Lazear EP, Rosen S (1981) Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts. J. Polit. Econ.
      89(5):841­864.
Leslie LM (2018) Diversity Initiative Effectiveness: A Typological Theory of Unintended Consequences.
      Acad. Manag. Rev.:amr.2017.0087.
Macrae CN, Bodenhausen G V., Milne AB, Jetten J (1994) Out of mind but back in sight: Stereotypes on
      the rebound. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 67(5):808­817.
Marteau TM, Bekker H (1992) The development of a six-item short-form of the state scale of the
      Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 31(3):301­306.
Mols F, Haslam SA, Jetten J, Steffens NK (2015) Why a nudge is not enough: A social identity critique of
      governance by stealth. Eur. J. Polit. Res. 54(1):81­98.
Moss-Racusin CA, Rudman LA (2010) Disruptions in Women's Self-Promotion: The Backlash Avoidance
      Model. Psychol. Women Q. 34(2):186­202.
Niederle M, Segal C, Vesterlund L (2013) How Costly Is Diversity? Affirmative Action in Light of Gender
      Differences in Competitiveness. Manage. Sci. 59(1):1­16.
Niederle M, Vesterlund L (2007) Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men Compete Too Much?
      Q. J. Econ. 122(3):1067­1101.
Reuben E, Rey-Biel P, Sapienza P, Zingales L (2012) The emergence of male leadership in competitive
      environments. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 83(1):111­117.
Rudman LA (1998) Self-promotion as a risk factor for women: The costs and benefits of
      counterstereotypical impression management. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 74(3):629­645.
Rudman LA, Glick P (2001) Prescriptive Gender Stereotypes and Backlash Toward Agentic Women. J.
      Soc. Issues 57(4):743­762.
Samek A (2017) Management Science Gender Differences in Job Entry Decisions: A University-Wide
      Field Experiment Gender Differences in Job Entry Decisions: A University-Wide Field Experiment.
      :1­10.
Samuelson W, Zeckhauser R (1988) Status Quo Bias in Decision Making.


                                                  20
Sanchez JI, Medkik N (2004) The Effects of Diversity Awareness Training on Differential Treatment. Gr.
     Organ. Manag. 29(4):517­536.
Sandberg S (2013) Lean in: Women, work, and the will to lead. (Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group).
Selinger E, Whyte K (2011) Is There a Right Way to Nudge? The Practice and Ethics of Choice
     Architecture. Sociol. Compass 5(10):923­935.
Spielberger C, Gorsuch R (1983) State-trait anxiety inventory for adults: Manual and sample: Manual,
     instrument and scoring guide (Consulting Psychologists Press).
Thaler RH, Sunstein CR (2008) Nudge: improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness (Yale
     University Press).
Tluczek A, Henriques JB, Brown RL (2009) Support for the reliability and validity of a six-item state
     anxiety scale derived from the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. J. Nurs. Meas. 17(1):19­28.
Weber A, Zulehner C (2010) Female Hires and the Success of Start-up Firms. Am. Econ. Rev. 100(2):358­
     361.




                                                 21
Figure 1: In Study 1, the distribution of correct answers in Stages 1 and 2 did not differ
between men and women




Notes: The graphs report the observed cumulative distribution of correct responses by men and women in stages 1 and
2 of the experiment.




                                                        22
Figure 2: In Study 1, the opt-out choice framework for the participation in a tournament in
Stage 3 eliminated the gender difference in the choice to compete in the tournament




Notes: "Opt in" indicates that participants were in the condition where the default compensation was piece rate. "Opt
out" indicates the condition where participants were assigned to competing in a winner-take all tournament within
each group of four by default, but could opt-out and instead be compensated on a piece rate basis. The vertical lines
indicate 95% confidence interval for the mean percentages.




                                                         23
Figure 3: In Study 1, average correct responses in Stage 3 did not differ by condition, within
a chosen compensation method




Notes: The vertical lines indicate 95% confidence interval for the means.




                                                         24
Figure 4: In Study 1, women in the opt-out condition achieved higher average monetary gains
than men did; the overall additional monetary gains were more equally distributed between
men and women in the opt-out compared to the opt-in condition.




Notes: The graph reports the average difference between the average dollar payoff that participants realized in Stage
3 and the payoff that they would have realized if they chose the alternative compensation scheme, given the number
of correct answers they gave in stage 3. Each column represents a combination of gender, the actual choice of the
participant, and the experimental condition (Opt in vs. Opt out). For the participants who selected a tournament-based
compensation scheme, the "counterfactual" payoff is the number of correct responses that they gave in Stage 3
multiplied by $0.5. For the participants who selected piece rate, the counterfactual payoff is zero if they would have
not won the tournament in the group to which they would be assigned, and equal to the number of their correct answers
multiplied by $2 had they been the winners of the groups to which they were assigned.




                                                         25
Figure 5: In Study 1, average anxiety levels were slightly higher for women, but did not differ
by condition and choice of compensation




Notes: The measure of anxiety is the average of the scores (integer numbers between 1 and 4) that each respondent
assigned to five questions of the State Anxiety Inventory (SAI) (Marteau and Bekker 1992), adapted from the original
scale (Spielberger and Gorsuch 1983). A higher value indicates a higher anxiety score.




                                                        26
Figure 6: In Study 2, the reported score of the four contestants in a group were a strong
predictor of the gender of the selected participants




Notes: "Female (Male) high score dominated" groups indicate groups of four contestants where a woman (man) was
the contestant with the highest reported score, and this score was strictly greater than the score of the best-performing
man (woman) in that group. "Close-tie" groups are the groups of four contestant in which a woman and a man were
both the highest performers (equal reported score), or a woman (man) had the highest reported score, and a man
(woman) had a reported score that was 1 point lower.




                                                           27
Figure 7: In Study 2, even within "close-tie" groups, score was strong predictor of the gender
of the selected applicants, whereas the condition (opt-in vs. opt-out) did not affect the
selection




Notes: "Top score: (Man)" indicated the close-tie groups where a man (woman) had the highest reported score, and a
woman (man) had a reported score that was 1 point lower. "Perfect tie" indicated the groups where two contestants,
a man and a woman, had the same, highest reported score. The vertical lines indicate 95% confidence interval for
the means.




                                                       28
Table 1: Study 1 - Regression analyses of the choice of tournament-based compensation in
Stage 3

                          Outcome variable:                       Choice of tournament in stage 3
                                                      (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)                  (5)

Woman                                             -0.137***
                                                    (0.045)
Opt in: Woman                                                    -0.254*** -0.241*** -0.247*** -0.246***
                                                                   (0.070)   (0.071)   (0.075)   (0.072)
Opt out: Man                                                        0.043     0.053     0.030     0.040
                                                                   (0.068)   (0.068)   (0.072)   (0.069)
Opt out: Woman                                                      0.032     0.038     0.033     0.035
                                                                   (0.072)   (0.074)   (0.076)   (0.073)
# correct answ. in stage 2                                                 0.021***     0.004  0.025***
                                                                             (0.007)   (0.009)   (0.007)
# correct in stage 2 - # correct in stage 1                                   -0.004    -0.009    -0.005
                                                                             (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.009)
Guessed rank in stage 2 tournament                                                   -0.132***
                                                                                       (0.033)
(Over)confidence                                                                                0.044**
                                                                                                 (0.022)
Observations                                         482             482       482       482       482
Pseudo R2                                           0.0168         0.0558    0.0745     0.115    0.0823

Notes: The estimates indicate marginal effects from probit regressions. The outcome variable is a binary indicator
equal to 1 if a participant selected tournament based compensation in stage 3, and 0 if they selected piece rate
compensation. Regressors include: the experimental conditions (opt-in vs. opt-out frame) interacted with the gender
of the participant (the omitted category is men in the opt-in condition); the number of correct responses in stage 2, and
the difference between the correct answers in stage 1 and those in Stage 1; the positions that each participant guessed
to have achieved in the tournament in stage 2 (out of four position, rank 1 being the winner); and the difference
between the actual position and the guessed position, as a measure of (over) confidence. The baseline is a male
participant in the opt-in condition, with 8.52 correct answers in stage 1, 10.24 correct answers in stage 2, a guess for
their rank in stage 2 of 2.05, and a confidence (actual rank minus guessed rank) of 0.31. The share of mean in the opt-
in conditions who chose a tournament is 0.725 (or 72.5%). Estimated standard errors, clustered at the session level
(there were 36 sessions) are in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 (two-sided tests).




                                                            29
Table 2: Study 1 - Number and share of payoff-maximizing choices by gender, choice and
condition

                                         Number of payoff-            Percent of payoff
                                                                                                          N
                                         maximizing choices          maximizing choices
Opt in, piece rate: Men                         23                         76.7%                         30
Opt in, tournament: Men                         38                         48.1%                         79
Opt out, piece rate: Men                        23                         92.0%                         25
Opt out, tournament: Men                        34                         42.0%                         81
Opt in, piece rate: Women                       58                         79.5%                         73
Opt in, tournament: Women                       23                         35.9%                         64
Opt out, piece rate: Women                      25                         78.1%                         32
Opt out, tournament: Women                      48                         49.0%                         98

Notes: The table reports the number and percentage, of subjects who made the payoff maximizing choice for them in
Stage 3 by experimental condition, gender, and choice of compensation scheme. We established the payoff
maximizing choice as follows. We used the estimated coefficients from a probit regression of whether a participant
won their tournament in Stage 2 on the number of correct responses in that stage, to predict the likelihood of winning
a tournament in Stage 3 given their performance in Stage 3 (recall that individuals who chose the tournament in Stage
3 had their performance compared against three participants from Stage 2). We then calculated the expected payoff
from choosing a tournament or a piece rate compensation for each participant. For the piece rate, the expected payoff
was $0.50 X the number of correct responses in Stage 3. The expected payoff from a tournament was $2 X the number
of correct responses in Stage 3 X the predicted probability of winning the tournament for that subject in Stage 3. We
classify a participant as having made their payoff-maximizing choice if they selected the compensation scheme that
gave them the higher expected payoff. In cases where the expected payoffs from the two compensation scheme were
close to each other (less than $1 in absolute difference; this happened if a participant solved 12 questions correctly),
we randomized the assignment to having made the payoff maximizing decision or not (we interpreted small differences
as making a participant indifferent between the two schemes).




                                                          30
Table 3: Study 1 - Average monetary gains (losses) from choosing a compensation scheme
in Stage 3, compared to "counterfactual" choice


                                                        Sum of net gains Avg. net gains                   N

        Gender
        Men                                                      $790.5               $3.68              215
        Women                                                    $746.0               $2.79              267
        Choice architecture
        Opt in                                                   $767.5               $3.12              246
        Opt out                                                  $769.0               $3.26              236
        Conditions in stage 3, by gender
        Opt in: Men                                              $465.0               $4.27              109
        Opt in: Women                                            $302.5               $2.21              137
        Opt out: Men                                             $325.5               $3.07              106
        Opt out: Women                                           $443.5               $3.41              130
        Conditions and compensation
        choices in stage 3, by gender
        Opt in, piece rate: Men                                  -$20.0              -$0.67               30
        Opt out, piece rate: Men                                 $85.0               $3.40                25
        Opt in, piece rate: Women                                $68.5               $0.94                73
        Opt out, piece rate: Women                               $34.0               $1.06                32
        Opt in, tournament: Men                                  $485.0              $6.14                79
        Opt out, tournament: Men                                 $240.5              $2.97                81
        Opt in, tournament: Women                                $234.0              $3.66                64
        Opt out, tournament: Women                               $409.5              $4.18                98

Notes: this table reports both the total gains (over all participants) and the average gains per participants from choosing
a compensation scheme over the alternative one. For the participants who selected a tournament-based compensation
scheme, the "counterfactual" payoff is the number of correct responses that they gave in Stage 3 multiplied by $0.5.
For the participants who selected piece rate, the counterfactual payoff is zero if they would have not won the
tournament in the group to which they would be assigned, and equal to the number of their correct answers multiplied
by $2 had they been the winners of the groups to which they were assigned.




                                                            31
Table 4: Study 1 - Additional specification for compensation choice regressions.

                                                                         Choice of tournament
                                                  Outcome variable:
                                                                               in stage 3

                           Opt in: Woman                                        -0.444
                                                                                (0.308)
                           Opt out: Man                                         -0.006
                                                                                (0.375)
                           Opt out: Woman                                       -0.491
                                                                                (0.329)
                           # correct answ. in stage 2                            0.001
                                                                                (0.021)
                           # correct in stage 2 - # correct in stage 1          -0.013
                                                                                (0.020)
                           Guessed rank in stage 2 tournament                 -0.199***
                                                                                (0.061)
                           # correct answ. in stage 2                            0.006
                           x Opt in: Woman                                      (0.023)
                           # correct answ. in stage 2                           -0.003
                           x Opt out: Man                                       (0.028)
                           # correct answ. in stage 2                            0.006
                           x Opt out: Woman                                     (0.025)
                           # correct in stage 2 - # correct in stage 1          -0.006
                           x Opt in: Woman                                      (0.030)
                           # correct in stage 2 - # correct in stage 1          -0.005
                           x Opt out: Man                                       (0.033)
                           # correct in stage 2 - # correct in stage 1           0.037
                           x Opt out: Woman                                     (0.027)
                           Guessed rank in stage 2 tournament                    0.063
                           x Opt in: Woman                                      (0.064)
                           Guessed rank in stage 2 tournament                    0.030
                           x Opt out: Man                                       (0.076)
                           Guessed rank in stage 2 tournament                  0.176**
                           x Opt out: Woman                                     (0.086)
                           Observations                                          482
                           Pseudo R2                                            0.129



Notes: The estimates indicate marginal effects from probit regressions The outcome variable is a binary indicator
equal to 1 if a participant selected tournament based compensation in stage 3, and 0 if they selected piece rate
compensation. Regressors include the experimental conditions (opt-in vs. opt-out frame) interacted with the gender of
the participant (the omitted category is men in the opt-in condition); the number of correct responses in stage 2, and
the difference between the correct answers in stage 2 and those in stage 1; the positions that each participant guessed
to have achieved in the tournament in stage 2 (out of four position, rank 1 being the winner); and interaction of the
gender of the participant with correct responses in Stage 2, and the difference between the correct answers in stage 1
and those in Stage 1; the positions that each participant guessed to have achieved in the tournament in stage 2. The
baseline is a male participant in the opt-in condition, with 8.52 correct answers in Stage 1, 10.24 correct answers in
Stage 2, a guess for their rank in stage 2 of 2.04, and a confidence (actual rank minus guessed rank) of 0.31. Estimated
standard errors, clustered at the session level (there were 36 sessions) are in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.


                                                            32
Table 5: Study 2 Regression analyses of the determinants of the selection of a female
participant by evaluators

                              Outcome variable:                    Choice of a female participant
                                         Sample:                       Only close-tie groups
                         Regression specification:             OLS      Probit         OLS        Probit
                                                               (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)
Regressors:
Features of study 1 and Study 1 participants
Opt-out condition                                         -0.092*         -0.097*          -0.087          -0.096
                                                           (0.056)         (0.059)         (0.055)         (0.059)
Top score: Man                                           -0.386***       -0.384***       -0.380***       -0.388***
                                                           (0.053)         (0.053)         (0.053)         (0.054)
Top score: Woman                                         0.139***        0.175***        0.142***        0.180***
                                                           (0.052)         (0.064)         (0.051)         (0.064)
Opt-out condition X Top score: Man                          0.092           0.095           0.095           0.103
                                                           (0.077)         (0.078)         (0.076)         (0.079)
Opt-out condition X Top score: Woman                        0.090           0.092           0.086           0.094
                                                           (0.074)         (0.092)         (0.074)         (0.093)
Controls (characteristics of evaluators)                                                     X                X
Constant                                                  0.701***                       0.748***
                                                           (0.038)                        (0.054)
Observations                                                 826             826             826             826
R-squared                                                   0.195                           0.218
Pseudo R2                                                                   0.150                          0.171
Notes: The outcome variable is a binary indicator equal to 1 if an evaluator selected a woman from a group of four
participants. The sample includes only groups of participants with a "close-tie", i.e. where the difference in score (in
Study 1) between the highest performing man and the highest performing woman was -1, 0 and 1. The variable "Opt-
out condition" is equal to 1 if the participants in a a group were, in study 1, assigned to the Opt-out condition, and 0
otherwise. "Top score: Man (Woman)" is equal to 1 if, in a given group, the top scoring man (woman) had one more
correct answer than the top scoring woman (man), and zero otherwise; the omitted category is, therefore, the groups
with a perfect tie between the top scoring man and woman. Control variables include the various characteristics of the
evaluators that we collected: gender, age, educational attainment, social and economic orientations, and previous
experience in HR work. For the Probit specifications, we report the estimates of the marginal effects. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                          33
Table 6: Study 2 - Regression analyses of the determinants of the selection of the top scoring
female participant by evaluators, conditional on selecting a woman

                                                      Choice of the woman with the highest score in Stage 2,
                                Outcome variable:
                                                                 conditional on choosing a woman
                                            Sample:           Full sample                   Close-tie groups
                         Regression specification:         OLS           Probit             OLS           Probit
                                                           (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
Regressors

Opt-out condition                                         -0.004         -0.005            -0.068        -0.068
                                                         (0.045)         (0.043)          (0.073)        (0.074)
Male-dominated group                                   -0.339***       -0.381***
                                                         (0.055)         (0.069)
Female-dominated group                                  0.280***       0.295***
                                                         (0.038)         (0.039)
Opt-out condition X Male-dominated group                  -0.015         -0.024
                                                         (0.079)         (0.114)
Opt-out condition X Female-dominated group                -0.022         -0.028
                                                         (0.054)         (0.058)
Top score: Man                                                                             -0.006        -0.004
                                                                                          (0.087)        (0.088)
Top score: Woman                                                                           0.036          0.037
                                                                                          (0.073)        (0.074)
Opt-out condition X Top score: Man                                                         -0.013        -0.021
                                                                                          (0.124)        (0.128)
Opt-out condition X Top score: Woman                                                       0.155          0.162
                                                                                          (0.102)        (0.100)
Constant                                                0.536***                         0.567***
                                                         (0.045)                          (0.076)

Observations                                              1,390          1,390              477            477
R-squared                                                 0.178                            0.065
Pseudo R2                                                                0.139                            0.049

Notes: The outcome variable is a binary indicator equal to 1 if an evaluator selected a woman and that woman was the
top scorer (winner) of the Stage 3 tournament in Study 1. The variable "Opt-out condition" is equal to 1 if the
participants in a a group were, in study 1, assigned to the Opt-out condition, and 0 otherwise. "Male (Female) ­
dominated group" is equal to 1 if in a given group, a man (woman) had a score from Stage 2 of Study 1 that was
greater than the one of the best scoring woman (man) by 2 or more. The omitted category includes the close-tie groups.
"Top score: Man (Woman)" is equal to 1 if, in a given close-tie group, the top scoring man (woman) had one more
correct answer than the top scoring woman (man), and zero otherwise; the omitted category is, therefore, the groups
with a perfect tie between the top scoring man and woman. Control variables include the various characteristics of the
evaluators that we collected: gender, age, educational attainment, social and economic orientations, and previous
experience in HR work. For the Probit specifications, we report the estimates of the marginal effects. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                                         34
Table 7: Study 2 - Regression analyses of the determinants of the selection of a participant
                  Outcome variable:                                                     Participant is selected
                                                                                                  Socially moderate and
                              Sample:                       Full sample                                                             Socially liberal evaluators
                                                                                                 conservative evaluators
           Regression specification:        OLS         Probit         OLS         Probit          OLS          Probit                 OLS             Probit

                                            (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)              (8)

  Regressors :
  Woman                                  0.064***     0.064***      0.048***      0.067***         0.026*           0.029           0.066***         0.102***
                                          (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.008)       (0.013)         (0.015)         (0.022)           (0.012)          (0.021)
  Opt-out condition                        0.003        0.003         0.009         0.013           0.009           0.010             0.009            0.015
                                          (0.012)      (0.013)       (0.008)       (0.013)         (0.011)         (0.017)           (0.010)          (0.017)
  Woman X Opt-out condition               -0.006       -0.006        -0.012        -0.013          -0.009           -0.005            -0.013          -0.017
                                          (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.012)       (0.018)         (0.021)         (0.031)           (0.017)          (0.027)
  Score in Stage 1                                                  0.017***      0.020***        0.015***        0.016***          0.019***         0.025***
                                                                     (0.001)       (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.003)
  Had highest score in Stage 1                                      0.626***      0.620***        0.599***        0.595***          0.647***         0.641***
                                                                     (0.008)       (0.012)         (0.020)         (0.021)           (0.017)          (0.018)
  Controls (charateristics of the
                                                                         X             X              X                X                 X                X
  participants)
  Constant                               0.218***                    -0.446                        -0.592                             -0.250
                                          (0.009)                    (0.276)                       (0.500)                           (0.384)
  Observations                             9,912         9,912        9,912         9,869           4,584            4,558            5,256             5,239
  R-squared                                0.005                      0.552                         0.501                             0.600
  Pseudo R2                                              0.004                      0.490                           0.438                               0.544

Notes: The outcome variable is a binary indicator equal to 1 if a participant was selected by an evaluator. "Woman" has value of 1 if a participant was a woman,
and zero otherwise. "Opt-out condition" is equal to 1 if the participant was, in Study 1, assigned to the Opt-out condition, and 0 otherwise. "Score in stage 1" is
equal to the number of correct responses that a participant had in the first tournament competition in Study 1, as reported to the evaluators. "Had highest score in
Stage 1" is equal to 1 if the participant was the top scorer among the four participants in a given group. Control variables include the various characteristics of the
participants that we reported to the evaluators: age, year of study, and major. For the Probit specifications, we report the estimates of the marginal effects. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                                                                  35
