                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE IMPACT OF THE GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATION ON INTERNET
                         INTERCONNECTION

                                          Ran Zhuo
                                       Bradley Huffaker
                                          KC Claffy
                                       Shane Greenstein

                                      Working Paper 26481
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26481


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2019, Revised April 2020




The authors thank Tim Bresnahan, Roderick Fanou, Samuel Goldberg, Avi Goldfarb, Ginger Zhe
Jin, Garrett Johnson, Stephen Strowes, the editors and an anonymous referee for helpful
suggestions. We thank Dan Andersen for technical assistance. The authors are grateful to the
Doctoral Office at Harvard Business School for financial support for field work. This research is
partially supported by NSF OAC-1724853, NSF C-ACCEL OIA-1937165, U.S. AFRL
FA8750-18-2-0049. The views and conclusions do not necessarily represent those of the Air
Force Research Laboratory, the U.S. Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ran Zhuo, Bradley Huffaker, KC Claffy, and Shane Greenstein. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of the General Data Protection Regulation on Internet Interconnection
Ran Zhuo, Bradley Huffaker, KC Claffy, and Shane Greenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 26481
November 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. L00,L51,L86

                                        ABSTRACT

The Internet comprises thousands of independently operated networks, interconnected using
bilaterally negotiated data exchange agreements. The European Union (EU)'s General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) imposes strict restrictions on handling of personal data of
European Economic Area (EEA) residents. A close examination of the text of the law suggests
significant cost to application firms. Available empirical evidence confirms reduction in data
usage in the EEA relative to other markets. We investigate whether this decline in derived
demand for data exchange impacts investment in interconnection by networks in the EEA relative
to networks in non-EEA OECD countries. Our data consists of a large sample of interconnection
agreements between networks globally in 2015­2019. All evidence estimates precisely zero
effects: the number of observed agreements, the inferred agreement types, and the number of
observed IP-address-level interconnection points per agreement. We also find economically small
effects of the GDPR on the entry and the observed number of customers of networks. We
conclude there is no visible short run consequence of the GDPR at the internet layer.

Ran Zhuo                                       KC Claffy
Department of Economics                        University of California, San Diego
Harvard University                             San Diego Supercomputer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138                            9500 Gilman Dr. Mail Stop 0505
rzhuo@g.harvard.edu                            La Jolla, CA 92093-0505
                                               kc@caida.org
Bradley Huffaker
University of California, San Diego            Shane Greenstein
San Diego Supercomputer Center                 Technology Operation and Management
9500 Gilman Dr. Mail Stop 0505                 Morgan Hall 439
La Jolla, CA 92093-0505                        Harvard Business School
bradley@caida.org                              Soldiers Field
                                               Boston, MA 02163
                                               and NBER
                                               sgreenstein@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

The Internet comprises thousands of independently owned, managed, and operated networks where

network operators voluntarily exchange data via bilaterally-negotiated agreements (The Internet

Society (2015)). The success of the Internet in creating economic surplus depends on efficient

and cost-effective interconnections negotiated by these networks. Hundreds of billions of dollars

in transactions depend on the internet's operation in the US alone, and these revenues have been

growing rapidly.1 The European Union (EU)'s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) serves

as a landmark privacy law, regulating the collection, processing, and transfers of consumers' per-

sonal data that occur along with these transactions. Since the GDPR's approval in April 2016 and

implementation in May 2018, it has inspired a wave of privacy regulation in countries such as

Brazil, India, Japan, South Korean and the US (Goldberg et al. (2019)). The unprecedented scale

and scope of the GDPR makes it the most important privacy policy since the commercialization

of the internet in the 1990s and many hypothesize it would fundamentally change the internet's

operation and the digital economy.

    This paper investigates whether the GDPR affected investment in the interconnection and

growth of the Internet at the internet layer. Consider this layer as analogous to the postal net-

work. When consumers and providers of online content and services send each other "letters"

containing digital data, networks ("post offices") deliver the mail.2 The GDPR restricts how and

where content and service providers can collect, store, share, and monetize personal information

contained in the "mail," bringing increased cost and complexity for these application firms, which
    1 From 2012 to 2017, payments for access to wireline forms of Internet access reached $88.7 billion, growing more

than 30% in those five years. Payments for access fees to wireless service reached over $90.0 billion, an increase of
57%. In 2017, online advertising contributed $105.9 billion in revenue to the GDP (Gross Domestic Product) among
Internet Publishing and Broadcasting and Web Search Portals. That has grown 250% since 2012. The Census Bureau
estimates electronic retailing at over $545 billion for just electronic shopping and mail order houses (NAICS 4541), a
growth of 65% over the same period.
    2 We will provide a precise definition of "the internet layer" in Section 2. We thank the editors for suggesting this

simple and insightful analogy as an accessible introduction to the internet layer.

                                                           1
may in turn impact the demand for "mail". We investigate whether the networks ("post offices")

reduced investments in their interconnection post-GDPR in response to the decline in the demand

for "mail" services.

    A growing literature measures the impact of privacy regulations on investment in applications,

while little research studies how such laws affect the internet layer. We hypothesize that the GDPR

shapes investment in applications by influencing user participation.3 Participation reacts to rules

limiting the collection, use, storage, and disposal of personal data, and limiting the resale and

(re)disclosure of user data.4 If visitors value these privacy protections, then the GDPR may gen-

erate visits to online sites complying with the GDPR, and those visitors may engage more with

the sites.5 The GDPR simultaneously reduces the value of those visits because it lowers the effec-

tiveness of targeted advertising and targeted sales.6 Thus, it could decrease the ability of firms to

monetize user participation and engagement. These effects operate in opposite directions.

    We also hypothesize that the GDPR raises the operational costs of an online business that col-

lects personal information.7 The prospective enforcement of rules also raises the expectations of

fines and ongoing negotiation, and these prospective costs apply to firms with the largest online

presence. The GDPR also generates additional costs associated with uncertainty about how en-

forcement operates. The increase in operational costs reduces investment in applications. It also

leads to lower valuations for entrepreneurial startups in online commerce.

    We sort through these hypotheses with limited available evidence. Some evidence suggests traf-
    3 Miller and Tucker (2011, 2018) postulate a similar trade-off between participation and the costs of supplying

services in the context of medical services.
    4 We explain the legal details of the GDPR in Section 3 with a close examination of the text of the law. We thank

an anonymous referee for suggesting use this approach to tighten our discussion.
    5 Empirical evidence on this hypothesis, however, is extremely lacking. Moreover, many provisions of the GDPR

are motivated by views that these are intrinsic rights, and do not account for their consequences for online commerce.
See Hoofnagle et al. (2019)).
    6 This is similar to Goldfarb and Tucker (2011). Goldberg et al. (2019) and Aridor et al. (2020) also hypothesize this

effect. We further discuss the cost associated with behavioral changes of content and service providers in Section 3.
    7 We offer a detailed discussion about the various requirements for compliance and their cost in Section 3.




                                                            2
fic diminished after the implementation of the GDPR.8 Some evidence also suggests the negative

effects on investment outweigh the positive, leading to lower overall investment in applications.9

We offer a more thorough discussion on the costs and benefits of the GDPR to consumers and

providers of online content and services in Section 3 with a close examination of the text of the

law, sorting the available academic literature into the taxonomy of costs and benefits.

    Most relevant to the question we study, we further expect a decline in applications to lead to

a decline in traffic and connectivity at the internet layer. This effect operates through changing

the derived demand for data exchange between networks when the supply of applications falls. A

simple bilateral bargaining model between networks, such as one in Besen et al. (2001), formalizes

this intuition.10

    Our study arrives against a backdrop of growing literature assessing the impacts of privacy

regulation such as the GDPR. To date there is little research on the impact of these prior policies'

at the transport or internet layer of the Internet. Our paper adds to the body of research on the

impact of online privacy regulation along this important margin.

    We then dive into the empirical analysis. Our data comes from various data sources collected

by the Center of Applied Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA) at the University of California, San

Diego, and represents the state-of-the-art in inferring the presence of interconnection agreements

and their types between networks on the world-wide scale, based on large collections of raw data

on global network and IP address level topology of the Internet. Our data includes ownership

information of all operating networks around the world, the number of observed agreements per

network and the inferred type of each agreement. Using this network level data we can estimate the
   8 Goldberg  et al. (2019) find some evidence of a decline in traffic at existing firms, while Johnson & Shriver (2019)
and Peukert et al. (2020) find evidence of a shift in traffic to the largest firms.
   9 This evidence points towards a reduction in entrepreneurial ventures and market share of smaller firms in Jia, Jin

and Wagman (2019, 2020).
  10 We present the derivations and comparative statics in Appendix A for interested readers.




                                                           3
number of networks that are customers to a given networks. By combing the topology we can infer

the number of interconnection points between pairs of networks with interconnection agreements

on the level of IP addresses, the numerical labels assigned to unique devices connected to the

Internet. We collect the datasets used in this paper quarterly, monthly or even daily. Most of the

datasets go as far back as to early 2000s and are publicly accessible through CAIDA's website at

http://www.caida.org/data/overview/.11 We explain the collection of the data and the construction

of the variables in Section 4 and provide additional details in Appendix B.

    Using this data, we present descriptives which show persistent and similar growth in internet in-

terconnection of EEA (European Economic Area) countries versus non-EEA OECD (Organization

of Economic Cooperation and Development) countries,12 though the levels of interconnectedness

differ.

    We treat the GDPR's April 2016 approval and May 2018 enforcement as two cutoff dates for

periods post policy treatment. We offer several reasons for this assumption and discuss them in

detail in Section 5.

    We then use a difference-in-differences approach, contrasting interconnection activities by net-

works owned by organizations headquartered in the EEA (treatment group) and networks owned

by organizations headquartered in other countries (control group) before and after the approval

and implementation of the policy. Given the wide territorial scope of the GDPR, we find it impor-

tant to discuss whether it is ever possible to have a reasonable control group.13 We motivate our

choice of control group in several different ways and discuss them thoroughly in Section 5. We

also acknowledge the limitations of our empirical approach in the same section.

    Contrasting changes in EEA networks' interconnection behavior before and after April 2016
  11 Formore information about the data sources used in this paper, please see the data appendix (Appendix B).
  12 Pleasesee Appendix Table B1 for lists of EEA countries and non-EEA OECD countries.
  13 We are very grateful to the editors and an anonymous referee for highlighting this key issue.




                                                        4
and May 2018 relative to non-EEA OECD networks', we estimate precise zero effects across

multiple measures. Networks in the EEA are similar to networks in non-EEA OECD countries

in terms of the growth in the number of interconnecting parties and types of agreements reached.

Networks' affiliation with the EEA also does not affect the observed numbers of IP-address-level

interconnection points between each pair of interconnecting networks. We also find economically

small effects of the GDPR on the entry and the number of networks that are customers of networks

in EEA countries relative to non-EEA OECD countries. Overall, we discover no discernible change

in EEA networks' interconnecting behavior, rejecting the hypothesis that the negative impact of the

GDPR at the application layer has thus far propagated to the internet layer. In Section 6, we present

these results. We discuss several robustness checks to our main results in Section 6.7.

   Our paper has an obvious policy implication: even stringent internet privacy regulation that has

strong negative impact at the application layer does not impact the short-run growth of the Internet

infrastructure and the incentive of network operators to interconnect the Internet. In the conclusion

section of the paper, we discuss a number of possible reasons for this result.

   Our paper also contributes by presenting data of unprecedented scale and scope. While a the-

oretical literature tackles questions on network operators and interconnection agreements (see for

examples, Besen et al. (2001), Choi, Jeon, and Kim (2015) and Laffont et al. (2001)), empirical

research in Economics has been scant. To the best of our knowledge, the type of data used in

our paper has only been used once in prior Economic literature, where D'Ignazio and Giovannetti

(2008) obtained data from the London Internet Exchange (LINX) of its member networks and one

type of agreement (peer-to-peer) between the members. Our data represents a significant improve-

ment from their data as it covers virtually all operating networks in the world, a large number of

agreements of both peer-to-peer and provider-to-customer types, and is publicly accessible. Such

data may be valuable for a range of economic- and policy-relevant research. Across the academic

                                                 5
and policy arena, the lack of well-measured data describing the interconnectivity and traffic flow

in the Internet has brought great attention, especially in issues such as net neutrality, international

trade in digitally delivered goods, and market power of big technology firms whose data flows

dominate global internet traffic (see discussions in Weller and Woodcock (2013), US International

Trade Commission (2014), Meltzer (2014), Nicholson and Giulia (2016) for a few examples). Our

data may represent a small step towards filling the data gap in growing needs to analyze internet-

related economic and policy issues. We think future works should keep tackling the issue of unmet

data needs.

    We organize the rest of the paper as follows. Section 2 provides the background in network

interconnection. Section 3 provides the background in the GDPR. Section 4 describes the data.

Section 5 explains justifications for our empirical strategy. Section 6 presents results across a

number of measures of the impact of the GDPR on interconnection. Section 7 concludes.



2. Internet Interconnection

In Section 1, we use an analogy to the postal network to introduce the internet layer. We offer a

more precise definition in this section. The section explains the technicalities associated with the

four layers of the internet, including the internet layer, and describes the demanders and suppliers

associated with each layer and the flow of payment. We also discuss the contractual and institu-

tional foundations behind interconnection, and argue networks can respond to policy changes by

quickly changing the number or specifications of interconnection agreements.

    The Internet was designed with four layers of data exchange in mind: application, transport,

internet, and link.14 Each layer uses a specific set of protocols, shared state, and provides a con-
  14 Inan official specification document for the Internet regarding requirements for Internet hosts, the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (RFC1122, 1989) describes the four layers and specifies protocols associated with each layer.



                                                           6
nection for higher layers. Processes in each layer communicate both with the layer directly above

and below, but also across the same layer through connections provided by lower layers. Figure 1

provides a visual illustration of the four layers and how data exchange takes place between and

across each layer.

   As shown in Figure 1, a consumer's personal computer (PC) or smart phone has applications

like web browsers, webpages and gaming platforms working at the application layer, and an oper-

ating system handling the transport, internet, and link layers. Consumers use their applications to

connect, using lower layers, to other applications hosted on other devices remotely. The application

layer is the layer where personal data is most relevant. Consumers may pay service and content

providers directly, and/or provide their engagement and personal information to these application

firms who resell it on to advertisers targeting content, services, and ads. Metrics of engagement

include ad views, ad clicks, and purchases resulting from referrals.

   When applications connect, data exchange happens between the consumer and content/service

providers. Application layer communication relies on lower layers of internet infrastructure and

communication protocols. The transport layer makes sure data from applications arrives correctly

and reliably between end point devices. Protocols at this layer break data into packets before

handing them off to the internet (network, or IP) layer. The internet layer maintains global routing

state, routing data packets to their destination address by selecting the next closest router. At this

layer, the Internet can be conceptualized as a collection of different networks, each with its own

set of routers and routing policies. Routers connect multiple networks and forward data packets

destined either for their own networks or other networks. In Figure 1, the internet layer is visualized

to facilitate moving data from the consumer's network to intermediary ISPs (transport networks A

and B) then to the service/content network, and the service/content network may send data back

the same route. Below the internet layer layer, the link layer forwards data packets to immediately

                                                  7
adjacent (the "next hop") routers.

   In order to reach other networks, individual networks make direct connections with each other,

as well as indirect connections through other networks that transport data traffic on their behalf.

Networks can be operated by consumers' and service/content firms' Internet Service Providers

(ISPs), or service/content firms themselves. Consumers and service/content firms pay ISPs to

connect their networks to each other. ISPs in turn pay each other where necessary to complete or

enhance reachability to the rest of the Internet.

   Network operators typically use a mix of agreements with different interconnection counter-

parties. As described by the Internet Society (The Internet Society, 2015), we can broadly classify

these agreements as one of two types:


   · Provider-to-customer (p2c) or customer-to-provider (c2p) is an agreement by which the

      provider network agrees to provide its customer network with connectivity to the rest of

      the Internet for a fee.


   · Peer-to-peer (p2p) is an agreement by which two networks agree to a mutual exchange of

      traffic to and from their customer networks. Peering arrangements reduce the amount of traf-

      fic a network must send through its upstream transit provider network, lowering the average

      cost of traffic delivery. If the peers have similar negotiating power, they form a settlement-

      free agreement. Under an imbalance, the weaker network pays the other under a paid peering

      agreement.


   Transition provider networks typically price p2c and c2p agreements as a metered service out-

side of the residential market on a per-megabit-per-second (Mbps) basis. Transit providers com-

pete vigorously, resulting in a strong declining trend for the prices for transition from 1998 until



                                                    8
present.15 Transit providers may also provide pricing discounts for pre-committing to certain vol-

umes of traffic. The duration of p2c and c2p agreements can be as short as one month or as long

as multiple years. Due to the strong declining trend in prices, networks usually renegotiate even

multiple-year agreements yearly. Other than the potential legal cost of breaking a multiple-year

agreement, customers incur little cost to switch to a different provider for substantial potential gains

of bringing the unit transit prices in line with the current market price. Networks also commonly

use extremely short-term agreements, typically with no volume commits and with a duration of

just one month, to fully capture the ever-decreasing market prices for transit (Norton , 2014).

    Though the prices of p2c agreements have declined rapidly, p2p agreements may reduce the

cost of traffic exchange even further when the volume of traffic is high. Potential peers typically

negotiate p2p agreements on a case-by-case basis. Traffic volume often represents "a key deter-

minant" of whether a peering agreement results from the negotiation as "the decision hinges upon

whether or not there is sufficient value from peering to justify spending time and money" (Norton,

2014). A portion of the cost of peering involves purchasing circuits of fixed capacities between the

peers at the peering point and this cost scales with the capacities of the circuits. When a network

does not have a Point of Presence (POP) at the agreed peering location, it incurs additional cost

to bring its traffic to the peering point. Networks incur additional cost associated with colocation,

equipment, and peering ports. The split of the cost is specific to the agreement and net payment

between networks may occur, resulting in a paid peering agreement. The cost of peering can also

vary significantly by the peering location and the geographic proximity of the two networks to the

peering location.16
  15 Estimates based on a sample of US transit providers show that per Mbps transit prices averaged $12.00 in 2008
and averaged $0.63 in 2015 and yearly decreases between 2008 and 2015 ranged from 28% to 52% (Norton, 2014,
Table 2-2).
  16 A very rough estimate of the total cost of a p2p interconnection with a 10Gbps capacity at a European peering

point using cross-continent transport stands at $11,000 per month in 2014 (Norton, 2014, Table 5-1).



                                                        9
    When two networks form an interconnection agreement, the two parties decide the techni-

cal aspects of interconnection. In many cases, setting up an interconnection does not require the

deployment of additional hardware (Norton, 2014). The two parties may simply utilize existing

assets, such as configuring an existing port or purchasing circuits between their existing POPs.

The process to interconnect can take as little as minutes. When the physical assets for intercon-

nection, such as optical fibers and undersea cables, are not present, it can take substantially longer

to install the hardware to interconnect, often in years. As we will discuss in more detail in later

sections, our empirical analysis contrasts interconnection activities of networks in the EEA versus

networks in non-EEA OECD countries and the vast majority of interconnections that we study

involve both parties in developed countries. We expect the availability of physical hardware to

have little constraint on the incentives to interconnect, at least in the short run that we study, and

therefore networks can establish or terminate interconnections reasonably quickly in response to

policy changes.




3    The GDPR

In this section, we provide an overview of the GDPR. We closely examine the text of the law,

specifically on the key definitions, the responsibilities of application firms, the rights of consumers,

and the mechanisms of enforcement. We discuss where networks fit into the regulatory framework

and how the law may impact them, sorting empirical evidence into a taxonomy of potential costs

and benefitss of the law. Combining the legal provisions and the empirical evidence with a dis-

cussion on the reaction of the popular media to the regulation, we find it easy to hypothesize

significant negative impact of the regulation on networks' investment, with networks located in

the EEA harder hit compared to their counterparts in other countries. We need sound empirical


                                                  10
evidence to support or refute this hypothesis.

    Approved on April 14, 2016 and effective on May 25, 2018, the GDPR applies to most ap-

plication firms and networks with EEA end customers because it applies to any organization that

"processes personal data" of EEA consumers.17 The GDPR defines "personal data" broadly, as any

information that might identify a consumer ("data subject").18 It also defines "processing" broadly,

as any operation that is performed on personal data, whether or not by automated means.19 The

GDPR places the burden of responsibilities on organizations that determine the purposes and the

means of processing of personal data (data "controllers"), while organizations that process per-

sonal data on behalf of controllers (data "processors") also have to comply with a considerable

portion of the GDPR.20 Many application firms fall within the meaning of the GDPR as both data

controllers and processors, while networks, routing data on behalf of application firms, fall within

the meaning of the GDPR as data processors. The GDPR has a wide territorial scope. Even when a

firm has no physical presence in the EEA, the GDPR applies if it is apparent that the firm envisages

offering services to consumers located in the EEA.21

    The GDPR may generate significant compliance cost for application firms as it specifies strin-

gent responsibilities of data controllers (and sometimes data processors). Firms need to fulfill

major obligations such as keeping detailed, account-like records of their processing activities,22

incorporating protection into the technical design for the services with data protection "by design"

and "by default,"23 (for organizations that process personal data on a large scale or process sen-
  17 The GDPR was incorporated into the EEA Agreement on July 6, 2018, so its scope covers both EU member states
and non-EU EEA member states. The nationality of the consumer is not relevant, the relevant criterion is whether the
person is located in the EEA (Hoofnagle et al. (2019)).
   18 GDPR Art. 4(1). Under this definition, not only a person's name and physical addresses, but also IP addresses,

cookies, and similar data are personal data.
   19 GDPR Art. 4(2).
   20 GDPR Art. 4(7), (8). In principle, if data processors violate the GDPR, the data controller will be considered

responsible and liable (Hoofnagle et al. (2019)).
   21 GDPR Recital 23.
   22 GDPR Art. 30.
   23 GDPR Art. 25(1), (2). Data protection "by design" refers to measures such as pseudonymisation, which are



                                                        11
sitive personal data) appointing a fully independent Data Protection Officer (DPO),24 developing

"Data Protection Impact Assessments" (DPIA) for high-risk processing activities,25 and notifying

the Data Protection Authority of a personal data breach within 72 hours after its discovery26 (Hoof-

nagle et al. (2019)). Ernest & Young predicts the world's 500 largest companies would spend $ 7.8

billion to comply with the GDPR.27 While a report by DataGrail, a privacy management platform,

estimates 74% of small- and mid-sized organizations would spend more than $100,000 and 20%

of them would spent more than $1 million.28

    The GDPR may also generate costly behavioral changes to application firms, hampering their

ability to monetize user participation and engagement, due to the law's legal basis for processing

personal data and many high level principles. Under the GDPR, consent must be freely given, spe-

cific, informed, unambiguous, and revocable29 (Hoofnagle et al. (2019)), preventing firms from

using long and inaccessible consent processes to obtain personal data. The purpose limitation prin-

ciple specifies that personal data shall be "collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes

and not further processed in a manner that is incompatible with those purposes."30 This would

limit application firms' ability to repurpose data in unanticipated ways. The data minimization

principle specifies that personal data should be "adequate, relevant and limited to what is neces-

sary in relation to the purposes for which they are processed" and shall be "kept in a form which
designed to implement data-protection principles. Data protection "by default" means only personal data which are
necessary for each specific purpose of the processing are processed and personal data are not made accessible without
the individual's intervention to an indefinite number of natural persons.
   24 GDPR Art. 37-39. According to GDPR Art. 37(1)(b), companies involved in internet marketing will have to

have DPOs as they are deemed to process personal data for "systematic monitoring of data subjects on a large scale"
(Hoofnagle et al. (2019)).
   25 GDPR Art. 35(1). High-risk processing activities would include automated processing or profiling that leads to

decisions that significantly affect people and sensitive data are processed on a large scale (Hoofnagle et al. (2019)).
   26 GDPR Art. 34.
   27 Kahn, Jeremy, Stephanie Bodoni & Stefan Nicola. 2018. "It'll Cost Billions for Companies to Comply With

Europe's New Data Law." Bloomberg Businessweek.
   28 Lindsey, Nicole. 2019. "Understanding the GDPR Cost of Continuous Compliance." CPO Magazine.
   29 GDPR Art 7(3).
   30 GDPR Art. 5(1)(b).




                                                         12
permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which

the personal data are processed."31 This accounting comes with increased cost and complexity,

and by intent reduces window for monetization.

    Available evidence from the empirical literature, though limited, supports the hypothesis that

the GDPR generates behavioral changes costly to application firms. Godinho de Matos & Adjerid

(2019) studied the effectiveness of a campaign for obtaining GDPR-compliant consent for personal

marketing and found such practices effective, though at additional cost to the firm to elicit such

consent. Goldberg et al. (2019) found a 10% decrease in recorded e-commerce sales for a sample

of EU firms after the GDPR's enforcement. Johnson & Shriver (2019) found that the week after

the GDPR's enforcement, website use of web technology vendor fell by 15%. They also found

websites were more likely to drop smaller vendors, which increased the relative concentration

of the vendor market by 17%. Peukert et al. (2020) found similar effects and the magnitude

of change was particularly large for websites with EU-specific top-level domains.32 Aridor et

al. (2020) found a 12.5% drop in observable consumers to a data analytics intermediary after the

GDPR's enforcement and that resulted in declines in revenue from targeted ads for European travel

platforms compared to their non-European counterparts.33

    Moreover, under the GDPR, application firms face prospective cost associated with fines and

on-going negotiation, as well as cost associated with uncertainty about how enforcement operates.

Less serious violations can trigger administrative fines up to ten million euros or up to 2% of the
  31 GDPR    Art. 5(1)(c), (e).
  32 A  top-level domain is the last segment of a domain name. Common top-level domains include .com, .org and .us.
   33 Additional empirical evidence suggests content and service providers indeed alter their behavior significantly

following the implementation of the GDPR. Libert, Graves & Nielsen (2018) found the GDPR has led to a 22%
decrease in third-party cookies on a set of EU news sites (third-party cookies are information stored in browsers used
for tracking and advertising, sent from sites other than the one the user is currently visiting). Degeling et al. (2018)
and Mohan et al. (2019) found extensive updates to websites' and cloud services' privacy policies. An exception is
Iordanou et al. (2018), which found few changes in the amount of data flow associated with web tracking and in the
percentage of this data flow attributed to tracking servers hosted in EU around the GDPR implementation window.




                                                          13
total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding financial year, whichever is higher, while more

serious violations, such as violations to the purpose limitation principle or data minimization prin-

ciple, can trigger administrative fines of up to 20 million euros or up to 4% of the total worldwide

annual turnover.34 The GDPR gives Data Protection Authorities broad powers to investigate, in-

tervene and bring legal proceedings. Hoofnagle et al. (2019) stress the presumption of on-going

communications between the Data Protection Authorities and data controllers over the unresolved

features of the rules. On-going negotiation generates cost especially for firms with the largest on-

line presence. Topics with on-going negotiation encompass questions about requirements to store

data locally, the precise rules of reselling data, and so on. Hoofnagle et al. (2019) also argue that

the rules, especially those in the recitals, were written with open-ended features to provide regula-

tors with the flexibility to respond to unexpected and unanticipated issues. This brings additional

cost to application firms due to uncertainty about how enforcement operates.

    In addition, the GDPR may impact the derived demand for data flow between networks by

restricting international transfers of data. To prevent data controllers from simply moving personal

data to a "data haven" with fewer or no restrictions, the GDPR only allows transfers of personal

data outside the EEA when the destination country or organization upholds privacy protection to a

comparable level of that specified in the GDPR.35 Application firms either bear the significant cost

of achieving GDPR-level personal data protection even outside the EEA or choose to reduce the

amount of data they transfer outside the EEA.

    We expect the costs associated with the GDPR to hit harder on application firms located within

the EEA than application firms located outside the EEA. The GDPR makes all EEA consumers

more costly to serve, but a non-EEA application firm faces different costs for non-EEA consumers,
  34 GDPR  Art. 83(4), (5).
  35 GDPR  Art. 45-47. Adequacy status are evaluated by the European Commission. The US in general does not
achieve adequacy. US-based firms may choose to participate the EU-US Privacy Shield, which requires firms to
commit to a GDPR-like level of protection.


                                                    14
and may not comply with the GDPR for their non-EEA consumers to lower their cost outside of

the EEA. Non-EEA application firms may also choose not to comply, cutting out EEA consumers

all together. We discuss in more detail the various evidence for noncompliance of non-EEA ap-

plication firms and for differential impact of the GDPR at the application layer in Section 5, as

support for our empirical strategy.

    As opposed to the cost to application firms, consumers receive many data-related rights under

the GDPR, which may boost their participation. The GDPR specifies seven rights for consumers:

the right 1) to access, 2) to data portability, 3) to rectify data, 4) to stop processing, 5) to object, 6)

to erase data, and 7) to resist profiling and computerized decision making processes36 (Hoofnagle

et al. (2019)). If consumers value these privacy protections, then the GDPR may generate more

use of the content and services that comply with the law. Empirical evidence on this, however,

is lacking. To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of academic works that have studied

whether consumers actually increase their demand for online content or services in response to

better privacy protection.37 In contrast, Goldberg et al. (2019) found a large and significant 10%

decline of recorded page views, visits and orders for a set of EU e-copmmerce firms after the

GDPR became effective, suggesting the possibility of less user engagement with less personalized

ad targeting and recommendations.

    Given the direct compliance cost, the indirect cost due to behavioral changes, prospective cost

and cost due to uncertainty, the GDPR may reduce application firms' revenue, chance of survival,

and investment into new products. Adding together the apparent lack of demand response from

consumers to better privacy protection, one may expect the negative effects on investment to out-
  36 GDPR  Art. 4(3), 8, 16, 17, 20, 21(1), 22.
  37 Theonly available evidence are anecdotal, which suggest consumers feel no better off under the GDPR. See for
examples:
  Olenick, Doug. 2019. "Consumers Feel Privacy is No Safer under GDPR." SC Media.
  Tesseras, Lucy. 2018. "GDPR Three Months On: Most Consumers Feel no Better Off." MarketingWeek.



                                                       15
weigh the positive, leading to lower overall investment in applications. The effect on investment

may be especially pronounced for application firms located in the EEA.38 Empirical evidence,

though limited, supports this notion. Jia, Jin & Wagman (2019, 2020) show that the implementa-

tion of the GDPR strongly reduced venture capital investment in technology start-ups in Europe

compared to their US counterparts and far away investors were more likely to respond negatively.

    Given the reasons outlined above, it is easy to hypothesize that the overall negative effect on

investment at the application layer may propagate to the internet layer by decreasing the derived

demand for data flow between networks, with EEA networks harder hit. This hypothesis coincides

with the alarmist and negative picture the popular media and numerous public "White Papers"

paint for the broad impact of the regulation.39 As of this writing, these views continue to be the

consensus. In extensive online search of news articles and editorials since the implementation of

the GDPR, we have found no opinion or report to suggest any other impact on business than a

costly impact, though views expressed in the popular media are neither supported by systematic

data collection, nor informed by a census of experience, and most of them stress the costs in

unspecific terms. We need sound empirical works to support or refute the hypothesized impact and

the uninformed speculation in the media.
  38 We  discuss in greater detail the extent of non-compliance of non-EEA application firms and evidence for differ-
ential impact in Section 5 where we provide justifications for our choice of control group.
  39 A sampling from (the most credible) news sources gives a good sense of the range of concerns voiced at the time

GDPR became binding. See for examples:
  Bershidsky, Leonid. 2018. "Europe's Privacy Rules Are Having Unintended Consequences." Bloomberg.
  Cool, Alison. 2018. "Europe's Data Protection Law Is a Big, Confusing Mess." New York Times.
  Downes, Larry. 2018. "GDPR and the End of the Internet's Grand Bargain." Harvard Business Review.
  Hern, Alex. 2018. "Facebook Moves 1.5bn Users out of Reach of New European Privacy Law." Guardian.
  Kostov, Nick & Sam Schechner. 2019. "GDPR Has Been a Boon for Google and Facebook." Wall Street Journal.
  Satariano, Adam. 2018. "G.D.P.R., a New Privacy Law, Makes Europe World's Leading Tech Watchdog." New
York Times.
  Trentmann, Nina. 2018. "Companies Worry That Spending on GDPR May Not Be Over." Wall Street Journal.




                                                         16
4. Data

In this section, we describe our data. Our data comes from various data sources collected and com-

piled by the Center of Applied Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA) at the University of California,

San Diego. Since 1998, CAIDA has been studying interconnectivity of the Internet by actively

probing the Internet using its many monitors placed at various vantage points around the world.

Its current flagship active measurement infrastructure, Archipelago, collects interconnectivity data

on the IP-address-level from more than 200 monitors located on 6 continents in over 60 countries.

CAIDA also collaborates with many organizations and compiles data collected from their moni-

tors. Most notably, it collaborates with the Route Views Project at the University of Oregon and

The R´
     eseaux IP Europ´
                    eens Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) in Europe to collect BGP

routing tables that contain network-level interconnection paths announced across the Internet. Our

main data on the network-level interconnection agreements comes from the routing tables, while

our lower IP-address-level interconnection points for each agreement come from the active probes

(Figure 2 visualizes the different levels at which we collect data and their relationships). CAIDA

also gathers records of network registration information from the world's five regional Internet

registries (RIRs), allowing us to identify countries or territories of organizations owning individual

networks.40

      Table 1 provides a summary of the variables used in this paper, describing their units of ob-

servations, frequency, sources and definitions. Table 2 presents summary statistics of variables

described in Table 1. In the remainder of this section we discuss the data collection process and

the caveats of data sources. For additional information, please refer to the data appendix (Appendix

B).

      As shown in Table 1, a number of our key variables come from a dataset called AS Relation-
  40 We   present a complete list of countries and territories in our sample in Appendix Table B1.


                                                           17
ships. The dataset contains network-to-network level interconnection agreements extracted from

routing tables contributed by Route Views and RIPE NCC. To correctly route data across the Inter-

net, networks exchange routing and reachability information through a protocol called the Border

Gateway Protocol (BGP). Each network router using the BGP protocol maintains a routing table.

The table contains the connectivity information of the network and its immediate neighbors in the

Internet and lists paths to particular network destinations. By placing monitors that peer directly

with large networks, we can extract the full set of agreements used between the collecting networks

and all visible destinations.

   We then annotate the extracted agreements with algorithmically-inferred agreement types, as

network operators consider the details of their business relationships as proprietary information

and do not generally make them public. Our inference algorithm (Luckie et al., 2013) draws from

a long literature of this type of inference including Gao (2001), Subramanian et al. (2002), Di

Battista et al. (2003), Erlebach et al. (2002), Xia and Gao (2004), Dimitropoulos et al. (2005)

and Dimitropoulos et al. (2007). It achieved over 98% accuracy of agreement type inference via

direct validation with a set of network operators (Luckie, et al., 2013). The algorithm succeeded

in inferring 96% of the agreement types in our sample.

   We compute the AS Relationships dataset monthly. We use data from January 2015 to June

2019 for our analysis. We first count the number of observed agreements each network has in

this data and make the variable numAgNtwrkkt . We then aggregate individual agreements to the

number of agreements between networks owned by each pair of countries (or territories) i and j to

construct the variable numAgi jt . Breaking down the number of agreements between each country

(or territory) pair by their agreement types, we make three variables numProvAgi jt , numPeerAgi jt ,

numCustAgi jt for when country (or territory) i's networks are providers to, peers to, and customers

of country (or territory) j's networks respectively. We measure a network's centrality in the In-

                                                 18
ternet by its customer cone, a commonly used measure of the number of networks that pay it

directly or indirectly for transit. A network's customer cone is defined as itself and all the net-

works it was observed reaching following provider-to-customer agreements. Networks with larger

customer cones have an especially important role in interconnecting the global Internet. We make

the variable NtwrkCustConekt for each network.

   Our IP-address-level interconnection points within each agreement come from a dataset called

IPv4 Prefix-Probing. The dataset consists of daily traceroutes from a subset of our Archipelago

monitors to every announced BGP routing prefix (a prefix is a block of IP addresses) in the Inter-

net. Each traceroute tries to reach each destination prefix and records the entire IP address-by-IP

address path it takes. We then map each IP address to its network with the help of Route Views

Prefix-to-AS mappings dataset (CAIDA, 2013) and bdrmapIT tool (Marder et al., 2018), identify

IP pairs that form inter-network links and label the observed interconnection links by their IP ad-

dresses and network identifiers. The IPv4 Prefix-Probing dataset is available since December 2015

on a daily basis from multiple monitors, so we use data from December 2015 to June 2019. We

do two aggregations. First we aggregate daily captures from multiple monitors to weekly cap-

tures of unique IP-address-to-IP-address connections. Then we aggregate individual connections

to the number of connections between each pair of networks k and l . The resulting variable is

numAgIPklt .

   Although we know of no more rigorous data collection efforts of interconnection on the in-

ternet layer, we recognize that our data has limitations. First, networks owned by organizations

headquartered in a particular country or territory can have multiple points of presence (PoP) in

many countries and locations within a country and a single Internet interconnection can represent

multiple geographically distinct physical connections. Geolocating points of presence is a hard

and an open question, so it is important to note the country subscripts of our variables indicate

                                                19
network ownership by organizations headquartered in those countries or territories instead of the

exact physical locations of the networks. This measure is especially problematic for large global

transit providers and content providers which have PoPs both within and outside the EEA. How-

ever, we note that though the relatively few large networks account for a substantial portion of

global internet traffic, the typical network is small and has limited geographic reach beyond its

country of origin.41 Throughout this paper, we use unweighted measures of the number of net-

works and the number of interconnections. This to some extent alleviates the concern that the

imperfect measurement of locations of a few large networks drives the results.

    Second, the number of agreements we capture, though extremely large, is a subset of all agree-

ments. Individual routers do not maintain a full set of Internet paths, but rather a set of "best"

paths for each destination based on local preferences. Networks also do not announce their peer-

to-peer paths to their providers so many peer-to-peer agreements are not observable in the data we

use. A truly complete set of agreements would require collecting BGP tables and traceroute data

from vantage points in the majority of Internet networks, while our data collection is limited to

vantage points where we have our own or partner monitors. Over time, monitors were added at

new vantage points, resulting in more visibility in parts of the Internet and hence a greater num-

ber of discoverable agreements. To keep visibility consistent throughout our sample periods, we

extracted agreements only from a set of monitors that operated throughout our sample periods,

January 2015­June 2019 for AS Relationships and December 2015­June 2019 for IPv4 Prefix-

Probing.

    Moreover, sometimes technical problems occur with monitors, resulting in changes in visibility

of some paths. In October 2018, configuration changes in three RIPENCC partner monitors placed
  41 For reference, if we measure the combined value of an organization's users and content purely in terms of the
number of IP addresses in its customer cone, an organization at the 95% percentile only accounts for 0.01% of the full
routed IP address space, an organization at the 99% percentile accounts for 0.2%, while Amazon.com, Inc. accounts
for 1.21%.


                                                         20
in Amsterdam, Barcelona and Zurich caused permanent disappearance of around 2450 network-

to-network interconnections from our sample. We dropped all of the affected interconnections

throughout our sample. We also note interconnection agreements are more complex than allowed

for in our approach. The types of agreements between the same two networks can differ by peering

location or even by prefix. Our inference algorithm oversimplifies these cases by assigning a

single agreement type to each pair of networks (CAIDA, 2015-2019a). Finally it is important

to note that connectivity is not traffic, though there is evidence that IP address space advertised

by BGP tables are strongly positively correlated with networks' self-reported traffic volume for

a large set of peer-to-peer interconnections (Lodhi, et al., 2014). We do not know how much

traffic exchange happens across an interconnection or how that traffic has changed over time. If

major changes in traffic occurred purely through existing interconnections, causing increased or

decreased investment in Internet infrastructure, it would be invisible in our data. More monitor

vantage points and additional sources of data would further improve our data quality.



5. Empirical Strategy

In this section, we provide justifications for key assumptions in our empirical strategy. Our em-

pirical strategy, in short, constitutes using a difference-in-differences approach that compares in-

terconnection activities by networks owned by organizations headquartered in the EEA (treatment

group) and networks owned by organizations headquartered in non-EEA OECD countries (con-

trol group) before and after the GDPR approval date (April 2016) and implementation date (May

2018). The validity of our approach hinges on the validity of our assumptions that any potential

policy effect did not set in before the approval of the GDPR and that our control group is rea-

sonable. We therefore focus our discussion on the justifications for these assumptions. We also



                                                21
acknowledge the limitations of our empirical approach in this section.

   We offer several justifications for our assumption about the timing of the effect: 1) a robustness

check using an alternative cutoff date, 2) conversations with network operators on their decision

horizon, and 3) empirical evidence at the application layer supporting stark cutoff dates.

   We first discuss a robustness check that uses December 2015 as an alternative cutoff date to

study whether networks responded to the law prior to its approval. Examining the timeline of the

creation of the law, we think December 2015 is the earliest possible date for firms to respond to

the future law. Consultation for the law began as early as 2009 and the European Commission

published a proposal text in 2012. In 2013, the European Parliament adopted a compromised

text, based on almost 4,000 proposed amendments. In 2015, the Council of the European Union

published its proposal for the GDPR and started negotiations with the European Parliament. The

Parliament and Council reached agreement on the text of the GDPR in December 2015 (Hoofnagle

et al. (2019)). Given the intensity of negotiation and the amount of changes the proposal went

through, we think it was unlikely for firms to respond before the text of the law was fixed. Most of

our variables are available well before December 2015, allowing us to use December 2015 as an

alternative cutoff date and test whether networks responded in anticipation of the law. We discuss

results from this robustness check in our results section.

   Moreover, through conversations with network operators, we learn network operators respond

to real-time changes in actual data flows at the application layer, rather than respond to potential

changes on the longer time horizon. This is due to the fact that networks can establish and terminate

interconnection agreements relatively quickly and networks have incentives to plan in very short

terms given the ever decreasing per Gbps cost of data exchange, which we have discussed in

Section 2. As networks respond to changes in derived demand for data exchange at the application

layer, we think they were unlikely to respond before changes happened at the application layer.

                                                 22
    Empirical evidence at the application layer supports the notion that changes at the application

layer happened after the GDPR effective date of May 2018. Jia, Jin, & Wagman (2019) discuss that,

within the two years between the GDPR's approval and effective dates, many organizations chose

to roll out their compliance strategy only days and weeks before the effective date. Goldberg et al.

(2019) show large declines in page views, visits, orders and revenue from EU consumers at a set

of e-commerce sites relative to a control group within four weeks after the policy implementation

date.42 Johnson & Shriver (2019) show a cliff-like decline in websites' use of web technology

within thirty days after the policy implementation date.43 Aridor et al. (2020) similarly show an

immediate effect on consumer opt-out behavior and firm revenue.44 We think such evidence of

large and quick responses at the application layer helps to justify our choice of stark cutoff dates

as well.

    Now we move to discuss our choice of control group. Our treatment group consists of net-

works owned by organizations headquartered in EEA countries. We choose networks owned by

organizations headquartered in non-EEA OECD countries as the control group. We think this is a

relevant comparison because networks in developed countries have similar growth rates of inter-

connection prior to the GDPR. As we will show in a series of graphs later in the results section,

the parallel pre-trends needed for the difference-in-differences approach are visually apparent for

the treatment and control groups across all outcome variables of interest. We exclude networks in

non-EEA non-OECD countries and territories from the control group for worries that networks in

developing countries might behave differently from networks in more developed countries prior to

the GDPR. Appendix Table B1 presents complete lists of countries and territories that are in the

EEA (treatment group), are not in the EEA but in the OECD (control group), and are neither in the
  42 See their Figure 2 for details.
  43 See their Figure 1 for details.
  44 See their Figures 3­6 for details.




                                                23
EEA nor in the OECD (excluded).

   We are well aware of the concern that, given the GDPR's global ambition and wide territorial

scope, application firms in non-EEA OECD countries also need to incur substantial cost to com-

ply with the law if they want to serve EEA consumers. This would in turn change the derived

demand for data exchange associated with non-EEA OECD networks and bias our results towards

zero given our choice of control group. We discuss thoroughly how we address this concern in five

ways: 1) a robustness check using a first differences approach, 2) a discussion of the extent of com-

pliance of non-EEA application firms, 3) a reorganization of our results based on our confidence of

the validity of the control group across our eight outcome measures and various subsample break-

downs, 4) interpretation of our results as differential impact and empirical evidence of differential

impact at the application layer, and 5) a straightforward acknowledgement of problems with our

control group for some of our outcome measures and subsamples.

   First, we note that we can perform a robustness check to our main difference-in-differences

approach by simply first differencing our outcome variables within EEA subsamples and studying

whether the approval or the implementation of the GDPR impacted the rate of interconnection

growth within EEA countries or networks. As we will show in a series of figures in our results

section, the growth of interconnection within EEA itself was remarkably smooth and steady. This

observation motivates us to test first differences as an additional piece of evidence corroborating

our main difference-in-differences estimates. We discuss results from this robustness check in our

results section.

   We then discuss the extent of compliance to the GDPR among non-EEA application firms. We

hypothesize that non-EEA consumers are unlikely to enjoy similar protection as EEA consumers

following the GDPR, even if these firms choose to comply. These firms may also choose not to

comply, cutting out EEA consumers all together. We note that, as compliance to the GDPR can

                                                 24
be extremely costly (see Section 3 for a detailed discussion), there is incentive for non-EEA ap-

plication firms to limit compliance to EEA consumers. While some non-EEA application firms

allegedly improved privacy protection for non-EEA consumers following the GDPR, the degree of

protection non-EEA consumers enjoyed fell far short from their EEA counterparts.45 In fact, the

California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) was strongly motivated by the goal to bring privacy pro-

tection of Californian residents on par with that of EEA residents under the GDPR as firms did not

voluntarily do so. Peukert et al. (2020) suggest websites catering to non-EU audiences decreased

their use of third-party web technology vendors following the GDPR. However, they found the

magnitude of change for those websites at 2.2­3.6 percentage points in their most reliable spec-

ifications to be far smaller than the magnitude of change for websites catering to EU audience

at 7.1­9.3 percentage points.46 A lot of anecdotal evidence also suggests many content and ser-

vice providers located outside the EEA simply stopped serving EEA consumers.47 When EEA

consumers were not blocked, they could be offered a very stripped down version of the content.48

    Our above discussion helps us to identify the outcomes and subsamples that are less likely

to be plagued by the bias towards zero across our eight different outcome measures and various

subsample breakdowns. We present our results in Section 6 with this consideration, showing first
  45 The   Associated Press investigated Facebook's claim on global GDPR compliance and found its implementation
of many GDPR provisions were vague for non-EEA consumers. While Facebook did not publicize the fact, the
Associated Press also found users in six Asian countries did not get the protection through manual checks. See
Jesdanun, Anick. 2018. "How Google, Facebook will adapt to Europe's New Privacy Law." The Associated Press.
   46 We believe their estimates for websites catering to non-EU audience are overestimates. They explored four dif-

ferent definitions for "websites that cater to EU audience": 1) the website has a top-level domain that is specific to
a country in the EU (for examples, .de or .fr); 2) the website appears on Alexa's rank for any country in the EU; 3)
the website returns content in any of the official languages of member countries of the EU, except English; 4) the
website is visited by users in Germany but not users in the US in Nielsen clickstream data. In each of the four cases,
"websites that cater to non-EU audience" are defined as the websites that did not meet the criterion. We note that all
four definitions would misclassify a large number of European-based English language sites with common top-level
domains such as .com, .org and .net as catering to non-EU audience.
   47 For example, Joseph O'Connor, a web developer, compiled an list of 1,361 websites (mostly US-based news sites)

that blocked visitors from the EU after the GDPR effective date. See O'Connor, Joseph. 2018-2019. "Websites Not
Available in the European Union after GDPR." https://data.verifiedjoseph.com/dataset/websites-not-available-eu-gdpr.
As of March 2019, the last time the list was updated, 1,129 websites on the list remained blocked.
   48 Sentance, Rebecca. 2018. "GDPR: Which Websites are Blocking Visitors from the EU?" Econsultancy.




                                                         25
the measures we are the most confident about. We discuss the rationale for our confidence in those

cases in Section 6.

    Moreover, we are confident that our estimates, interpreted as the differential effects between

EEA networks and non-EEA OECD networks, will be nonzero if the policy has any effect at the

internet layer at all. A number of empirical works have found significant and often large differential

effects of privacy regulation at the application layer using a difference-in-differences approach and

control groups similar to ours. These differential changes in derived demand for data exchange

motivate our expectation of differential changes at the internet layer, if the policy does affect the

internet layer.

    The pioneering paper in this literature is Goldfarb & Tucker (2011), which found the EU's 2002

e-Privacy Directive reduced online display ad effectiveness in the EU relative to other countries.

Their data consisted of survey responses of purchasing intent from online ad campaigns in which

survey takers were randomly exposed to display ads. They used the implementation dates of the

law in different EU countries as the policy cutoff date and constructed a triple interaction term that

interacted exposure to the ads, EU membership status, and post policy treatment. Their control

group of non-EU countries consisted of Australia, Brazil, Canada, Mexico, and the US.

    Works specifically focused on the GDPR include Jia, Jin & Wagman (2019), which used EU-

based technology ventures as their treatment group and US-based ventures as their primary control

group. They used ventures based in the rest of the world49 as an alternative control group. They

found EU ventures after the implementation of the GDPR, relative to their counterparts in the

US or the rest of the world, declined by as much as 26.1% in the number of monthly venture

deals and between 11.1%­16.1% in the aggregate investment. Jia, Jin & Wagman (2020) used
  49 Countriesin the rest of the world in their data were predominantly Australia, Canada, China, Israel, India, Japan,
Russia, and South Korea.




                                                         26
the same design and found the impact of the GDPR on EU venture investment relative to their

US counterparts was larger when ventures and lead investors were not in the same state or union.

Using the same approach, Aridor et al. (2020) found the GDPR resulted in a 12.5% drop in

trackable consumers on European travel platforms as compared to their non-European counterparts

and resulted in declines in revenue for those firms following the implementation of the GDPR. They

used travel platforms in United States, Canada, and Russia as the control group.

   In addition to all of above, We acknowledge the limitation of our difference-in-differences re-

search design that it is not able to estimate the absolute effect of the GDPR at the internet layer. We

interpret our findings as the differential effect of the policy on EEA networks relative to non-EEA

OECD networks. We also acknowledge that the differential impact for some of our subsamples

and outcome measures are more likely to tend towards zero while others less so. We discuss this

in more detail when we present results by outcome measure and subsample in our next section.



6. Results

In this section, we present regression specifications and regression results specific to each outcome

variable. We also discuss results from various robustness checks at the end of this section.



6.1    The Number of Agreements between Countries

In this subsection, we study the outcome variable numAgi jt , the number of interconnection agree-

ments between pairs of networks owned by the countries i and j. As the unit of observations is a

country pair, we need to hold fixed the EEA membership status (or OECD status) of the counter-

party of interconnection while we compare the outcomes for EEA countries (treatment group) and

for countries in the OECD but not in the EEA (control group).


                                                  27
   We therefore construct three subsamples based on counterparties: (a) the counterparties are

non-EEA OECD countries, (b) the counterparties are non-EEA non-OECD countries, and (c) the

counterparties are EEA countries. Within each subsample, we then keep only observations where

networks or countries are in the EEA (treatment group) or are in the OECD but not in the EEA

(control group) and compare their outcomes. As a result, subsample (a) allows us to compare

country pairs that are EEA­non-EEA OECD versus non-EEA OECD­non-EEA OECD. Subsam-

ple (b) allows us to compare country pairs that are EEA­non-EEA non-OECD versus non-EEA

OECD­non-EEA non-OECD. Subsample (c) allows us to compare network or country pairs that

are EEA­EEA versus non-EEA OECD­EEA. Note one observation can contribute to multiple sub-

samples, for example a country pair France­US can contribute to both the treatment group in (a)

and the control group in (c). Appendix Figure B1 illustrates visually the construction of the three

subsamples.

   We note that a bias towards zero is less likely to impact regression results for subsamples (a)

and (b) than results for subsample (c). The control group of either subsample (a) or subsample (b)

does not involve EEA countries. As we discussed in the previous section, we believe non-EEA

application layer firms are far less likely to comply with the GDPR in markets outside the EEA

or change their behavior in those markets due to the regulation. Their derived demand for data

exchange at the internet layer from and to those markets therefore should change little. We are

concerned that results for subsample (c) may be biased towards zero as non-EEA application firms

need to comply with the GDPR in EEA markets or they may exit those markets, whichever would

reduce derived demand for data exchange at the internet layer.

   Figure 3 shows a comparison of the total number of agreements in the EEA countries and in the

non-EEA OECD countries, holding fixed the counterparties. We make a few observations. First,

despite the differences in levels, EEA countries and non-EEA OECD countries exhibit remarkable

                                                28
parallel trends in setting up agreements with counterparties that are non-EEA OECD countries,

non-EEA non-OECD countries, and EEA countries throughout the sample period. Second, agree-

ments with developing countries or territories have a lot more noise in measurement compared to

agreements within OECD countries or EEA countries.

   We then run the following regression on each of the three subsamples,



  log(numAgi jt + 1) = 0 + 1 POSTe,i jt × EEAi jt + 2 POSTa,i jt × EEAi jt + i j Di j + t Dt + i jt .

                                                                                                    (1)


We take the log of numAgi jt to reflect estimated effects in percentage changes and add one to

account for zero values when we take the log. POSTe,i jt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if time

t is after the GDPR effective date. POSTa,i jt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after

the GDPR approval date. EEAi jt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the country pair i j is in the

treatment group for the subsample, and equal to 0 if the country pair i j is in the control group

for the subsample. A dummy Di j for each country pair i j and a dummy Dt for each month t are

included. The difference-in-differences effect is identified by the coefficients on the interaction

terms POSTe,i jt × EEAi jt and POSTa,i jt × EEAi jt .

   The results are shown in Table 3. The main effect, based on the coefficient on POSTe,i jt ×

EEAi jt , is not significantly different from zero across the three subsamples. The only significant

result in this table comes from the coefficient on POSTa,i jt × EEAi jt for the non-EEA non-OECD

counterparty subsample and we test the robustness of this result. Table 3 clusters standard error

by country pair. Alternatively, one might expect the interconnection decisions of one particular

country to other countries to have correlated errors. This may be especially true for interconnec-

tion decisions from an EEA or OECD country to developing countries based on the EEA/OECD



                                                   29
networks' global interconnection strategy to remote and low demand areas. Therefore, we clus-

ter standard error by EEA and OECD countries in the country pairs for the non-EEA non-OECD

counterparty subsample as a robustness test, resulting in 43 clusters as compared to 6,751 clus-

ters in Column 2 of Table 3. The coefficient on POSTa,i jt × EEAi jt is no longer significant and is

therefore likely a spurious result.



6.2    The Number of Agreements between Countries by Agreement Type

In this subsection, we further break down the number of agreements between country pairs to

provider-to-customer, peer-to-peer, and customer-to-provider types. As before, we prioritize re-

sults for subsamples where interconnection counterparties are non-EEA OECD countries or non-

EEA non-OECD countries.

   Figure 4 shows a comparison of the total number of agreements in the EEA countries and in

the non-EEA OECD countries, by agreement type. We still observe EEA countries and non-EEA

OECD countries have remarkable parallel trends by agreement type throughout the sample period.

Based on visual evidence, the GDPR does not have heterogeneous effects on different types of

agreements.

   We then run the following regression on each agreement type for each of the three counterparty

subsamples,



log(numTypeAgi jt + 1) = 0 + 1 POSTe,i jt × EEAi jt + 2 POSTa,i jt × EEAi jt + i j Di j + t Dt + i jt .

                                                                                                  (2)


We take the log of numTypeAgi jt to reflect estimated effects in percentage changes and add

one to account for zero values when we take the log. numTypeAgi jt refers to numProvAgi jt ,



                                                 30
numPeerAgi jt , or numCustAgi jt . POSTe,i jt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after the

GDPR effective date. POSTa,i jt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR ap-

proval date. EEAi jt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the country pair i j is in the treatment group

for the subsample, and equal to 0 if the country pair i j is in the control group for the subsample. A

dummy Di j for each country pair i j and a dummy Dt for each month t are included. The difference-

in-differences effect is identified by the coefficients on the interaction terms POSTe,i jt × EEAi jt and

POSTa,i jt × EEAi jt .

    We show the results in Table 4. We see a few significant results in the non-EEA non-OECD

counterparty subsample. As previously, once we cluster standard error by EEA and OECD coun-

tries in the country pairs for the non-EEA non-OECD counterparty subsample as a robustness test,

the significance of these results disappear. We also note these results, though sometimes signifi-

cant, lack systematic patterns and are economically small in magnitude.50



6.3     The Number of IP-Address-Level Interconnection Points per Agreement

Our earlier results suggest the GDPR did not change whether agreements were made and what

types of agreements were made between networks. One hypothesis for the absence of behavior

change is that setting up an agreement is such a substantial decision that changes in usage and

bargaining friction due to the GDPR are small in comparison. Networks may only change the

capacity associated with each interconnection in response to lower usage instead of cancelling an

agreement altogether. If that is the case, we are unlikely to observe effects of the GDPR on the

extensive margin. The GDPR's impact may be on how dense the two networks' interconnection is.
   50 To illustrate how economically small the implied effect based on the coefficients is, we take for example the

coefficient -0.038 on POSTe × EEA from column (8) of Table 4, the largest significant result in the table. The
dependent variable for the regression in column (8) is log(numPeerAgi jt + 1). It has a mean of 0.109 and an SD of
0.544. Therefore, being in the treatment group post GDPR effective date has an effect which is a tiny fraction of one
standard deviation of the outcome.



                                                         31
Motivated by this consideration, we examine how the GDPR affected the number of IP-address-

level interconnection points two networks had, conditional on them having an agreement.

    The outcome variable we study in this section is numAgIPi jt , the number of IP-address-level

interconnection points between network k and network l , given k and l have an agreement. As

the unit of observations is a network pair, we hold fixed the EEA membership status (or OECD

status) of the counterparty of interconnection while we compare the outcomes for EEA countries

(treatment group) and for countries in the OECD but not in the EEA (control group).

    As previously, we construct three subsamples based on counterparties: (a) the counterparties

are in non-EEA OECD countries, (b) the counterparties are in non-EEA non-OECD countries, and

(c) the counterparties are in EEA countries. Within each subsample, we then keep only observa-

tions where networks or countries are in the EEA (treatment group) or are in the OECD but not in

the EEA (control group) and compare their outcomes.

    The control group of either subsample (a) or subsample (b) does not involve networks in EEA

countries. As we discussed before, we believe non-EEA application layer firms are far less likely to

comply with the GDPR in markets outside the EEA or change their behavior in those markets due

to the regulation. Their derived demand for data exchange at the internet layer from and to those

markets therefore should change little. We are concerned the results for subsample (c) may be

biased towards zero as non-EEA application firms need to comply with the GDPR in EEA markets

or they may exit those markets, whichever would reduce derived demand for data exchange at the

internet layer.

    Figure 5 shows a comparison of the average log number of interconnection points per agree-

ment in the EEA countries and in the non-EEA OECD countries, holding fixed the interconnection

counterparties. We first note that observed interconnection points with developing countries have

a lot of noise in our measurement while observed interconnection points among EEA and OECD

                                                32
countries are quite precisely measured, reflecting the large number of vantage points inside de-

veloped countries. When interconnection points are well-measured, we observe that, despite the

differences in levels, EEA countries and non-EEA OECD countries still exhibit remarkable paral-

lel trends in terms of the number of interconnection points per agreement throughout the sample

period.

   We then run the following regression on each of the three subsamples,



               log(numAgIPklt ) = 0 + 1 POSTe,klt × EEAklt + kl Dkl + t Dt + klt .                 (3)



We take the log of numAgIPklt to reflect estimated effects in percentage changes. POSTe,klt is an

indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR effective date. POSTa,klt is an indicator

variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR approval date. EEAklt is an indicator variable equal

to 1 if the network pair kl is in the treatment group for the subsample, and equal to 0 if the network

pair kl is in the control group for the subsample. A dummy Dkl for each network pair kl and a

dummy Dt for each week t are included. The difference-in-differences effect is identified by the

coefficient on the interaction term POSTe,klt × EEAklt . Given this particular data source only started

in December 2015, close to the GDPR approval date, we do not include POSTa,klt × EEAkl jt .

   The results are shown in Table 5 and are in no case significantly different from zero. We

include agreements present for at least 150 weeks for our regressions in Table 5. Given we study

the intensive margin, alternatively we keep only agreements present for all of 169 weeks between

December 2015 and June 2019. Doing so substantially reduces the sample size and the results are

similar to those in Table 5.

   In addition to interconnection behavior between pairs of countries or networks, we study how

the GDPR might have impacted the number of agreements per network, the number of networks


                                                  33
per country and the sizes of the customer cones of each networks. For these results, we stress that

our estimates are differential impact between EEA networks and non-EEA OECD networks. The

results are biased towards zero if one wants to interpret them as absolute effects of the policy.



6.4     The Number of Agreements by Networks

Figure 6 shows a comparison of the average log number of agreements by networks in the EEA

countries and in the non-EEA OECD countries. We observe visually apparent parallel trends be-

tween the two groups prior to the approval of the GDPR, between the approval and implementation

of the GDPR, as well as after the implementation of the GDPR. We then run the following regres-

sion,



 log(numAgNtwrkkt ) = 0 + 1 POSTe,kt × EEAkt + 2 POSTa,kt × EEAkt + k Dk + t Dt + kt . (4)



We take the log of numAgNtwrkkt to reflect estimated effects in percentage changes. POSTe,kt is

an indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR effective date. POSTa,kt is an indicator

variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR approval date. EEAkt is an indicator variable equal

to 1 if network k is owned by an EEA country, and equal to 0 if network k is owned by a non-EEA

OECD country. We include a dummy Dk for each network k and a dummy Dt for each month

t . The difference-in-differences effect is identified by the coefficients on the interaction terms

POSTe,kt × EEAkt and POSTa,kt × EEAkt .

   We show the results below Figure 6. The coefficient on POSTe × EEA = -.004 (se = 0.007,

clustered by network) and the coefficient on POSTa × EEA = 0.006 (se = 0.007, clustered by

network). Both are insignificant at conventional levels of significance. This result suggests the

GDPR does not have differential impact on the number of interconnection agreements on EEA


                                                 34
networks relative to their non-EEA OECD counterparts.



6.5     The Number of Networks

Figure 7 shows a comparison of the average log number of networks per country in the EEA coun-

tries and in the non-EEA OECD countries. Again, we observe visually apparent parallel trends

between the two groups prior to the approval of the GDPR, between the approval and implemen-

tation of the GDPR, as well as after the implementation of the GDPR. We then run the following

regression,



      log(numNtwrkit ) = 0 + 1 POSTe,it × EEAit + 2 POSTa,it × EEAit + i Di + t Dt + it .       (5)



We take the log of numNtwrkit to reflect estimated effects in percentage changes. POSTe,it is an

indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR effective date. POSTa,it is an indicator

variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR approval date. EEAit is an indicator variable equal

to 1 if country i is an EEA country, and equal to 0 if country i is a non-EEA OECD country. We

include a dummy Di for each country i and a dummy Dt for each quarter t . The difference-in-

differences effect is identified by the coefficients on the interaction terms POSTe,it × EEAit and

POSTa,it × EEAit .

   We show the results below Figure 7. The coefficient on POSTe × EEA = -.002 (se = 0.017,

clustered by country) and the coefficient on POSTa × EEA = 0.016 (se = 0.024, clustered by coun-

try). Both are insignificant at conventional levels of significance. This result suggests the GDPR

does not differentially impact the number of networks in EEA countries compared to non-EEA

OECD countries.




                                                35
6.6   Customer Cone of Networks

Figure 8 shows a comparison of the average log customer cone of networks in the EEA countries

and in the non-EEA OECD countries. We observe visually apparent parallel trends between the

two groups prior to the approval of the GDPR, between the approval and implementation of the

GDPR, as well as after the implementation of the GDPR. We then run the following regression,



 log(NtwrkCustConekt ) = 0 + 1 POSTe,kt × EEAkt + 2 POSTa,kt × EEAkt + k Dk + t Dt + kt .

                                                                                                 (6)


We take the log of NtwrkCustConekt to reflect estimated effects in percentage changes. POSTe,kt is

an indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR effective date. POSTa,kt is an indicator

variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR approval date. EEAkt is an indicator variable equal

to 1 if network k is owned by an EEA country, and equal to 0 if network k is owned a non-EEA

OECD country. We include a dummy Dk for each network k and a dummy Dt for each month

t . The difference-in-differences effect is identified by the coefficients on the interaction terms

POSTe,it × EEAit and POSTa,it × EEAit .

   We show the results shown below Figure 8. The coefficient on POSTe × EEA = -.007 (se =

0.004, clustered by country) and the coefficient on POSTa × EEA = 0.011 (se = 0.004, clustered

by country). Though both are significantly different from zero, their magnitudes are economically

very small, suggesting the GDPR has little impact on the centrality of networks in EEA countries

compared to non-EEA OECD countries.




                                                 36
6.7     Robustness Checks

In this subsection, we discuss a few robustness checks. We first replace the logged outcome vari-

ables in all of our specifications with their original unlogged values. We present the results in

Appendix C.1. As shown, all of the results are qualitatively similar to results with logged outcome

variables. This alleviates the concern that our precise zero estimates are driven by taking the log

of the outcome variables.

    We then perform a robustness check by redefining POSTa to equal to 1 if the observation is

made after December 2015. As discussed in our empirical strategy section, it is possible that net-

works invested in anticipation of the enforcement of the GDPR even before the law was approved.

We think the earliest possible date for the firms to respond in anticipation is December 2015, the

time when the text of the law was fixed. The results from this robustness check for our various

outcomes are almost identical to our main results presented in Tables 3­5 and Figures 6­8. This

alleviates the concern that our main specifications did not capture possible effects due to anticipa-

tion.

    Lastly, we perform a first differences regression for each outcome using only the subsample

consisting of the treatment group in our main regression. Specifically, we run the following regres-

sion:



      log(outcomemt ) - log(outcomem,t -1 ) = 0 + 1 POSTe,mt + 2 POSTa,mt + m Dm + mt ,             (7)



where m is the unit of observation of the outcome variable of interest. m can take the network

subscript k, country subscript i, network pair subscript kl , or country pair subscript i j. POSTe,mt is

an indicator variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR effective date. POSTa,mt is an indicator

variable equal to 1 if time t is after the GDPR approval date. A dummy Dm for each unit of


                                                  37
observation m is included. We do not include a time dummy as such a dummy would absorb any

effect of the GDPR. The effect on first differences is identified by the coefficients on the terms

POSTe,mt and POSTa,mt . We show these results in Appendix C.2. As shown, the results are very

precisely estimated and in all cases do not exceed 0.6 percentage points. These results suggest that

the rate of growth in interconnection in the EEA after the GDPR did not change when compared

to that before the GDPR and provide further support for our main results.



7. Conclusion

The effectiveness of the Internet in creating economic surplus depends on efficient interconnections

bilaterally negotiated by independently operated networks. In this paper, we investigate whether

the approval and implementation of the GDPR affects the growth and interconnection of the In-

ternet in Europe. Despite evidence that the GDPR so far had significant effects at the application

layer on European firms, we find no visible consequences at the infrastructure layer. Across mul-

tiple measures, we estimate precise zeros effects of the GDPR on EEA networks relative to their

non-EEA OECD counterparts. Occasionally we estimate statistically significant effects, which

prove to be not robust. Our robustness checks suggest that our results are not driven by taking the

log of outcome variables or our choice of April 2016 as the first policy cutoff date. Using the first

differences approach as an additional robustness check, we show that EEA networks had similar

growth rates before and after the GDPR approval or implementation, therefore our main results are

not driven by our choice of control group.

   A number of possible reasons could have contributed to this finding. First, the lack of dis-

cernible short-run effect at the internet layer could have arisen from slow investment and behav-

ioral changes at the internet layer. This seems unlikely because renegotiations of interconnection



                                                 38
agreements happen frequently and we observe continued growth across all network connections. It

is also possible that despite the large behavioral changes at the application layer due to the GDPR,

the effect is small compared to other considerations in negotiating interconnection agreements.

That could happen if, for example, the regular growth in data due to growth in many applications

overwhelms any short-run impact of the GDPR. Video traffic includes Netflix and Youtube, and

these were less affected by GDPR, and could grow even as other traffic drops. In that case, network

operators may rationally expect the long run effect of the GDPR to be small even at the application

layer. Finally, we only observe the short run, so we cannot rule out that more gradual changes due

to the GDPR may surface in the longer run, which is an open question. If we are able to observe a

much longer period of time, we will be able to use the data from additional periods and the same

methodology to study the effect of the GDPR in the longer run.

   Our results have immediate policy implications. As many countries are contemplating imple-

menting their own versions of privacy and data protection regulations, there are concerns about

whether such regulations may negatively impact the growth of the Internet, reduce technology

firms' incentives in operating and innovating, reduce the use of the Internet in productivity en-

hancing activities, and reduce the economic surplus generated through the use of the Internet in the

country and beyond. Our results suggest limited effects of such regulations on the internet layer.

Said another way, our results suggest the costs are concentrated at the application layer.

   Our results also speak to the debate on the allocation of rents generated through the successful

commercialization of the Internet. The enormous rents associated with the exploitation of Web 2.0

and mobile web represent a large portion of the private returns to innovation in the 21st century.

These rents have been overwhelmingly captured by players at the application layer, notably the

"big tech" companies, while firms at the internet layer captures little of the rents. Our study is

consistent with the view that the cost of the GDPR has been a shock to rents, and the costs have

                                                 39
been borne by the application layer, paid out of the rents from innovation.

   We also note that current empirical works, including this paper, study the impact of the GDPR

on suppliers of internet services and content at various layers of the Internet. Empirical evidence

on consumers' responses to privacy regulation is extremely lacking. As policy makers strive to

enhance consumer welfare through better privacy protection while trying to minimize such laws'

impact of the digital economy, evaluating the laws' effect on consumers is an important direction

for future research to allow for the overall welfare analysis.

   In addition to policy implications, our paper presents data consisting of virtually all operat-

ing networks in the world and a large number of interconnection agreements among them across

many years, which opens the possibility of investigating a range of economic- and policy-relevant

questions about the Internet. Across the academic and policy arena, the lack of well-measured data

describing the interconnectivity and data flow in the Internet has brought great attention, especially

in issues such as net neutrality, international trade in digitally delivered goods, and market power

of big technology firms whose data flows dominate global internet traffic. While the theoretical

literature has dabbled at many of these issues, empirical literature is scant. Our data may be a

small progress towards filling the data gap in growing needs to analyze internet-related economic

and policy issues. Future works should keep tackling the issue of unmet data needs.




                                                 40
References
Aridor, Guy, Yeon-Koo Che, and Tobias Salz. 2020. "The Economic Consequences of Data Pri-
    vacy Regulation: Empirical Evidence from GDPR." Available at SSRN 3522845.
Besen, Stanley, Paul Milgrom, Bridger Mitchell, and Padmanabhan Srinagesh. 2001. "Advances
    in Routing Technologies and Internet Peering Agreements." American Economic Review 91,
    no. 2: 292-296.
Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky. 1986. "The Nash Bargaining Solution in
    Economic Modelling." The RAND Journal of Economics: 176-188.
Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis, The. 2015-2019a. "AS Relationships." University
    of California, San Diego. http://www.caida.org/data/as-relationships/ (accessed June-July
    2019).
Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis, The. 2015-2019b. "Inferred AS to Organization Map-
    ping Dataset." University of California, San Diego. http://www.caida.org/data/as-organizations/
    (accessed June-July 2019).
Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis, The. 2015-2019c. "IPv4 Prefix-Probing Traceroute
    Dataset." University of California, San Diego.
    https://www.caida.org/data/active/ipv4 prefix probing dataset.xml (accessed June-July 2019).
Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis, The. 2015-2019d. "Macroscopic Internet Topology
    Data Kit (ITDK)." University of California, San Diego.
    http://www.caida.org/data/internet-topology-data-kit/ (accessed June-July 2019).
Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis, The. 2013. "Routeviews Prefix-to-AS mappings (pfx2as)
    for IPv4 and IPv6." University of California, San Diego.
    http://data.caida.org/datasets/routing/routeviews-prefix2as/README.txt (accessed Septem-
    ber 21, 2019).
Choi, Jay Pil, Doh-Shin Jeon, and Byung-Cheol Kim. 2015. "Net Neutrality, Business Models,
    and Internet Interconnection." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7, no. 3: 104-
    41.
Degeling, Martin, Christine Utz, Christopher Lentzsch, Henry Hosseini, Florian Schaub, and
    Thorsten Holz.2018. "We Value Your Privacy... Now Take Some Cookies: Measuring the
    GDPR's Impact on Web Privacy." arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05096.
Di Battista, Giuseppe, Maurizio Patrignani, and Maurizio Pizzonia. 2003. "Computing the Types
    of the Relationships between Autonomous Systems." In IEEE INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-
    second Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies
    (IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37428), vol. 1, pp. 156-165. IEEE.
D'Ignazio, Alessio, and Emanuele Giovannetti. 2009. "Asymmetry and Discrimination in Internet
    Peering: Evidence from the LINX." International Journal of Industrial Organization 27, no.
    3: 441-448.

                                              41
Dimitropoulos, Xenofontas, Dmitri Krioukov, Bradley Huffaker, and George Riley. 2005. "In-
    ferring AS Relationships: Dead End or Lively Beginning?." In International Workshop on
    Experimental and Efficient Algorithms, pp. 113-125. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Dimitropoulos, Xenofontas, Dmitri Krioukov, Marina Fomenkov, Bradley Huffaker, Young Hyun,
    and George Riley. 2007. "AS Relationships: Inference and Validation." ACM SIGCOMM
    Computer Communication Review 37, no. 1: 29-40.

Erlebach, Thomas, Alexander Hall, and Thomas Schank. 2002. "Classifying Customer-Provider
     Relationships in the Internet." TIK-Report 145.

Gao, Lixin. 2001. "On Inferring Autonomous System Relationships in the Internet." IEEE/ACM
    Transactions on Networking (ToN) 9, no. 6: 733-745.

Godinho de Matos, Miguel, and Idris Adjerid. 2019. "Consumer Consent and Firm Targeting after
    GDPR: The Case of a Large Telecom Provider." Working paper.

Goldberg, Samuel, Garrett Johnson, and Scott Shriver. 2019. "Regulating Privacy Online: The
    Early Impact of the GDPR on European Web Traffic & E-Commerce Outcomes." Available
    at SSRN 3421731.

Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2011. "Privacy Regulation and Online Advertising." Man-
    agement Science 57, no. 1: 57-71.

Hoofnagle, Chris Jay, Bart van der Sloot, and Frederik Zuiderveen Borgesius. 2019. "The Euro-
    pean Union General Data Protection Regulation: What It Is and What It Means." Information
    & Communications Technology Law 28, no. 1: 65-98.

Internet Engineering Task Force. 1989. "RFC 1122: Requirements for Internet Hosts ­ Commu-
     nication Layers." R. Braden, Editor. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1122.

Iordanou, Costas, Georgios Smaragdakis, Ingmar Poese, and Nikolaos Laoutaris. 2018. "Tracing
     Cross Border Web Tracking." In Proceedings of the Internet Measurement Conference 2018,
     pp. 329-342. ACM, 2018.

Jia, Jian, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Liad Wagman. 2019. "The Short-Run Effects of GDPR on Tech-
      nology Venture Investment." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
      w25248.

Jia, Jian, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Liad Wagman. 2020. "GDPR and the Localness of Venture Invest-
      ment." Available at SSRN 3436535.

Johnson, Garrett A., and Scott K. Shriver. 2019. "Privacy & Market Concentration: Intended &
    Unintended Consequences of the GDPR." Available at SSRN 3477686.

Jordan, Scott. 2019. "The California Consumer Privacy Act and Impact for Network Measure-
     ment and Research." Slides.



                                            42
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, Scott Marcus, Patrick Rey, and Jean Tirole. 2001. "Interconnection and
     Access in Telecom and the Internet." In AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 91, no. 2, pp.
     287-91.

Libert, Timothy, Lucas Graves, and Rasmus Kleis Nielsen. 2018. "Changes in Third-Party Con-
    tent on European News Websites after GDPR." Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism
    Reports: Factsheet.

Lodhi, Aemen, Natalie Larson, Amogh Dhamdhere, and Constantine Dovrolis. 2014. "Using
    PeeringDB to Understand the Peering Ecosystem." ACM SIGCOMM Computer Commu-
    nication Review 44, no. 2: 20-27.

Luckie, Matthew, Bradley Huffaker, Amogh Dhamdhere, and Vasileios Giotsas. 2013. "AS Re-
    lationships, Customer Cones, and Validation." In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
    Internet measurement conference, pp. 243-256. ACM, 2013.

Marder, Alexander, Matthew Luckie, Amogh Dhamdhere, Bradley Huffaker, and Jonathan M.
    Smith. 2018. "Pushing the Boundaries with bdrmapIT: Mapping Router Ownership at Inter-
    net Scale." In Proceedings of the Internet Measurement Conference 2018, pp. 56-69. ACM,
    2018.

Meltzer, Joshua. 2014. "The Importance of the Internet and Transatlantic Data Flows for US and
    EU Trade and Investment." Global Economy and Development Working Paper 79.

Miller, Amalia R., and Catherine E. Tucker. 2011. "Can Health Care Information Technology
     Save Babies?." Journal of Political Economy 119, no. 2: 289-324.

Miller, Amalia R., and Catherine Tucker. 2018. "Privacy Protection, Personalized Medicine, and
     Genetic Testing." Management Science 64, no. 10: 4648-4668.

Mohan, Jayashree, Melissa Wasserman, and Vijay Chidambaram. 2019. "Analyzing GDPR Com-
   pliance Through the Lens of Privacy Policy." arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.12038.

Nicholson, Jessica R., and Giulia McHenry. 2016. "Measuring Cross-Border Data Flows: Data,
    Literature, and Considerations." US Department of Commerce. https://www.ntia.doc.gov/other-
    publication/2016/measuring-cross-border-data-flows-data-literature-and-considerations.

Norton, William B. 2014. "The 2014 Internet Peering Playbook: Connecting to the Core of the
    Internet." DrPeering Press.

Peukert, Christian, Stefan Bechtold, Michail Batikas, and Tobias Kretschmer. 2020. "European
    Privacy Law and Global Markets for Data." CEPR Discussion Paper 14475.

Subramanian, Lakshminarayanan, Sharad Agarwal, Jennifer Rexford, and Randy H. Katz. 2002.
    "Characterizing the Internet Hierarchy from Multiple Vantage Points." In Proc. IEEE Info-
    com 2002.

The Internet Society. 2015. "Policy Brief: Internet Interconnection."
    https://www.internetsociety.org/policybriefs/internetinterconnection/.

                                               43
Xia, Jianhong, and Lixin Gao. 2004. "On the Evaluation of AS Relationship Inferences [Inter-
     net reachability/traffic flow applications]." In IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference,
     2004. GLOBECOM'04., vol. 3, pp. 1373-1377. IEEE.

US International Trade Commission. 2014. "Digital Trade in the US and Global Economies, Part
    2." Available at: https://www.strtrade.com/media/publication/7238 pub4485.pdf.

Weller, Dennis, and Bill Woodcock. 2013. "Internet Traffic Exchange Market Development and
    Policy Challenges." OECD Digital Economy Papers. https://doi.org/10.1787/5k918gpt130q-
    en.




                                              44
Figure and Tables

                     Figure 1: Four layers of the Internet




       host                                                        host
                                process to process
       host
     application                                                   host
                                                                 application

                                   host to host
      transport                                                   transport

                       router                       router
      internet        internet                     internet       internet


        link            link                         link           link

     consumer        transport                    transport   service/content
     network         network A                    network B       network


 PC / mobile phone    Internet Service Providers               CDN / server




                                        45
                                 Figure 2: Data collection at the internet layer


                                    network 701                                    network 1
                         ve  l
                 or k le
             netw


                )      l
           (cityP leve
             P O



                     level
             o u ter
            r



                 vel
            IP le
Notes: Our network-level interconnection agreements extracted from routing tables correspond to
the topmost level in this figure. Our IP-address-level interconnection points for each agreement
extracted from active probes correspond to the bottom level in this figure. Geolocating points of
presence (PoP) and mapping routers to networks are challenging and open questions, therefore we
do not use data on the middle levels.




                                                       46
                                       Figure 3: Number of interconnection agreements by EEA and non-EEA OECD countries by counterparty
                                  (a) Counterparties are non-EEA OECD countries                                                      (b) Counterparties are non-EEA non-OECD countries
                                                     GDPR approved                        GDPR implemented
                                                      April 14, 2016                        May 25, 2018




                   50000
                                                                                                                        10000
                                                                                                                        9000




                          40000
                                                                                                                            8000




            30000
                                                                                                                7000




     Number of Agreements
                                                                                                              Number of Agreements




                   20000
                                                                                                                        6000
                                                                                                                        5000




                   10000
                      01jan2015          01jan2016              01jan2017     01jan2018          01jan2019                 01jan2015          01jan2016   01jan2017     01jan2018   01jan2019
                                                                      Month                                                                                     Month




47
                                       (c) Counterparties are EEA countries
                                                                                                             Notes: The dots represent iEEA,t numAgi jt , the total
                                                     GDPR approved                        GDPR implemented
                                                      April 14, 2016                        May 25, 2018




                  40000
                                                                                                             number of agreements by networks owned by EEA coun-
                                                                                                             tries when the counterparties are networks owned by
                                                                                                             (a) non-EEA OECD countries, (b) non-EEA non-OECD




                  35000
                                                                                                             countries, (c) EEA countries. The crosses represent
                                                                                                             iOECDiEEA,t numAgi jt , the total number of agreements




                   30000
                                                                                                             by networks owned by non-EEA OECD countries when
                                                                                                             the counterparties are networks owned by (a) non-EEA




       25000
                                                                                                             OECD countries, (b) non-EEA non-OECD countries, (c)




     Number of Agreements
                                                                                                             EEA countries. The agreements of networks owned by




                  20000
                                                                                                             non-EEA non-OECD countries when the counterparties are
                                                                                                             also networks owned by non-EEA non-OECD countries are




                  15000
                                                                                                             not included in calculating these sums.
                      01jan2015          01jan2016              01jan2017     01jan2018          01jan2019
                                                                      Month
                                             Figure 4: Number of agreements by EEA and non-EEA OECD countries by agreement type
                                (a) Provider-to-customer (p2c) agreements                                                   (b) Peering (p2p) agreements




                 50000
                                                                                                           30000  25000




                       40000
                                                                                                    20000




       Number of Agreements
                                                                                             Number of Agreements




     30000
                                                                                                           15000




                 20000
                                                                                                           10000
                    01jan2015        01jan2016    01jan2017     01jan2018   01jan2019                         01jan2015   01jan2016   01jan2017     01jan2018   01jan2019
                                                        Month                                                                               Month




48
                                (c) Customer-to-provider (c2p) agreements                   Notes: (a) The dots represent iEEA,t numProvAgi jt ,
                                                                                            the total number of agreements by networks owned by




                 45000
                                                                                            EEA countries where these networks are providers. The
                                                                                            crosses represent iOECDiEEA,t numProvAgi jt , the total




                 40000
                                                                                            number of agreements by networks owned by non-EEA
                                                                                            OECD countries where these networks are providers.(b)




                  35000
                                                                                            The dots represent iEEA,t numPeerAgi jt . The crosses
                                                                                            represent iOECDiEEA,t numPeerAgi jt . Peering agree-
                                                                                            ments between EEA countries and non-EEA OECD coun-




      30000
     Number of Agreements
                                                                                            tries contribute to counts in both series. (c) The dots
                                                                                            represent iEEA,t numCustAgi jt . The crosses represent




                 25000
                                                                                            iOECDiEEA,t numCustAgi jt . Agreements between net-
                                                                                            works owned by non-EEA non-OECD countries are not in-




                 20000
                    01jan2015        01jan2016    01jan2017     01jan2018   01jan2019       cluded in calculating these sums.
                                                        Month
     Figure 5: Average log number of IP-address-level interconnection points per agreement by EEA and non-EEA OECD countries by
     counterparty
                                                           (a) Counterparties are non-EEA OECD countries                                                                                             (b) Counterparties are non-EEA non-OECD countries




                               2
                                                                                                                                                                              2.5




                                            1.8
                                                                                                                                                                                         2.4




                           1.6
                                                                                                                                                                        2.3




             1.4
                                                                                                                                                           2.2




        Average Log Number of Interconnection Points
                                                                                                                                                      Average Log Number of Interconnection Points




                               1.2
                                                                                                                                                                              2.1




49
                                                       01jan2016   01jul2016   01jan2017   01jul2017 01jan2018   01jul2018   01jan2019   01jul2019                                                   01jan2016   01jul2016   01jan2017   01jul2017 01jan2018   01jul2018   01jan2019   01jul2019
                                                                                                  Week                                                                                                                                          Week


                                                                    (c) Counterparties are EEA countries
                                                                                                                                                     Notes: The dots represent log(numAgIPiEEA jt ), the log




                               2
                                                                                                                                                     number of IP-address-level interconnection points aver-
                                                                                                                                                     aged among agreements by networks owned by EEA




                                              1.8
                                                                                                                                                     countries when the counterparties are networks owned
                                                                                                                                                     by (a) non-EEA OECD countries, (b) non-EEA non-
                                                                                                                                                     OECD countries, (c) EEA countries. The crosses rep-




                                  1.6
                                                                                                                                                     resent log(numAgIPiOECDEEA jt ), the log number of
                                                                                                                                                     IP-address-level interconnection points averaged among




                     1.4
                                                                                                                                                     agreement by networks owned by non-EEA OECD coun-
                                                                                                                                                     tries when the counterparties are networks owned by (a)




          1.2
                                                                                                                                                     non-EEA OECD countries, (b) non-EEA non-OECD coun-




        Average Log Number of Interconnection Points
                                                                                                                                                     tries, (c) EEA countries. Only agreements present through-




                               1
                                                                                                                                                     out Dec 2015 ­ June 2019 are used to take the averages.
                                                       01jan2016   01jul2016   01jan2017   01jul2017 01jan2018   01jul2018   01jan2019   01jul2019
                                                                                                  Week
Figure 6: Average log number of interconnection agreements by networks in EEA and non-EEA
OECD countries




                                     1.05
                                                                         GDPR approved                              GDPR implemented
                                                                          April 14, 2016                              May 25, 2018



              Average Log Number of Agreements of Networks
                    .85       .9     .8 .95        1




                                           01jan2015         01jan2016              01jan2017           01jan2018          01jan2019
                                                                                         Month

                                                                 EEA countries             Non-EEA OECD countries



Notes:      The dots represent log(numAgNtwrkkEEA,t ), the log number of agree-
ments averaged among networks owned by EEA countries.                 The crosses represent
log(numAgNtwrkkOECDkEEA,t ), the log number of agreements averaged among networks
owned by non-EEA OECD countries. Non-EEA and non-OECD countries' networks are not
included in taking the averages. Only networks present throughout Jan 2015 ­ June 2019 are
used to take the averages. The first red vertical line represents 14 April 2016, the approval
date of the GDPR. The second red vertical line represents 25 May 2018, the implementation
date of the GDPR. Regression including month and network fixed effects has the coeffi-
cient on POSTe × EEA = -.004 (se = 0.007, clustered by country) and the coefficient on
POSTa × EEA = 0.006 (se = 0.007, clustered by country). Both are insignificant at conventional
levels of significance.




                                                                                           50
       Figure 7: Average log number of networks in EEA and non-EEA OECD countries
                                6.6          6.4
                Average Log Number of Networks
               5.8        6       6.2
                                5.6




                                    01jan2015      01jan2016           01jan2017        01jan2018   01jan2019
                                                                           Month

                                                       EEA countries      Non-EEA OECD countries



Notes: The dots represent log(numNtwrkiEEA,t ), the log number of networks averaged among
EEA countries. The crosses represent log(numNtwrkiOECDiEEA,t ), the log number of networks
averaged among non-EEA OECD countries. Non-EEA and non-OECD countries' networks are
not included in taking the averages. Regression including quarter and country fixed effects has the
coefficient on POSTe × EEA = -.002 (se = 0.017, clustered by country) and the coefficient on
POSTa × EEA = 0.016 (se = 0.024, clustered by country). Both are insignificant at conventional
levels of significance.




                                                                         51
    Figure 8: Average log customer cone of networks in EEA and non-EEA OECD countries
                                  .4
               Average Log Customer Cone of Networks
                   .25          .3.2         .35




                                       01jan2015       01jan2016           01jan2017        01jan2018   01jan2019
                                                                                Month

                                                           EEA countries       Non-EEA OECD countries



Notes: The dots represent log(NtwrkCustConekEEA,t ), the log customer cone averaged among
networks owned by EEA countries. The crosses represent log(NtwrkCustConekOECDiEEA,t ),
the log customer cone averaged among networks owned by non-EEA OECD countries. Non-EEA
and non-OECD countries' networks are not included in taking the averages. Only networks present
throughout Jan 2015 ­ June 2019 are used to take the averages. Regression including month
and network fixed effects has the coefficient on POSTe × EEA = -.007 (se = 0.004, clustered
by country) and the coefficient on POSTa × EEA = 0.011 (se = 0.004, clustered by country).
Though both are significantly different from zero, their magnitudes are economically small.




                                                                              52
                                                        Table 1: Description of variables


                            Unit of                                                                                        Additional
      Variable           Observation      Frequency             Description                     Source                        Notes
      numAgi jt           ctryi ­ctry j   monthly     The number of interconnection        AS Relationships     Agreements are available on
                                                      agreements between pairs of net-                          network­network level and are
                                                      works owned by the countries i                            aggregated to country­country
                                                      and j.                                                    level.
      numProvAgi jt       ctryi ­ctry j   monthly     The number of interconnection        AS Relationships     Same as above.
                                                      agreements where country i's
                                                      network is a provider to country
                                                      j's network.
      numPeerAgi jt       ctryi ­ctry j   monthly     The number of interconnection        AS Relationships     Same as above.
                                                      agreements where country i's
                                                      network and country j's network
                                                      are peers.




53
      numCustAgi jt       ctryi ­ctry j   monthly     The number of interconnection        AS Relationships     Same as above. Value is iden-
                                                      agreements where country i's                              tical to numProvAg jit for ctry j ­
                                                      network is a customer of country                          ctryi .
                                                      j's network.
      numAgIPklt        ntwrkk ­ntwrkl     weekly     The number of IP-address-level      IPv4 Prefix-Probing   Data is available daily and is ag-
                                                      interconnection points between                            gregated to weekly.
                                                      network k and network l , given
                                                      k and l have an agreement.
      numAgNtwrkkt          ntwrkk        monthly     The number of interconnection        AS Relationships
                                                      agreements network k has.
      numNtwrkit             ctryi        quarterly   The number of networks country       AS Organizations
                                                      i owns.
      NtwrkCustConekt       ntwrkk        monthly     The number of networks net-          AS Relationships     A measure of a network's impor-
                                                      work k can reach through its cus-                         tance in Internet routing.
                                                      tomer connections alone.

     Notes: In the computer science field, a network is referred to as an Autonomous System (AS). All data sources listed here are available
     through CAIDA's webpage http://www.caida.org/data/overview/.
                                      Table 2: Summary statistics


 Variable                                 Observations     Mean        SD        Min        Max
 Panel A: unrectangularized variables
    numAgi jt                               119,071         64.4      759.0       1        33,497
    numProvAgi jt                           121,369         44.8      681.8       1        31,485
    numPeerAgi jt                            62,241         30.8      140.1       1         4,155
    numCustAgi jt                           121,369         44.8      681.8       1        31,485
    numAgIPklt                             19,413,597       9.8       144.8       1        172,481
    numAgNtwrkkt                           2,909,695        5.4       55.9        1         8,391
    numNtwrkit                               3,597         357.3     1754.3       1        24,887
    NtwrkCustConekt                        2,909,695        7.8       263.3       1        37,061


 Panel B: rectangularized variables
    numAgi jt                              1,085,400        7.1       252.2       0        33,497
    numProvAgi jt                          2,160,000        2.5       161.9       0        31,485
    numPeerAgi jt                          1,085,400        1.8       34.3        0         4,155
    numCustAgi jt                          2,160,000        2.5       161.9       0        31,485

Notes: Panel A presents the variables with the appropriate levels of aggregation from the raw data.
For numAgi jt , numProvAgi jt , numPeerAgi jt , numCustAgi jt , we also rectangularize the variables
by filling in zero values for country pairs and dates with no observed agreements from our raw data
and present the rectangularized variables in Panel B.




                                                  54
Table 3: The GDPR's impact on the number of agreements by EEA and non-EEA OECD countries,
by counterparty




                                      Non-EEA                 Non-EEA
                                        OECD                 Non-OECD                   EEA
                                          (1)                    (2)                     (3)
 POSTe × EEA                          -0.009                    0.003                 -0.003
                                       (0.029)                 (0.005)                 (0.016)
 POSTa × EEA                          -0.007                    0.017                   0.011
                                       (0.024)                 (0.005)                 (0.017)
 Group dummies                      country pairs           country pairs           country pairs
 Time dummies                          months                  months                  months
 Clusters                                418                    6,751                    880
 R2                                     0.991                   0.948                   0.987
 Observations                           22,572                 364,554                 47,520

Notes: The dependent variable is log(numAgi jt + 1). The variable numAgi jt is rectangularized as described
in Table 2 and we add one when we take the log to account for zero values. POSTe is an indicator variable
equal to 1 if the observation is made after the GDPR became effective. POSTa is an indicator variable equal
to 1 if the observation is made after the GDPR was approved. Column (1) includes observations when one
party is a network owned by an EEA or non-EEA OECD country and the counterparty is a network owned
by a non-EEA OECD country. Column (2) includes observations when one party is a network owned by
an EEA or non-EEA OECD country and the counterparty is a network owned by a non-EEA non-OECD
country. Column (3) includes observations when one party is a network owned by an EEA or non-EEA
OECD country and the counterparty is a network owned by an EEA country. All regressions include month
dummies and country pair dummies. All regressions cluster standard error by country pair. Standard errors
are in parentheses. Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed test at the  10% level,  5% level,  1%
level.




                                                    55
     Table 4: The GDPR's impact on the number of agreements by EEA and non-EEA OECD countries, by counterparty and agreement type




                              Counterparty is non-EEA OECD             Counterparty is non-EEA non-OECD                      Counterparty is EEA
                             Provider        Peer       Customer      Provider        Peer         Customer        Provider         Peer       Customer
                                (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
      POSTe × EEA           -0.032        -0.040        -0.020          0.002      -0.007          -0.013          -0.007         -0.038        0.005
                             (0.023)       (0.042)       (0.022)       (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.012)        (0.016)     (0.013)
      POSTa × EEA             0.021         0.031       -0.025          0.011        0.007         -0.006           0.027          0.002       -0.021
                             (0.026)       (0.035)       (0.027)       (0.004)      (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.016)       (0.017)      (0.014)
      Group dummies         ctry pairs    ctry pairs    ctry pairs    ctry pairs   ctry pairs      ctry pairs      ctry pairs     ctry pairs   ctry pairs
      Time dummies            months       months        months        months       months          months          months         months       months




56
      Clusters                 473           418           473          6,751        6,751           6,751           1,376           880           1,376
      R2                      0.984         0.984         0.985         0.941        0.930           0.925           0.978         0.980           0.977
      Observations            25,542       22,572        25,542       364,554       364,554         364,554         74,304         47,520       74,304

     Notes: The dependent variable is log(numProvAgi jt + 1) for columns (1), (4), (7), log(numPeerAgi jt + 1) for columns (2), (5), (8), and
     log(numCustAgi jt + 1) for columns (3), (6), (9). The dependent variables are rectangularized as described in Table 2 and we add one when we
     take the log to account for zero values. POSTe is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the observation is made after the GDPR became effective. POSTa
     is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the observation is made after the GDPR was approved. Columns (1), (2), (3) include observations when the treat-
     ment/control party is a network owned by an EEA/non-EEA OECD country and is the provider, peer, or customer to the counterparty network owned
     by a non-EEA OECD country. Columns (4), (5), (6) include observations when the treatment/control party is a network owned by an EEA/non-EEA
     OECD country and is the provider, peer, or customer to the counterparty network owned by a non-EEA non-OECD country. Columns (7), (8), (9)
     include observations when the treatment/control party is a network owned by an EEA/non-EEA OECD country and is the provider, peer, or customer
     to the counterparty network owned by an EEA country. All regressions include month dummies and country pair dummies. All regressions cluster
     standard error by country pair. Standard errors are in parentheses. Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed test at the  10% level,  5% level,
      1% level.
Table 5: The GDPR's impact on the number of IP-address-level interconnection points per agree-
ment by EEA and non-EEA OECD countries, by counterparty




                                      Non-EEA                  Non-EEA
                                        OECD                  Non-OECD                    EEA
                                          (1)                     (2)                      (3)
 POSTe × EEA                             0.039                   0.003                 -0.032
                                        (0.023)                 (0.049)                 (0.024)
 Group dummies                      network pairs            network pairs           network pairs
 Time dummies                           weeks                    weeks                   weeks
 Clusters                                128                      522                     307
 R2                                      0.871                   0.827                   0.867
 Observations                         2,593,805                 494,374                1,886,031

Notes: The dependent variable is log(numAgIPi jt ). POSTe is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the observa-
tion is made after the GDPR became effective. POSTa is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the observation
is made after the GDPR was approved. Column (1) includes observations when one party of the agreement
is a network owned by an EEA or non-EEA OECD country and the counterparty is a network owned by a
non-EEA OECD country. Column (2) includes observations when one party of the agreement is a network
owned by an EEA or non-EEA OECD country and the counterparty is a network owned by a non-EEA
non-OECD country. Column (3) includes observations when one party of the agreement is a network owned
by an EEA or non-EEA OECD country and the counterparty is a network owned by an EEA country. Only
agreements present for at least 150 weeks are used. The GDPR approval date Apr 2016 is close to the
sample starting date Dec 2015, so POSTa × EEA is not included in the regressions. All regressions include
week dummies and network pair dummies. All regressions cluster standard error by country pair. Standard
errors are in parentheses. Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed test at the  10% level,  5% level,
 1% level.




                                                     57
