                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DRIVING BEHAVIOR AND THE PRICE OF GASOLINE:
                   EVIDENCE FROM FUELING-LEVEL MICRO DATA

                                      Christopher R. Knittel
                                        Shinsuke Tanaka

                                       Working Paper 26488
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26488


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We thank comments from Kyle Emerick, Federico Esposito, Laura Gee, Kenneth Gillingham,
Kelsey Jack, Yoshifumi Konishi, Ashley Langer, Shomon R. Shamsuddin, Richard L. Sweeney,
Koichi Ushijima, Arthur A. Van Benthem, Catherine Wolfram, Hidefumi Yokoo, and participants
at 2019 AERE Summer Conference and Kyoto Summer Workshop on Applied Economics. We
also appreciate the IID, Inc. Group for sharing the data on on-road fuel consumption. This
research was assisted by a grant from the Abe Fellowship Program administered by the Social
Science Research Council in cooperation with funds provided by the Japan Foundation Center for
Global Partnership. The views expressed here are those of the author and do not reflect those of
the data provider or the funding agencies. This paper was written in part while Tanaka was
visiting the MIT's Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research (CEEPR). He is
grateful to CEEPR for its hospitality. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26488.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christopher R. Knittel and Shinsuke Tanaka. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Driving Behavior and the Price of Gasoline: Evidence from Fueling-Level Micro Data
Christopher R. Knittel and Shinsuke Tanaka
NBER Working Paper No. 26488
November 2019
JEL No. D12,L71,Q31,Q41,R48

                                          ABSTRACT

We use novel microdata on on-road fuel consumption and prices paid for fuel in Japan to estimate
short-run price elasticities of demand for gasoline consumption. We have three main findings.
First, our elasticity estimates of roughly -0.37 are in orders of magnitude larger than previously
estimated using more aggregate data. Second, we are one of the first papers to separately estimate
both the price elasticities of miles driven (-0.30) and on-road fuel economy (0.07). Lastly, we find
that on-road fuel economy is determined by recent prices than distant past prices paid, suggesting
limited habit formation of fuel-conserving driving behaviors.


Christopher R. Knittel
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu

Shinsuke Tanaka
The Fletcher School
Tufts University
160 Packard Ave.
Medford, MA 02155
Shinsuke.Tanaka@tufts.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26488
I.       Introduction
Automobile usage imposes substantial social costs, including the greenhouse gas emissions,
local pollution that is harmful to human health, traffic congestion and accidents, and oil
dependency (Parry et al. 2007, Currie and Walker 2011, and Knittel et al. 2016). While
economists often advocate gasoline taxes to address these externalities, policy makers often
rely on more costly fuel economy standards (Austin and Dinan 2005 and Jacobsen 2013). A
major source of the inefficiency of fuel economy standards is that they reduce marginal cost
of driving. This leads to two inefficiencies on the intensive margin. The first has been well
documented: drivers will drive too many miles compared to the social optimum. This is known
as rebound. Reducing the marginal cost of driving leads to a second effect, the magnitude
of which is less well known. In particular, on-road fuel economy will suffer through changes
in either driving style or vehicle maintenance. Despite the potential importance of these
behavioral responses, we know little about this latter effect. A major difficulty in estimating
this effect is the lack of extensive and systematic data on fuel consumption at the micro level.
Instead, most existing studies rely on imperfect and often highly aggregated panel data, such
as monthly gasoline consumption at the state level (see, for example, Hughes et al. (2008)).
    In this study, we investigate the short-run price elasticity of demand for gasoline con-
sumption using innovative, high-frequency data, collected from a mobile phone application.
The data report detailed micro-level information on gasoline consumption, vehicle distance
traveled, and gasoline prices paid at the refueling level over 90,000 drivers for 10 years.
The use of such micro data allows us to make unique contributions in three aspects. First,
by observing actual prices paid by individual drivers for fuel at every refueling level, we
can estimate the own-price elasticity of demand for gasoline at the driver-vehicle level. Sec-
ond, we can decompose the impact on fuel consumption into those behavioral changes that
capture changes in vehicle distance traveled and adjustments in driving style and vehicle
maintenance, as reflected in actual on-road fuel economy. Lastly, we can explore the extent
to which drivers adjust their actual fuel economy in response to a series of past gasoline
prices to understand habit formation of fuel-conserving driving behaviors from past events.
In addition to these, we also investigate asymmetric price effects across price increases and
decreases.
    We estimate an average elasticity of around -0.37. This is larger than conventional es-
timates of -0.02 to -0.04 in the macroeconomic forecast analysis (U.S. Energy Information
Administration 2018) or -0.034 to -0.077 from 2001 to 2006 in Hughes et al. (2008).1 Our
     1
    See the similar estimates summarized in Lin and Prince (2013). Also note that Li et al. (2014), and
indirect so does Davis and Kilian (2011), documents evidence that changes in gasoline taxes are more salient


                                                     1
estimate is similar to recent work by Levin et al. (2017) which uses daily expenditure data
from credit card receipts.
    We next split our elasticity estimate into the elasticity of vehicle-kilometer traveled
(VKT) to gasoline prices and the price elasticity of actual on-road fuel economy achieved.
Our VKT elasticity is -0.30. The magnitude is also greater than the short-run elasticities
estimated in other studies (e.g., the one month elasticity in the 2000s is -0.07 in Hughes et
al. (2008) and -0.02 between 1997 and 2001 in Small and Dender (2007)), and our estimates
are even larger than the medium-run or long-run elasticities of around -0.123 over two years
in Knittel and Sandler (2018) and -0.15 in Gillingham (2011).
    We also find meaningful response of on-road fuel economy to changes in gasoline prices,
likely manifesting itself through changes in driving style and/or changes in vehicle mainte-
nance behavior. The price elasticity of actual fuel economy is roughly 0.07. We are one of
the first, if not the first, to estimate this key parameter.2 Yet, growing discussions in the
energy efficiency gap suggest great potential for behavioral adjustments on the energy cost
savings (Allcott and Greenstone 2012). We shed a new light on driving behavioral adjust-
ments drivers make for given distance in response to price changes. The existing literature on
the price effect on fuel economy is exclusively limited to the extrinsic margin, in which high
gasoline prices incentivize consumers to switch to high fuel efficient vehicles (Li et al. 2009,
Klier and Linn 2010, Busse et al. 2013). In contrast, evidence on the intrinsic margin, in
which consumers respond to day-to-day fluctuations in gasoline prices, is remarkably absent.
Our evidence highlights a relatively unexploited channel through which fuel consumption
responds to prices.
    We further investigate whether the price effects on on-road fuel economy persist or fade
away over time; are these effects capturing drivers learning how to drive better or a short-
term response to price changes? By relating the current actual fuel economy to all past
prices paid by the drivers, we find that the recent prices have greater explanatory power
than distant past prices, suggesting that there is little learning or habit formation from the
past events that persists over time.
    Additional analysis shows substantial asymmetry in the price elasticity of demand for
gasoline consumption when gasoline prices rise or fall. The neoclassical economics theory
predicts that comparable price changes have similar effects regardless of the direction of
to consumers than day-to-day fluctuations in the tax-exclusive gasoline prices. Both papers find elasticity
estimates in line with our own when focusing on variation in gasoline prices coming from changes in gasoline
even when using more aggregate data.
   2
     While not the focus of the paper, Langer and McRae (2017) includes regressions of trip-level fuel con-
sumption for 108 drivers that were loaned a set of identical Honda Accords over forty days. They find that
increases in gas prices increased fuel consumption, but do not untangle why this is. Given the short time
period it may be the case that gas prices varied little making it difficult to identify the true response.


                                                     2
its change. In contrast, the behavioral model of loss aversion proposed by Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) suggests that consumers perceive a price increase more greatly than an
equivalent price decrease. While a growing body of studies document evidence in favor of
the behavioral model (DellaVigna 2009), little is known about whether this asymmetric price
effects holds for gasoline, a product for which price has been extremely volatile, and demand
is found to be relatively price inelastic (Lin and Prince 2013). The order of the magnitude
when price goes up from the previous purchase is -0.42, nearly twice greater than that for
falling prices of -0.22, suggesting that consumers are highly more sensitive to increasing
prices than decreasing prices. The magnitude of our estimated short-run elasticity for price
increase is close to the range of the long-run elasticities in other studies (e.g., -0.11 in Small
and Dender (2007) from 1997 to 2001, -0.35 in Bento et al. (2009), and similar estimates
summarized in Graham and Glaister (2002)).
    This article proceeds as follows. Section II describes the primary data we use for the
analysis. Section III examines the price elasticity of demand for gasoline consumption, vehicle
distance traveled, and actual fuel economy. Section IV examines the learning effect of a
history of prices paid on the current driving behavior. Section V explores the heterogenous
price elasticities across various dimensions. Section VI concludes.


II.     Data3
The primary data on the on-road fuel consumption are collected by a private company
through a unique mobile phone application. Drivers can freely download and use the ap-
plication to learn about their own real-world fuel economy relative to that of other drivers
driving the same configuration of vehicles4 and tips to improve driving behaviors to save
fuel costs. For this purpose, drivers report the amount of fuel purchased to fill the tank
completely and the odometer value at every refueling level, from which fuel consumption
and the distance traveled can be obtained.
    For each observation, we can also identify the date and time of the purchase, the price
of gasoline paid,5 and prefecture of the gasoline station where the purchase was made. The
average daily (i.e. 24-hour) fuel consumption and distance traveled are computed using the
date and time for the two consecutive refuels. The actual fuel-economy figures are computed
by dividing the distance traveled by the gasoline consumption.
   3
     See Online Appendix A for more detailed description of the data and the variables construction.
   4
     The vehicle configurations can be uniquely matched at the detailed level of model, manufacturing year
and month, displacement size, weight, engine type, wheel drive type, body type, and transmission type.
   5
     All prices are converted into the 2010 January value using the monthly consumer price index reported
by the Statistics Bureau of Japan.


                                                    3
     The technology to photograph receipts and odometer for reporting simplifies the process
and helps minimize the typing errors (see Online Appendix Figure A.1). In addition, the
drivers can indicate if there is any unreported refuelling since the last report to avoid inflat-
ing distance traveled for the reported fuel consumption. The additional processes to guard
against outliers and unreasonable values are described in Online Appendix A. Our sample
is limited to gasoline-powered passenger vehicles and minicars6 manufactured by domestic
automakers.
     Table 1 reports the summary statistics of our final sample used for the analysis. In total,
the sample includes over 4 million observations of fuel consumption at every refueling from
2005 to 2014 for more than 90,000 driver-vehicle pairs driving more than 3,900 configurations.
On average, drivers consume 3.54 liters per day (L/day) (equivalent to 0.93 gallons per day),
drive 36.7 kilometers per day (km/day) (22.8 miles), and pay 136.6 per liter ($5.21 per
gallon). Average frequency of refueling is every 14.1 days. The observations come from every
prefecture with some preponderance on large prefectures such as Saitama, Kanagawa, Aichi,
Tokyo, Chiba, and Osaka (Online Appendix Table A.2).
     It would be ideal to have randomly selected representative drivers record on-road fuel
consumptions at every trip. In the absence of such data, our data rely on information sub-
mitted by drivers who voluntarily engage with the application. We can compare VKT, fuel
consumption, and average fuel economy in our sample to a representative sample of Japanese
drivers and vehicles from the Annual Statistical Report on Motor Vehicle Transport.7 Our
sample drives more, consumes more gasoline, but has greater fuel economy. The survey re-
ports an average VKT for vehicles, conditional on driving during a given day, that is quite
close to our average; the survey's average is 35.5 km/day, compared to our average of 36.7
km/day. However, once you account for the fact that vehicles in the national survey are only
driven 67.0% of the days, the unconditional mean in the survey is lower (23.8 km/day). The
gasoline consumption per day in the national survey is 3.62 L as opposed to 3.54 L/day in
our sample, which translates into actual fuel efficiency of 10.01 km/L in the survey, and this
   6
     Minicars (called "kei-cars" ) constitute one of the primary classifications of vehicles in Japan. They are
tiny vehicles whose displacement is 660 cubic centimeter or lower and are popular because roads are typically
narrow, and automobile-related taxes are substantially lower than those imposed on passenger vehicles.
   7
     This is one of the fundamental statistics managed by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport
and Tourism (MLIT). The survey is conducted every month for randomly selected owners of all registered
vehicles with the sample size of 33,000 vehicles in February, June, and October, and 10,000 vehicles in
the remaining months. The subjects are mandated to answer the survey. The reports (both monthly and
annual) can be downloaded directly from the MLIT website. We use the report in 2009 because the data
after 2010 report vehicles for business use only. We also use the values based on the passenger transport
instead of the freight transport. These values are reported separately for passenger cars and minicars. We
use the share of passenger cars in our data to compute the weighted average. Unfortunately, there is no
information on national average official fuel economy of vehicles on the road to investigate the similarity of
vehicle composition of our sample in this respect.


                                                      4
is lower than our average fuel efficiency of 10.85 km/L.
    Given how drivers select into the sample--the app's goal is to provide information on
how drivers can improve their fuel efficiency--one may expect our estimated fuel economy
elasticity to be larger than the population's. However, it is not clear whether they will have a
larger elasticity than the population. It may be the case that they turned to the app as a way
to respond to gasoline prices because they have less discretion over their VKT. Below, we
explore heterogeneities in the estimated elasticities across various dimensions to offer some
insights on how the elasticities would look like for the general population relative to what
we find in our sample.
    Appendix Figure A.2 plots the weekly observations of the national average retail gasoline
prices per liter over our study period. Clearly, the prices have been very volatile during this
time; the prices have gone up and peaked at 185.0 on August 4, 2008 but declined sharply
to the bottom value of 110.3 on January 13, 2019, and have been rising more steadily
ever since. Note that the price trend is very similar to that of the U.S. during this period,
although the fuel prices in Japan are substantially higher than those in the U.S. The short-
term fluctuations in fuel prices as illustrated provide an important source of variation for
our identification of demand elasticities.


III.       The Price Elasticity of Demand for Gasoline
We begin with a simple log-log model of gasoline demand, given by:

                           ln Yivt =  +  × ln P riceivt + µt + iv + ivt ,                                (1)

where ln Yivt denotes the log of gasoline consumption per day (L/day) for driver i, driving
the vehicle v , at time t, and P riceivt is the fuel price per liter paid by driver for that amount
of gasoline consumption. We include a variant of the time fixed effects, µt , to control for
any correlations between gasoline consumption and gasoline price. This is crucial because
there are strong seasonality effects in both demand for gasoline and fuel prices, whereas the
macroeconomic conditions can also lead to a spurious correlation. In our preferred model,
we include the year-by-month fixed effects to account for the transitory shocks specific to
each month of the year.
    One advantage of our data is that we can include the driver-by-vehicle fixed effects,
iv , which allows us to estimate the relationship within the driver-vehicle levels.8 Thus, any
   8
    In our sample, 79.0% of all drivers are matched with a single vehicle, whereas 16.8% report two vehicles.
It would be pointless given the purpose of the program for multiple drivers to report for a single vehicle.



                                                     5
heterogeneity across drivers that is likely to correlate gasoline consumption and fuel prices
paid will not be a threat to identification. We compare our results with those that would
be estimated in comparable studies using the vehicle model fixed effects to understand the
potential bias that may arise.
     An important identification issue is reverse causality. For instance, drivers can search
for cheaper gasolines when they consume more, in which case the estimated elasticities are
overstated. Alternatively, when drivers drive a long distance on highways (which are all toll
roads in Japan) or in rural areas, drivers are more likely to pay high gasoline prices due to
little competition among gasoline stations, as drivers are required to utilize gasoline stations
at the service areas or those out of few options in rural areas, causing a positive correlation
between fuel consumption and prices paid.
     To address this issue, we use the instrumental variable (IV) approach to estimate the
model. The first stage of the IV model is:

                            ln P riceivt =  +  × ln P ricet + µt + iv +            ivt ,                       (2)

where actual prices paid by drivers are instrumented by P ricet , the average gasoline price
in the same prefecture on the date of the purchase.9
    The coefficient of interest,  , estimated in the second stage of the IV model measures the
price elasticity of demand for gasoline consumption. The identification assumption is that
after controlling for time effects, the day-to-day fluctuations in gasoline price in the market
are orthogonal to unobserved factors that affect the driving decisions by individual drivers
other than going through the fuel prices paid. This is a common assumption and likely to
hold as the market price of gasoline is determined largely by the world supply and demand of
crude oil (Knittel and Sandler 2018). All standard errors are clustered at the driver-vehicle
level.
    Figure 1 plots the elasticities estimated from various models (individual coefficients are
presented in Table 2) and the distribution of prices paid by individual drivers in our sample.
The coefficient estimated from the OLS model is positive (shown in Column (1) in Table 2),
suggesting that the endogeneity of price results in substantial upward bias in the estimated
elasticity.10 Conversely, all estimates illustrated in the figure based on either IV or the reduced
   9
      The national average daily prices are obtained from the same company that we obtained the fuel con-
sumption data. The information is available only after 2010. For data before 2009, we use the weekly gasoline
retail prices at the prefecture level reported by the Institute of Energy Economics, Japan. We computed the
daily fuel prices for non-reported days by taking the arithmetic averages of the two most recently reported
values. All fuel prices are converted into the January 2010 yen using the consumer price index.
   10
      This evidence effectively suggests a limited role of searching behaviors by drivers in biasing the estimates.
Dorsey et al. (2019) also show little search by drivers in choosing where to stop for gasoline by tracing all
trips made and refueling patterns by 108 drivers driving the test vehicles for forty days.


                                                        6
form models show consistently negative elasticities. The model with only the basic year and
month fixed effects suggests less elastic demand. In contrast, all estimated elasticities with
more granular time fixed effects present relatively more elastic demand with the order of
-0.213 to -0.371. The preferred IV model with the year-by-month fixed effects produces an
estimated elasticity of -0.371, which represents an order of magnitude more elastic than
those inferred from aggregate gasoline expenditure data. To put this into the context, our
estimated elasticities suggest that a one standard deviation increase in fuel prices leads to
about a 4.14%, or 0.146 L, fewer gasoline consumption a day.
    To see how gasoline consumption is determined, we decompose the effect between the
vehicle distance traveled and the actual on-road fuel economy of the vehicle. These results
are reported in Columns (6) and (7) of Table 2. We find that about 81% of reductions in fuel
consumption come from reduced vehicle distance traveled, whereas the remaining 19% come
from improvement in fuel conserving driving behaviors. The estimated elasticities are -0.302
for vehicle distance traveled and 0.070 for actual fuel efficiency, and both are statistically
significant at the 1% level, suggesting that a one standard deviation increase in gasoline
prices leads to a 3.37% (1.237 km) fewer vehicle distance traveled a day and a 0.776% (0.084
km/L) increase in actual fuel economy.11 These findings highlight the importance to account
for driving behaviors in fully understanding how gasoline prices affect fuel consumption.
    We conduct several robustness checks to these results. First, we include observations
of extremely long vehicle distance traveled12 and repeat the same analysis. The results are
consistent with our findings above (Online Appendix Table B.4). Notably, the point estimate
with the OLS model enlarges, whereas all estimates based on the IV model are smaller in
magnitude. This is consistent with our story that positive bias arises due to higher gasoline
prices paid by longer distance drivers (driving on toll roads or rural places). In contrast,
these extremely long distance drivers are less elastic to prices possibly because these trips
cannot be simply reduced.
    Second, we explore alternative functional forms, in particular linear and semi-log models.
The double-log specifications, as we model in the main analysis, is the most conventional in
the literature. Yet, some have proposed for other specifications (Hsing 1990). We find that
the findings are robust to both linear and semi-log functional forms (Online Appendix Table
B.5).
  11
     It is worth noting that since drivers have control over and simultaneously determine all three variables:
gasoline consumption, distance traveled, and actual fuel economy, their relationship should not be interpreted
as causal but only indicate a correlational relationship among the three variables.
  12
     The main analysis removes observations beyond 100 km/day of daily distance traveled since they are
unlikely to reflect normal driving distances in Japan. Nonetheless, this robustness check includes observations
of up to 250 km/day, a 6% increase in the number of observations.



                                                      7
    Finally, we also define fuel prices based on the average fuel price of all days since the last
refuel until this time as the main independent variable, in Table B.6. Our results are robust
to this alternative definition.
    The comparison of our results to those estimated only with the vehicle configuration fixed
effects (presented in Online Appendix Table B.7) reveals that the elasticities estimated with
driver-vehicle fixed effects are consistently more elastic, suggesting that estimates based on
repeated cross-sectional data (e.g., the National Household Travel Survey in the U.S.) may
be understated. This provides strong support to account for important heterogeneities across
drivers to better estimate the demand elasticities.


IV.         Learning Effect
The evidence thus far suggests that drivers alter their driving style (or vehicle maintenance)
in response to price changes. The second question we investigate is how persistent such effects
remain over time. To test this, we explore whether the fuel prices paid in the distant past
affect behavior in similar ways than more recent prices, where we can measure driving style
via real-world fuel economy. Implicitly, this is a test as to whether there is a utility cost
of driving less aggressively. If consumers value aggressive driving either because it provides
utility directly or through their value of time, then the effect of gasoline prices on real-world
fuel economy will be temporary. If, instead, high gasoline prices prompt consumers to learn
about the virtues of less aggressive driving, we will see long-run effects from price changes.
    One way to flexibly estimate the effects from past events is to separately include all prices
paid in the past at every refuel level by estimating a distributed lag model of the form:

                                               k
                              ln Yivt =  +           j ln Pt-j + µt + iv +   ivt ,                       (3)
                                              j =0

where Pt-j is the price paid at the j -th previous refuel.
    However, such a flexible estimation faces two challenges. First, prices paid this time and
the recent past are highly serially correlated. For instance, the correlation coefficient between
the price paid for this cycle and the previous one is 0.959.13 Second, we do not observe a
consistent set of past prices across, and even within, drivers, since refills do not occur at
fixed intervals. With these issues being noted, below we present the results when we include
the six most recent prices paid by a given driver.
    We formalize an approach based on the household finance models within the seminal
works of Ulrike et al. (2011), Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), and Malmendier and Nagel
 13
      Online Appendix Table C.1 shows the correlation coefficient matrix for the most recent six prices paid.

                                                        8
(2016).14 In particular, we summarize all prices paid in the past as a weighted average of those
prices, while allowing the weight to increase, be constant, or decline over time. If the weight
is constant, then all past prices affect behavior equally, if the weight is increasing over time,
then more recent prices matter more, while if the weight is decreasing over time, consumers
are adopting behavioral changes that are not costly once adopted. Most importantly, we
allow the data to identify the weighting function. In particular, for each price paid at the
k -th refuel, we construct the following weighted average of past prices:

                                                      k
                                        ivk () =            wj ln Pt-j ,                                  (4)
                                                     j =0

and
                                                            j
                                             wj =      k
                                                                    ,                                     (5)
                                                       m=0      m
where the sum of all past weights is equal to one.
   The parameter  determines how quickly fuel-consuming driving manners die out in
actual driving behaviors. To illustrate how the parameter  determines the shape of the
weighting function, Figure 2 Panel A plots the weights for a 100th refuel for two values of
. If  > 1 (e.g., for  = 1.1), the weight is decreasing over time, assigning greater weights
toward past prices, and thereby being indicative that current driving behavior is influenced
more by the distant past events. Alternatively, for  < 1 (e.g.,  = 0.9), the influences of
past events fade away, while the recent events carry greater weights on the current driving
behaviors. With  = 1, each event in the past is equally weighted.
   The cost of this approach, compared to a distributed lag model, is that the weighting
function is more parametric and constrained to be monotonic.
   In our estimation, we include all prices paid from the first observation in our data and
simultaneously estimate the price elasticity of demand and the weighting parameter by the
specification:
                         ln Yivt =  +  × ivk () + µt + iv + eivt ,                       (6)

where the outcome variable of interest is the log of actual fuel economy.15 Because ivk () is
a nonlinear function with respect to the weighting parameter, , we adopt a nonlinear least
  14
      Ulrike et al. (2011) studies the effect of life-time experiences in stock market returns on current risk
attitudes and financial market participation; Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) studies investor's expectation
of future stock market returns as a function of a series of past returns; and Malmendier and Nagel (2016)
show how the lifetime experiences of inflation form the future inflation expectation.
   15
      To reduce the computational burden, we adopt the reduced form analysis with year and month fixed
effects and include up to 100th refuel, which accounts for 87% of all sample. The evidence on the actual fuel
economy suggests that including up to 200th refuel, accounting for 98% of all observations, remains similar.



                                                      9
squares method that minimizes the sum of squared residuals. As starting values, we first
estimate the model without the weighted average of past prices to obtain the parameters for
other variables and set them as well as  = 1.
    Figure 2 Panel B plots the estimated  for KPL (individual coefficients and  values
are reported in Online Appendix Table C.2 for all three dependent variables: KPL, VKT,
and gasoline consumption).16 For all variables, the estimated 's are statistically significantly
lower than one, suggesting that more recent prices have greater impacts on the current driving
behaviors than the distant past prices. This suggests that although changes in driving style
can increase fuel economy, there is a utility cost to these changes. Therefore real-world fuel
economy will depend only on the current price of gasoline and not past prices.
    The results based on Equation (3) also provide consistent evidence that the driving
behaviors respond to the most recent prices more strongly than the second or third most
recent prices paid (Online Appendix Table C.4). The point estimates suggest that the effects
of recent prices quickly lessen; even the fifth most recent prices have no longer any influence
on the current behavior. The finding that there is little path dependence in driving behaviors
contrasts with recent evidence by Severen and van Benthem (2019) showing that consumers
who experienced the 1979/80 oil crisis around age 16 substantially lowered vehicle usage
later years at both extensive and intensive margins.


V.       Asymmetric Price Elasticities of Demand
The final part of our analysis explores the heterogeneity of elasticities across a number of
dimensions. We start with comparing elasticities across price increases and decreases, where
the price change is based on the price at the previous fill up. The neoclassical economic
theory predicts that consumers respond similarly to the given price changes regardless of the
direction. To simplify the analysis, we focus on the reduced-form analysis where the outcome
variable is regressed upon the daily average gasoline price in the market on the day of the
purchase.17 In particular, the regression models are:
  16
      We focus our discussions on  because the estimated  has little economic interpretation. The coefficient
 measures how much the outcome changes with respect to a unit change in ivk (), holding everything
else constant. Thus, multiplying  by ivk () with the estimated weight wj (, j ) measures the effect of price
paid at j -th time ago on the current outcome.
   17
      The reduced-form approach helps avoid the case of multiple endogenous variables with multiple instru-
mental variables, which makes the interpretation of their coefficients difficult. Nonetheless, we also conducted
the instrumental variable approach and present the results in Online Appendix Table D.1. In general, the
estimated elasticities from the IV regressions are greater than those from the reduced-form regressions.




                                                      10
                                  -           -
  ln Yivt =  +  + × ln P rice+
                             vt +  × ln P ricevt +  × 1(Pvt  Pvt-1 ) + µt + iv + ivt , (7)


where

                                     P rice+
                                           vt = P × 1(Pvt  Pvt-1 )
                                                                                                            (8)
                                     P rice-
                                           vt = P × 1(Pvt < Pvt-1 ),


and 1(·) is an indicator function.
    Figure 3 shows the estimated elasticities with 95% confidence intervals (individual coef-
ficients are presented in Online Appendix Table D.1). For each elasticity, we compute and
list changes in the amount of gasoline consumption per day with respect to a one standard
deviation increase in fuel prices and its associated 95% confidence interval. What is striking
is that the elasticity is substantially higher when prices go up than when they go down
with elasticities of -0.415 and -0.224 respectively, suggesting that drivers are relatively more
sensitive to increased prices than decreased prices.18 The evidence that for a given amount
of price change, consumers perceive a price increase more strongly than a price decrease is
consistent with the behavioral model of loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky 1979).
    In addition, we explore if elasticities differ when prices are above or below the mean value
of what individual drivers paid during the study period.19 The coefficients are estimated from
the single regression when Equation (8) is replaced by:

                                       P rice+               ¯
                                             vt = P × 1(Pvt  P )
                                                                                                            (9)
                                                             ¯ ),
                                       P rice- = P × 1(Pvt < P
                                              vt


where P ¯ = 1 N Pivt , and N represents the total number of observations for each driver-
             N   t=0
vehicle pair in our data. We find that the elasticity is higher when prices are low relative to
when they are high. Combining this result with the results with respect to price increases
and decreases is consistent with consumers being more responsive to price increases in the
very short period but soon adapt to persistently high prices. However, we can not rule out
the case where elasticities vary over time and prices are mean reverting and those periods
with price increases are also periods where prices are low.
  18
     Note that the weighted average elasticity of these two cases, which is essentially the  coefficient in
Equation (1) when 1(Pvt  Pvt-1 ) is additionally controlled for, is -0.321 with the standard error of 0.025.
  19
     We take advantage of our observations of the history of prices individual drivers paid with the expectation
that prices each driver paid are more salient than the market prices. Nonetheless, we also repeated the analysis
using the market average price during the same period, and the results are similar.



                                                      11
    Next we explore heterogeneity across drivers in our sample and the vehicles they drive.
We split the sample by the vintage of the vehicle, the fuel economy, vehicle type, when the
driver signed up with the app, and the average distance the driver drives per day. We find that
drivers with more recently manufactured vehicles than the average time in our sample are
more elastic than those driving older vehicles, and those who are driving more fuel efficient
vehicles than the average in our sample are more elastic than the counterparts. We also find
that drivers of minicars are more elastic than those of passenger vehicles, indicating that
those who prefer smaller and thus cheaper cars are more elastic. Online Appendix D show
that drivers of cheaper cars consistently have greater elasticities among both passenger cars
and minicars owners. Together, consumers who are more sensitive about vehicle prices are
also responsive to fuel prices.
    Next, we find that users who started using application before and after the mean starting
time have similar elasticities. This suggests that those consumers that selected into the app
earlier are not different from those that selected into the sample later. While ideally we
could compare elasticities of our sample with the population, this provides some, albeit
weak, evidence that sample selection may not be a big concern. Lastly, we compare drivers
whose average distance traveled per day is greater and less than the sample average vehicle
distance traveled. The point estimates suggest that drivers who drive more are more price
elastic than those who drive less, yet their difference is not statistically significantly different
each other.


VI.      Conclusions
This study offers three important findings. First, the short-run price elasticities of fuel con-
sumption are in the order of magnitude larger than what is previously estimated using more
aggregated data. In addition, fuel consumption responds to price changes not only by adjust-
ing vehicle distance traveled but also by altering driving manners. Second, a price increase is
more salient to consumers than a price fall, a finding that is consistent with the behavioral
model of loss aversion. Third, drivers adjust their driving manners in response to prices they
actually paid for that trip, suggesting little driving habit formation over time. Although
increases in gasoline taxes may be more salient than daily fluctuations in gasoline prices we
exploit, as evidenced in Li et al. (2014), our findings suggest only a transitory impact of such
price increase, and consumers adapt to that level of prices. These findings suggest limited
efficacy of gasoline taxes alone on reducing gasoline consumption and may provide support
to other instruments including fuel economy standards and other incentives programs such
as feebate policies.

                                                12
References
Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone, "Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?," Journal
 of Economics Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 3­28.

Austin, David and Terry Dinan, "Clearing the air: The costs and consequences of higher
 CAFE standards and increased gasoline taxes," Journal of Environmental Economics and
 Management, 2005, 50 (3), 562­582.

Bento, Antonio M., Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Roger H.
 von Haefen, "Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased US Gasoline Taxes,"
 American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 667­699.

Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer, "Are Con-
 sumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases," American Economic Re-
 view, 2013, 103 (1), 220­256.

Currie, Janet and Reed Walker, "Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
 E-ZPass," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 65­90.

Davis, Lucas W. and Lutz Kilian, "Estimating the Effects of a Gasoline Tax on Carbon
 Emissions," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2011, 26 (7), 1187­1214.

DellaVigna, Stefano, "Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field," Journal of
 Economic Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 315­371.

Dorsey, Jackson, Ashley Langer, and Shaun McRae, "Fueling Alternatives: Evidence
 from Real World Driving Data," Mimeo, 2019.

Gillingham, Kenneth, "How Do Consumers Respond to Gasoline Price Shocks? Hetero-
 geneity in Vehicle Choice and Driving Behavior," Mimeo, 2011.

Graham, Daniel J. and Stephen Glaister, "The Demand for Automobile Fuel: A Survey
 of Elasticities," Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, 2002, 36 (1), 1­26.

Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer, "Expectations of Returns and Expected Re-
 turns," The Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (3), 714­746.

Hsing, Yu, "On the Variable Elasticity of the Demand for Gasoline," Energy Econoimics,
 1990, 12 (2), 132­136.

Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling, "Evidence of a
 Shift in the Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand," The Energy Journal, 2008,
 29 (1), 113­134.

Jacobsen, Mark R., "Evaluating US Fuel Economy Standards in a Model with Producer
  and Household Heterogeneity," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5
  (2), 148­187.


                                          13
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
 under Risk," Econometrica, 1979, 47 (2), 263­292.

Klier, Thomas and Joshua Linn, "The Price of Gasoline and New Vehicle Fuel Economy:
 Evidence from Monthly Sales Data," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010,
 2 (3), 134­153.

Knittel, Christopher R. and Ryan Sandler, "The Welfare Impact of Second-Best
 Uniform-Pigouvian Taxation: Evidence from Transportation," American Economic Jour-
 nal: Economic Policy, 2018, 10 (4), 211­242.

  , Douglas L. Miller, and Nicholas J. Sanders, "Caution, Drivers! Children Present:
  Traffic, Pollution, and Infant Health," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (2),
  350­366.

Langer, Ashley and Shaun McRae, "Step on It: A New Approach to Improving Vehicle
  Fuel Economy," Mimeo, 2017.

Levin, Laurence, Matthew S. Lewis, and Frank A. Wolak, "High Frequency Evidence
  on the Demand for Gasoline," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (3),
  314­347.

Li, Shanjun, Christopher Timmins, and Roger H. von Haefen, "How Do Gasoline
  Prices Affect Fleet Fuel Economy?," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2009,
  1 (2), 113­137.

  , Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger, "Gasoline Taxes and Consumer Behavior,"
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (4), 302­342.

Lin, Cynthia C.-Y. and Lea Prince, "Gasoline price volatility and the elasticity of
  demand for gasoline," Energy Economics, 2013, 38 (1), 111­117.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, "Learning from Inflation Experiences," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (1), 53­87.

Parry, Ian W. H., Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington, "Automobile Exter-
 nalities and Policies," Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, 45 (2), 373­399.

Severen, Christopher and Aurthur van Benthem, "Formative Experiences and the
  Price of Gasoline," mimeo, 2019.

Small, Kenneth A. and Kurt Van Dender, "Fuel Efficiency and Motor Vehicle Travel:
 The Declining Rebound Effect," The Energy Journal, 2007, 28 (1), 25­51.

Ulrike, Malmendier, and Stefan Nagel, "Depression babies: Do Macroeconomic Experi-
 ences Affect Risk Taking?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 373­416.

U.S. Energy Information Administration, "Short-Term Energy Outlook," Technical
 Report October 2018.

                                            14
Figures

                   Figure 1: Price Elasticity of Demand for Gasoline




          Notes : The left figure plots the estimated elasticities from various time effects
          and methods (IV or reduced) as specified in the labels. The intercepts are
          adjusted to allow all demand curves to pass the mean price and quantity
          values. The blue shaded area represents the 95% confidence interval of the
          elasticity estimated from the model with the year-by-month fixed effects.
          The right figure plots the distribution of prices paid by individual drivers
          in our sample. The units are Japanese yen for price and liter per day for
          quantity. Average exchange rate during this period is US$ = 99.2.




                                                  15
                  Figure 2: Learning Effect

                 Panel A: Simulated weight




                 Panel B: Estimated weight




Notes : Panel A plots the weighting function for the two values of
 in Equation (6). Panel B plots the estimated weighting function
for KPL ( = 0.778) using up to 100th refuel.




                                16
           Figure 3: Asymmetric Price Elasticities of Demand for Gasoline




Notes : This figure presents the estimated price elasticities of demand for gasoline consumption per
day. The square dots represent the coefficients, and the lines indicate the associated 95% confidence
interval. The asymmetric effects for fuel prices going up/down and fuel prices high/below are
estimated from the single regressions, whereas other specifications are estimated from separate
regressions. KPL represents the actual fuel economy in km/L, and VDT represents the vehicle
distance traveled per day in km. The effect size is the changes and the associated 95% confidence
interval of gasoline consumption per day in liter in response to a one standard deviation increase
in gasoline price ( 15.24).




                                                 17
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                           Mean         Std.           N         U.S. standard
 Panel A: Individual report level
 Gasoline consumption per day (L/day)                      3.535       2.034      4,088,789 0.93 gallon/day
 Vehicle distance traveled per day (km/day)                36.70       20.66      4,088,789 22.81 mile/day
 Actual fuel economy (km/L)                                10.85       3.538      4,088,789   25.51 MPG
 Gasoline price paid ( /L)                                136.55       15.24      4,088,789  $5.21/Gallon
 # of days b/w refueling                                   14.12       25.54      4,088,789
 Odometer (km)                                           66,359.8     48,788.9    4,088,789  41,234.2 mile
 Panel B: Driver-vehicle level
 # of reports                                             48.59         49.43       90,411
 Initial year                                             2008.7        2.906       90,411
 Panel C: Driver level
 Male                                                      0.889        0.314       33,804
 Age                                                      35.514        8.277       33,428
 Panel D: Vehicle level
 Manufacturing year                                       1,999.7       7.130        3,932
 Vehicle price ( 10,000)                                   191.0        101.5        3,663           $19,249
 Dummy for regular gasoline (vs. highoctane)               0.760        0.427        3,932
 Dummy for passenger vehicle (vs. minicars)                0.695        0.461        3,932
 Seating capacity                                          4.838        1.130        3,830
 Dummy for automatic transmission                          0.710        0.454        3,932
 Vehicle weight (kg)                                      1192.9        336.9        3,783           2,630 lb
 Displacement (cc)                                        1631.4        851.2        3,931
 Official fuel economy (km/L)                              14.71        4.966        3,707         34.6 MPG
Notes : This table reports the summary statistics for the variables of primary interests. Additional information is
provided in Online Appendix A.2. Each panel indicates the units of observations. The values of the relevant variables
are converted into the U.S. standards for the reference purpose. In Panel C, the total number of drivers is 71,263,
only part of which report these driver characteristics.




                                                        18
                                   Table 2: The Price Elasticities of Driving Behaviors

 Dep. Var.                                          ln(Gasoline)                                 ln(VKT)        ln(KPL)
                             (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
 ln(Price)               0.139*** -0.0743***          -0.213***      -0.371***     -0.245***     -0.302***     0.0695***
                         (0.00599) (0.00782)           (0.0128)       (0.0348)      (0.0230)      (0.0367)     (0.00735)
 Model                     OLS             IV            IV             IV         Reduced          IV            IV
 Driver-vehicle FE          Y              Y              Y              Y            Y             Y             Y
 Time FE                   Year           Year          Year           Year          Year          Year          Year
                         + month        + month       × quarter      × month       × month       × month       × month
Notes : The outcome variables are the logs of gasoline consumption (in liter) per day (i.e. 24 hours) in Columns (1)­(5),
vehicle-kilometer traveled (VKT) per day in Column (6), and the real-world fuel economy (in km/liter) (KPL) obtained
by dividing gasoline consumption by vehicle-kilometer traveled in Column (7). All models except Column (1) and (5) are
estimated by the instrumental variable approach, whose first stage results are presented in Online Appendix Table B.3. All
specifications include the driver-vehicle fixed effects and variant time fixed effects as specified in each column. The number
of observations is 4,088,789. Standard errors clustered at the driver-vehicle level are reported in the parentheses.
***p < 0.01




                                                                19
