                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  COMMONALITY IN CREDIT SPREAD CHANGES:
                DEALER INVENTORY AND INTERMEDIARY DISTRESS

                                         Zhiguo He
                                      Paymon Khorrami
                                       Zhaogang Song

                                     Working Paper 26494
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26494


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We are grateful to Yu An, Jennie Bai, Jack Bao, Florian Nagler, Yi Li, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
Fabrice Tourre, and Alex Zhou, as well as seminar participants at Deakin University, Fordham
University, Georgetown University, Johns Hopkins University, Monash University, University of
Maryland, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, and University of Melbourne for helpful
discussions. Zhiguo He acknowledges financial support from the Fama-Miller Center at the
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business. Zhaogang Song is grateful to the Supplemental
Research Support Fund of the Johns Hopkins Carey Business School. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Zhiguo He, Paymon Khorrami, and Zhaogang Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Commonality in Credit Spread Changes: Dealer Inventory and Intermediary Distress
Zhiguo He, Paymon Khorrami, and Zhaogang Song
NBER Working Paper No. 26494
November 2019
JEL No. G12,G22,G23

                                          ABSTRACT

Two intermediary-based factors - a broad financial distress measure and a dealer corporate bond
inventory measure - explain about 50% of the puzzling common variation of credit spread
changes beyond canonical structural factors. A simple model, in which intermediaries facing
margin constraints absorb supply of assets from customers, accounts for the documented
explanatory power and delivers further implications with empirical support.

First, whereas bond sorts on margin-related variables (credit rating and leverage) produce
monotonic patterns in loadings on intermediary factors, non-margin-related sorts produce no
pattern. Second, dealer inventory co-moves with corporate-credit assets only, whereas
intermediary distress co-moves even with non-corporate-credit assets. Third, dealers' inventory
increases, and bond prices decline, in response to instrumented bond sales by institutional
investors, using severe downgrades ("fallen angels'') and disaster-related insurance losses as IVs.


Zhiguo He                                        Zhaogang Song
University of Chicago                            The Johns Hopkins Carey
Booth School of Business                         Business School
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                          100 International Drive
Chicago, IL 60637                                Baltimore, MD 21202
and NBER                                         zsong8@jhu.edu
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu

Paymon Khorrami
Imperial College Business School
South Kensington Campus
London, SW7 2AZ, UK
p.khorrami@imperial.ac.uk
1     Introduction
The commonality in excess variation of credit spread changes beyond credit risk factors,
as documented in Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) (hereafter CGM), is one
of the canonical puzzles in asset pricing of credit risk. A key feature of U.S. corporate
bond market is that broker-dealers serve as intermediaries of almost all transactions and
use their balance sheets to take inventory and absorb bond supply from clients. Meanwhile,
the recent intermediary asset pricing literature has argued that intermediary constraints are
important determinants of asset prices (see He and Krishnamurthy (2018) for a survey). In
this paper, we provide novel evidence that two intermediary factors account for about half
of the puzzling common variation in credit spread changes. These factors are (1) a distress
measure that captures constraints of the entire intermediary sector and (2) an inventory
factor that captures the inventory held by dealers specializing in corporate bonds.
    To construct the dealer inventory factor, we use the enhanced TRACE database of cor-
porate bond transactions with untruncated trade size and anonymous dealer codes. Our
measure of dealer inventory is computed using cumulative order flows (in par value) of
transactions between customers and dealers. Using transaction records to construct inven-
tory poses several practical difficulties, such as the unobservable level of dealers' bond inven-
tory at the beginning of our sample period (2005:Q1), changes of dealer inventory unrelated
to transactions (such as bond expiration), and missing primary market transactions from
issuing firms to underwriting dealers. We address these issues carefully and then construct
a quarterly measure of inventory by aggregating cumulative order flows of all dealers.
    Our measure of intermediary distress combines two existing measures that have be shown
to capture the severity of broad intermediation frictions. The first is a balance sheet leverage
measure proposed by He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) (hereafter HKM) for bank holding compa-
nies of primary dealers recognized by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY); and
the second is market-price-based "noise" measure proposed by Hu, Pan, and Wang (2013)
(hereafter HPW), i.e., the root mean squared distance between the market yields of Treasury
securities and the hypothetical yields implied from yield curve models. Our measure of inter-
mediary distress is computed as the first principal component of these two measures, meant
to parsimoniously capture the capital constraints on the aggregate intermediary sector.
    Following CGM, our analysis starts by extracting residuals of individual-bond time series
regressions of credit spread changes on seven structural factors. We assign each of the
residual series into one of 15 cohorts based on time-to-maturity and rating, compute an
average residual for each cohort, and extract the principal components of these 15 cohort-
level residuals. Similar to CGM, but with a comprehensive data set of corporate bond

                                               1
transactions in recent years, we find that about 80 percent of the variation can be explained
by the first PC, indicating a large systematic component that is not captured by structural
credit factors.
    As one of the main contributions of this paper, we link our two intermediary factors ­
the intermediary distress and dealer inventory factors ­ to this common variation of credit
spread changes. We find that the two intermediary factors explain 53% of the variation of
the first PC. More broadly, intermediary distress and dealer inventory explain 48% of the
total variation of credit spread residuals. About 2/3 of this explanatory power attributable
to intermediary distress and 1/3 to dealer inventory. Economically, one-standard-deviation
increases of dealer inventory and intermediary distress are associated with quarterly credit
spread increases of about 3-30 and 5-60 basis points, respectively. We further show that the
effect is monotonically decreasing in bond ratings for both intermediary factors, an important
empirical pattern that is relevant to our later theoretical modeling.
    This strong explanatory power is robust to many alternative specifications.1 Given
widespread interpretations of common non-structural credit spread movements as liquidity-
related, we are particularly interested in robustness to including transaction-cost-based liq-
uidity factors studied in Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨  utter, and Lando (2012) and Bao, Pan, and
Wang (2011). For instance, in Section 3.2, we show that the change of illiquidity measure
in Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨ utter, and Lando (2012) exhibit non-significant correlations with our
two intermediary factors, and can only explain about 0.6%-3% of common variation of CGM
residuals.
    Given the low correlation between distress and inventory, our empirical results indicate a
two-factor structure of the common unexplained credit spread variation. We hence present a
simple two-agent equilibrium model with hedgers and intermediaries trading multiple assets.
Hedgers should be thought of as an agglomeration of institutional investors that face liquidity
shocks, e.g., insurance companies and pension funds. Intermediaries absorb supply of bonds
coming from hedgers, but are limited in their liquidity provision by a balance sheet con-
straint due to margin or capital requirements. This model features a single dominant factor,
the Lagrange multiplier on the balance sheet constraint, that governs all non-fundamental
movements in asset prices, consistent with our empirical evidence and that of CGM.
    This single factor is endogenously driven by two types of shocks ­ hedger liquidity shocks
   1
     Our results are also robust to using cohorts based on maturity and leverage; excluding the 2008 financial
crisis period; measuring dealer inventory by market value; using only large dealers' inventory; doing all anal-
ysis at the monthly frequency; matching the horizon of credit spread changes and innovations of intermediary
factors; and controlling for the Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) measure, TED spread (difference between
three-month Libor and T-bill rates), and P´  astor and Stambaugh (2003) stock liquidity factor.



                                                      2
and intermediary wealth shocks. Hedger liquidity shocks are like "supply shocks" in the sense
that more bonds arrive onto intermediaries' balance sheets, lowering bond prices. Of course,
hedger liquidity shocks are unobservable, so we use the model to argue that dealer inven-
tory effectively captures these supply shocks. Intermediary wealth shocks are like "demand
shocks" in the sense that balance sheet frictions are alleviated, which shifts out intermedi-
aries' demand schedules. Intermediary wealth shocks are effectively captured by leverage,
one of the building blocks for our intermediary distress factor. Thus, through the lens of
our model, our empirical exercise amounts to estimating a supply-demand system with two
types of non-fundamental shocks. Model-based regressions with dealer inventory and lever-
age reproduce the qualitative patterns of our time series regressions in empirical analysis, in
particular the monotonic pattern of sensitivities for bonds grouped by rating, which is a key
determinant in a bond's margin/capital requirement.
    Guided by the model, we develop three sets of empirical tests to further understand the
economic channel behind the strong effects of intermediary factors on credit spread changes.
First, sorting bonds by any characteristic unrelated to margin/capital requirements should
not produce any pattern in associations to our two intermediary factors. Indeed, sorting
by two such variables, maturity and trading intensity (measured by the total dollar trading
volume), produces no detectible pattern in the economic magnitude or statistical significance
of regression coefficients on our intermediary factors, controlling for bond rating.
    Second, we enlarge our tests to other assets. An extended model with heterogeneous,
imperfectly-integrated intermediary trading desks (e.g., a corporate credit desk, a Treasury
desk, a securitized product desk, and an equity options desk), each with their own margin
constraint, suggests the following testable predictions regarding co-movement across asset
classes. Corporate-credit assets should be sensitive to dealers' corporate bond inventory,
or even inventory computed from a subset of corporate bonds ("spillover effects"); non-
corporate-credit assets should be insensitive to such inventory ("segmentation effects"); and
both types of assets should be sensitive to aggregate intermediary distress. Intuitively, inven-
tory coming from different asset classes exacerbates desk-specific constraints independently,
whereas aggregate distress shocks affect all desks' constraints.
    We find empirical support for this line of reasoning. Results of two tests support the
spillover effect within corporate-credit markets: the first using dealer inventory of high-yield
bonds and investment-grade bonds separately to explain credit spreads of all bonds, and
the second using dealer inventory of bonds to explain CDS spreads. In contrast, agency
mortgage-backed securities (MBS), commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), asset-
backed securities (ABS), and S&P 500 index options are insensitive to corporate bond inven-


                                               3
tory, reflecting potential segmentation effects. Despite these differential sensitivities to bond
inventory, all non-corporate-credit assets, as well as CDS, are sensitive to our intermediary
distress factor, consistent with HKM who show empirically that primary dealers behave as
the common marginal investor across many asset classes.
    Third, we seek to establish a link between dealer inventory and liquidity shocks hitting
other investors, as posited by the model. We do this by first establishing that dealer inventory
does respond to such supply shocks. Next, we ask to what degree dealer inventory captures
supply shocks versus other shocks by re-running our credit spread analysis with liquidity
shocks as an IV for inventory.
    To provide corroborating evidence linking liquidity shocks to dealer inventory, we use
eMAXX data to measure bond holdings by each of the three groups of institutional investors
­ insurance companies, mutual funds, and pension funds. Given insurance companies face
regulatory constraints in holding low-rated bonds (Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad, 2011),
we interpret bond downgrades as a liquidity shock. Indeed, based on both summary statistics
and formal regressions controlling for various bond characteristics, we find that insurance
companies decrease their holdings of downgraded bonds, especially those downgraded from
investment-grade to high-yield ­ so-called "fallen angels" (Ambrose, Cai, and Helwege, 2008)
­ by about $0.67 million, relative to the average of those that experience no rating change
or are downgraded from some IG rating to a lower IG rating. Mutual funds and pension
funds take some of the IG-to-IG downgraded bonds, but not "fallen angels". Conversely,
dealers' inventories of "fallen angels" increase substantially in the quarter when bonds are
downgraded, by about $1.61 million.
    We then push this idea further to construct two instrumental variables for bond supply
to dealers. As the first IV, we take the fallen angels sold off by institutional investors. To
(partially) address the potential confound that fundamental changes trigger sell-offs and
simultaneously lower bond prices, we control for sell-offs of all downgraded bonds. Second,
we obtain unexpected insured losses due to natural disasters to proxy for forced sell-offs by
insurance companies. This has clearer-cut exogeneity than fallen angel liquidations, but it
is more likely to be a weak IV, because selling corporate bonds may be only one of many
ways for insurance companies to fund large insurance payments.
    First-stage regressions show that a one-standard-deviation decrease in institutional hold-
ings of fallen angels and increase in insured loss is associated with a 0.20-0.37 standard
deviation increase in dealer inventory, with strong statistical significance for the former but
weak for the latter. In second-stage regressions, we hence use regular robust standard errors
for evaluating the significance of fallen angel sell-offs but the Anderson and Rubin (1949)


                                               4
Wald-test and Stock and Wright (2000) S-statistic (which are weak-instrument robust) for
insured losses. The results show that dealer inventory increases, instrumented by fallen angel
sell-offs, are highly significant in increasing credit spreads. When instrumented by insured
losses, the p-values on dealer inventory range from 10% to 15% across bond groups, also con-
sistent with the positive effect of dealer inventory on credit spread changes. Finally, the effect
of dealer inventory using IVs is larger than that in the baseline analysis, potentially because
our IVs mitigate the downward bias caused by unobserved demand shocks simultaneously
affecting dealer inventory.

Related literature. This paper contributes primarily to empirical literatures on corporate
credit risk and intermediary asset pricing. In the credit risk literature, the unexplained
common variation of credit spread changes, first documented in Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein,
and Martin (2001) (CGM), is a canonical puzzle in the context of structural models like
Merton (1974) and Leland (1994).2 Related is the "credit spread puzzle" of Huang and Huang
(2012). In view of these puzzles, attention has been paid to the role of market liquidity, e.g.,
due to search frictions a` la Duffie, G^ arleanu, and Pedersen (2005). For example, Longstaff,
Mithal, and Neis (2005), Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011), and Bao and Pan (2013) show that
illiquidity measures affect credit spreads and corporate bond returns.3 He and Milbradt
(2014) develop a theory where credit risk in Leland and Toft (1996) and He and Xiong
(2012) interacts with the over-the-counter search liquidity, with satisfactory quantitative
performance over business cycles shown in Cui, Chen, He, and Milbradt (2017).
     In the broad intermediary asset pricing literature, Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) and He,
Kelly, and Manela (2017) are the first to show that financial intermediary balance sheets have
pricing power for large cross-sections of assets. Recent contributions include Du, Tepper, and
Verdelhan (2017), Chen, Joslin, and Ni (2018), Siriwardane (2019), Boyarchenko, Eisenbach,
Gupta, Shachar, and Van Tassel (2018), and Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2019). We connect
these intermediary-centric literatures to the corporate credit literature, arguing particular
intermediation frictions govern the puzzling commonality in bond price variation.
     By invoking dealers' special role in providing corporate bond liquidity, our study is related
   2
      Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008) show that structural models capture well the sensitivity of corporate
bond returns to equity returns or hedge ratios, which may seem to conflict the negative implication of CGM
given the intrinsic relation between returns and yield spread changes. Huang and Shi (2014) find that
structural models indeed characterize well the hedge ratios for credit spread changes, but half of variations
in credit spread changes are still unexplained even after including explanatory variables or specifications that
are important in characterizing hedge ratios.
    3
      Relatedly, Lin, Wang, and Wu (2011), Acharya, Amihud, and Bharath (2013), and de Jong and Driessen
(2012) study the pricing of liquidity risk in corporate bond returns.



                                                       5
to other studies zooming in on bond dealers. For example, Bao, O'Hara, and Zhou (2018) and
Bessembinder, Jacobsen, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2018) show that dealers face higher
regulatory constraints post 2008 crisis, which impairs their liquidity provision. Schultz (2017)
and Dick-Nielsen and Rossi (2018) find that dealer inventory capacity is constrained recently,
while Di Maggio, Kermani, and Song (2017) and Choi, Shachar, and Shin (2019) document
dealers' inventory changes during the 2008 crisis. Our study differs by connecting dealers'
corporate bond inventory to market prices.4
    A closely related study, Friewald and Nagler (2019) (FN), conducts a comprehensive
analysis of how OTC trading frictions ­ inventory, search, and bargaining frictions ­ affect
credit spread changes, showing that twelve measures of such frictions jointly explain 23%
of the CGM PC1. Besides the magnitude difference that we explain 53% of the CGM
PC1, there are several distinctions. Whereas FN are focused on explanatory power, we
use the loading patterns of bond groups on intermediary factors as evidence of our model's
margin mechanism. In terms of the economic framework, their focus is microstructure-level
trading frictions, whereas ours is dealers' aggregate balance sheet. Accordingly, we add an
intermediary distress factor and conduct analysis at the quarterly frequency, a time-horizon
on which microstructure frictions are less likely to dominate (for example, Schultz (2017) and
Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2019) show that half lives of temporary dealer inventory, potentially
due to search frictions, are up to several months). Finally, we espouse a parsimonious two-
factor model that has a clear supply-demand interpretation attached to our inventory and
distress factors, which leads us to design new tests. For example, we consider various asset
classes (CDS, MBS, CMBS, ABS, options) to study imperfectly integrated trading desks
within a bank, and we use bond-level holdings of insurance companies, mutual funds, and
pension funds to provide refined evidence on the supply-demand channels.
    Our two-factor empirical framework is motivated by a simple intermediary-based model
with margin constraints. See Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008) and Garleanu and Pedersen
(2011) for dynamic asset pricing models with exogenous margin/capital constraints and Biais,
Hombert, and Weill (2017) for equilibrium under endogenous versions of such constraints.5
The innovation of our static model is to focus in detail on two types of shocks: (1) asset supply
shocks in the vein of Ho and Stoll (1981) or Kondor and Vayanos (2019); and (2) intermediary
   4
     Two recent studies on equity market, Carole, Hendershott, Charles, Pam, and Mark (2010) and Hender-
shott and Menkveld (2014) relate variations of bid-ask spreads and prices to the inventory positions of New
York Stock Exchange specialists.
   5
     Because in the data margin constraints ­ and hence the asset pledgeability ­ are arguably endogenous
to asset fundamentals, most of literature on asset pricing with margin constraint has been theoretical, with
Chen, Chen, He, Liu, and Xie (2019) being the notable exception who causally estimate the pledgeability
premium by exploiting the dual-listed bonds in Chinese bond markets.


                                                     6
wealth shocks in the vein of many standard intermediary asset pricing models `   a la He and
Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013). In addition, to study non-bond asset classes empirically, we
extend the model in a way that incorporates some market segmentation on the intermediary
side, unlike classic segmented-market frameworks like Gromb and Vayanos (2002). This
extension can be interpreted as an economy with asset-class-specific intermediaries, as in the
slow-moving-capital stories of Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007) and Duffie (2010).
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains our data and measure. Section 3
presents our main findings. Section 4 presents a simple intermediary model to interpret the
findings and delivers further implications we test in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.


2       Data and Measures
In this section, we introduce the data sample of U.S. corporate bond transactions and con-
struct the empirical measures used in our main analysis. We also introduce the data sample
of institutional holdings and other asset classes used in further tests.


2.1     Data of Corporate Bond Transactions
Our sample of corporate bond transactions are from the enhanced Trade Reporting and
Compliance Engine (TRACE) maintained by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(FINRA).6 The FINRA started to collect data of corporate bond transactions in July 2002
and disseminated them to the public in three phrases through early 2005. We choose the
starting of our sample period to be 2005:Q1 when the last phase was finished, similar to
Schultz (2017) and Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨   utter, and Lando (2012), and end the sample at
2015:Q2. Each transaction record contains the trade date, time, (untruncated) principal
amount, CUSIP, price, an indictor of whether the trade is either between a customer and a
dealer or between two dealers, trading capacity of dealers (principal or agent), trade direction,
and an anonymous dealer identifier, among many other variables.
    6
    The TRACE database covers all corporate bond transactions executed by broker dealers registered with
the FINRA. The missing trades from the TRACE database are those executed on all-to-all trading platforms
or exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange's Automated Bond System. These trades account for a
very small portion of total corporate bond trading volume, less than 1% in 1990 and 5% in 2014 according
to reports of U.S. SEC (1992) and Bank for International Settlements (2016).




                                                   7
2.1.1    Data Filtering

We first apply a number of filters to account for reporting errors and to assign each trade to
the actual trading counterparties. In particular, we adjust the sample for trade corrections
and cancelations within the same day as well as across days (usually known as "trade rever-
sals"). We account for the duplicated reports of inter-dealer trades. Furthermore, we assign
a trade to the dealer who executed this trade rather than the reporting dealer for give-up
trades in which one respective reporting firm reports on behalf of one actual trading coun-
terparty (e.g., a clearing firm reports on behalf of a correspondent firm) and for locked-in
trades in which one reporting firm reports on behalf of both actual trading counterparties.
The data sample after these basic adjustments will be used to construct our measures of
dealer inventory, hence we denote it the "bond inventory sample."
    To construct the baseline sample for studying variation of credit spreads, we merge the
TRACE database with the Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD) that pro-
vides bond characteristics including the age, maturity, amount outstanding, credit rating,
issuance amount, coupon information, and various bond features such as whether a bond is
convertible, puttable, callable, and so on. We further merge the data with CRSP for equity
price information and with Compustat for accounting information. We exclude those that
cannot be matched and restrict our sample to senior unsecured bonds that are denominated
in U.S. dollars, with a fixed coupon rate, with available credit rating, and without embedded
options.7 We further exclude bonds issued by financial firms or utility firms, as we shall
consider leverage as an important structural model factor that has different implications for
these firms. We also exclude bonds with issue size less than $10 million. In terms of trades,
we keep only secondary market trades by removing the those with P1 flag (primary market
trades; see more explanation in Section 2.2.1) and those with the trading date before and at
the bond offering date. We exclude trades of bonds with time-to-maturity less than 1 year
and also those with trade size larger than the issue size.
    Our main sample frequency is quarterly. For each bond i, we take the price pi,t of the
last trade in a quarter t to compute the standard yield-to-maturity, and then calculate its
credit spread csi,t by subtracting off the yield of the corresponding Treasury security.8 The
quarterly changes of credit spreads are then csi,t = csi,t - csi,t-1 . However, many corporate
bonds do not trade every day, so that the calculated csi,t is not necessarily based on
two actual quarter-end prices. To avoid large deviations from actual quarterly changes, we
   7
    Similar to Bao and Hou (2017), we keep the bonds with a make whole call provision.
   8
    The Treasury yields is calculated based on the Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) database of Treasury
yields with linear interpolations between provided maturities whenever necessary.



                                                    8
exclude a csi,t observation if the actual number of days between the trade dates in quarter
t and t - 1 is lower than 45 days or larger than 120 days. We also match the Treasury yield
to the exact day of the trade used in each quarter in computing credit spread to eliminate
any nonsynchronization issues and scale csi,t to make it a 90-day change (see Bao and Hou
(2017) for similar adjustments at the monthly frequencies). Finally, we remove upper 1%
and lower 1% tails of the credit spread levels to avoid the influence of outliers and require
a bond to have at least 4 years of consecutive quarterly observations of csi,t to ensure an
enough number of observations for regressions on structural model factors.
    For the detailed step-by-step procedure of data filtering and the associated change in
sample coverage, see Table A.1.

2.1.2   Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports the summary statistics of our baseline sample of credit spreads. We have
2584 distinct bonds issued by 653 firms, with a total of 55,938 observations at the bond-
quarter level. Around 35% of the observations are on high-yield bonds, defined as the
Moody's crediting rating lower than BBB.9 The mean credit spread is 1.52% and 5.27%
for investment-grade and high-yield bonds, with a standard deviation of 1.17% and 3.65%,
respectively. The average time-to-maturity is 9.78 years, with a higher mean for investment-
grade bonds at 10.85 years than for high-yield bonds at 6.78 years. For investment-grade
bonds, average issuance size is about $600 million, whereas high-yield bonds' is only about
$400 million. That is, lower rated firms tend to be smaller. The average coupon rates are
lower for investment-grade (5.87%) than high-yield bonds (7.6%).
    For comparison, Bao and Hou (2017) use a sample of about 10 years from July 2002
to December 2013. Because they focus on monthly frequency, they have a larger sample
size with more than 230,000 bond-month observations and around 7000-9000 distinct bonds.
FN also use a monthly dataset from January 2003 to December 2013. Their sample includes
only 974 bonds with 45,000 bond-month observations, substantially smaller than that of Bao
and Hou (2017) and both our quarterly and monthly samples (our monthly sample has 3324
bonds and more than 185,000 bond-month observations; see Table A.1).
  9
   The sample and results remain little changed when we use the average of available Moody's, Standard
& Poor's, and Fitch ratings.




                                                  9
2.2     Intermediary Factors
This section explains how we construct the two intermediary factors in our paper: dealer
corporate bond inventory, and intermediary distress.

2.2.1    Dealer Inventory

Our measure of dealer inventory is computed using cumulative order flows between customers
and dealers from the data of corporate bond transactions. As our objective is to study
the balance sheet pressure imposed by aggregate dealer inventory rather than bond-specific
characteristics, we use the "bond inventory sample" as defined in Section 2.1 that includes
the whole set of corporate bond transactions.10
    Using records of transactions to construct measures of inventory poses several practi-
cal difficulties, which we address carefully in a few steps. First, we have no data on the
actual level of dealers' bond inventory at the beginning of our sample period (2005:Q1 -
2015:Q2). Accordingly, we construct the dealer inventory measure starting from 2002:Q3
when the TRACE data of corporate bond transactions first became available, but only use
the inventory measure after 2005:Q1. With this "buffer" period of two and half years, the
mismeasurement of dealer inventory starting from 2005:Q1 should be mitigated, in light
of the evidence on half lives of dealer inventory being up to several months (e.g., Schultz
(2017), Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2019)). The initial holdings should have matured and/or
been unwound by dealers.
    Second, we do not observe changes of dealer inventory unrelated to market transactions. If
dealers hold a bond until its maturity, there is no transaction record indicating the expiration
of the bond position. To deal with this issue, we calculate cumulative positions of all dealers
for each bond, and from the date of the last transaction of a bond, we assume dealers'
inventory of this bond turns zero at its maturity date and hence remove this amount of
inventory on that date.11
    Third, dealers who are active in the primary market are "selling" bonds around the
issuance date, which should be excluded as we ignore the newly issued corporate bonds in
our calculation. Starting March 1, 2010, the FINRA started to require member firms to
report trades executed in the primary market, and an identifier is assigned on these trades.
Hence we use the provided identifier to take out primary market trades executed after March
  10
     This sample is a superset of the baseline sample of individual-bond credit spreads, as discussed in Section
2.1.2.
  11
     Our procedure will miss those callable bonds that are being called before their maturity, though these
callable bonds are removed from inventory at their times of maturity.



                                                      10
1, 2010. For the sample before March 1, 2010, we remove trades of a bond executed before
and on its offering date obtained from the Mergent FISD. This procedure should remove
most of the primary market trades as underwriting dealers are expected to finish delivering
bonds within a short period of time.12
    After making these adjustments, we construct a quarterly measure of dealer inventory
by aggregating cumulative order flows of all dealers as a whole with customers. We use the
par value rather than market value to avoid the potential confounding effect of price changes
when studying the effect of dealer inventory on bond prices. The quarterly log change of
this measure, denoted Inventory A , is the baseline dealer inventory factor in our analysis
of credit spread changes. We also construct separate measures of dealers' high-yield and
investment-grade inventory for some specific tests, which will be discussed in detail later.
    To the best of our knowledge, data on dealers' exact holding amounts of corporate bonds
are unavailable. In addition to using transaction data to measure dealer inventory as we
do, two data sources based on financial reporting also provide some crude information on
dealers' security holdings. One is the FRBNY report on holdings of primary dealers,13 and
the other is the Flow of Funds report on holdings of security broker-dealers, released by the
Federal Reserve.14 Several differences and issues are worth discussing. First, the FRBNY
began collecting primary dealers' holdings of corporate bonds as a separate asset class only
starting April 3, 2013; its reported corporate bond positions prior to April 3, 2013 were
extrapolated.15 Second, the FRBNY report only includes about 20 primary dealers, while the
Flow of Funds series cover all brokers and dealers that submit information to the Securities
and Exchange Commission through either the Financial and Operational Combined Uniform
Single Report (FOCUS) or the Report on Finances and Operations of Government Securities
(FOGS). However, the Flow of Funds series are the holding amounts of "corporate and
foreign bonds" (FL663063005.Q) that include both corporate bonds and all other fixed-
income securities such as private-label MBS.
    Unlike inventory measures based on these two alternative data, our measure of dealer
inventory only includes corporate bonds. Furthermore, our measure covers all dealers trading
  12
     Before March 1, 2010, market participants were facing ambiguity regarding the definition of primary
versus secondary market trades. Our procedure may eliminate some secondary market trades on the issuance
day as well as keep some primary market trades after the issuance day.
  13
     See https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/gsds/search.html.
  14
     "Financial Accounts of the United States" (Z.1) at https://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/fof/
DisplayTable.aspx?t=l.130.
  15
     Before April 3, 2013, only aggregate holdings that do not separate corporate bonds from securities issued
by non-federal agencies (e.g., government-supported enterprises) are available. The FRBNY extrapolates
corporate bond positions prior to April 3, 2013 using the composition of corporate bond holdings on that
date.


                                                     11
in corporate bonds, which is more than just the FRBNY primary dealers. We also exclude
dealers without corporate bonds holdings, unlike the Flow of Funds, which does not separate
holdings of corporate bonds from other securities.16

2.2.2    Intermediary Distress

To construct the intermediary distress factor, we combine the balance-sheet-based leverage
ratio measure of the aggregate intermediary sector proposed by HKM and the market-price-
based "noise" measure proposed in HPW. The HKM leverage ratio, denoted LevHKM           t    for
quarter t, is computed as the aggregate market equity plus aggregate book debt divided
by aggregate market equity, using CRSP/Compustat and Datastream data, of the holding
companies of primary dealers recognized by the FRBNY.
    In measuring the change or innovation of the leverage ratio, we create the variable
NLevHKM t    := LevHKM
                     t    - LevHKM
                                t-1   × LevHKM
                                            t-1 , motivated by the nonlinear affect of interme-
diary constraints on asset prices implied from intermediary-based asset pricing models like He
and Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). Note that NLevHKM           t
weights the change of leverage ratio higher when its level is high.
    The HPW "noise" measure is computed as the root mean squared distance between the
market yields of Treasury securities and the hypothetical yields implied from yield curve
models like that of Svensson (1994).17 Besides its obvious connection to our paper as cor-
porate bonds are part of fixed-income securities, "noise" is widely used in the literature as
a measure of "shortage of arbitrage capital" across various markets. The rationale is that
relative value trading across various habitats on the yield curve is widely conducted at most
investment banks and fixed-income hedge funds. Hence, a significant deviation of market
yields from model-implied yields is a symptom of a lack of arbitrage capital, and impor-
tantly, "to the extent that capital is allocated across markets for major marginal players in
  16
     The discrepancies in terms of asset and dealer coverage lead to differences between our dealer inventory
measure and the other two alternative data sources. First, the magnitudes often diverge; for example, the
total holding of primary dealers is about $250 and $28 billion at the end of 2007Q1 and 2014Q4, respectively,
while about $91 and $107 billion from our series. Second, our level series of dealer inventory shows an
expansion starting from early 2013 ­ which is consistent with increasing outstanding balance of corporate
debt (see Figure 2) ­ but is absent in the two alternative measures. That being said, both our measure and
the two alternative measures share a similar increasing trend from early 2003 up to mid-2007 and a large
decline thereafter until 2012.
  17
     The Svensson (1994) model is an extension of the yield curve model initially proposed in Nelson and Siegel
(1987). These models are widely used in the academic literature and in practice to compute benchmark yield
curves. For example, Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) use them to construct Treasury yield curves that
are regular inputs of the Federal Reserve's policy discussions and publications. Song and Zhu (2018) discuss
the use of these models by the Federal Reserve in evaluating offers submitted in auctions that executed the
purchases of Treasury securities for quantitative easing.


                                                      12
the market, this symptom applies not only to the Treasury market, but also more broadly to
the overall financial market" (see HPW). The quarterly change of the HPW noise measure
(in basis points) is denoted N oise.
    Our measure of intermediary distress, denoted as Distress, is defined as the first princi-
pal component of NLevHKM   t   and N oise. The former is constructed mainly using balance
sheet information of financial intermediaries, while the latter is based on prices. Combining
the two leads to a parsimonious measure of the capital constraints on the aggregate inter-
mediary sector. As shown later in Section 3.3, both NLevHKM    t     and N oise contribute a
nontrivial fraction of the explanatory power of Distress for credit spread changes.

2.2.3   Summary Statistics

To gauge the variation of the two intermediary factors, Figure 1 plots the quarterly time series
of Inventory A and Distress (both scaled to have zero mean and unit variance) in the top
and middle panels, respectively. Dealer inventory has comparable frequent variation across
different sub-periods of the sample, whereas intermediary distress exhibits extreme variation
in the 2008 crisis but mild variation otherwise. Importantly, although Inventory A does
show large negative values in the 2008 crisis, similar to Distress, the two factors exhibit
orthogonal variation to a large extent. Table 2 shows the correlation between Inventory A
and Distress is only -0.16, with an intuitive negative sign because sales by a highly-levered
dealer sector should lead to a lower inventory, though statistically insignificant.
    The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots the quarterly time series of NLevHKM and N oise
that are used to construct our measure of intermediary distress. These two series line up
with each other well, though N oise led NLevHKM by a quarter in plummeting during the
2008 crisis. The correlation between them, from Table 2, is 0.83. Our measure Distress,
as the first principal component of them, captures 70% of the total variation.
    Table 2 also reports the correlation of our intermediary factors with the change of VIX
that is widely used as an indicator of financial market stress. We find that Distress has
a significant positive correlation with VIX, about 0.36. In contrast, the correlation of
Inventory A with V IX , though with an intuitive negative sign, is less than 10% and sta-
tistically insignificant, implying that dealer inventory is largely orthogonal to these popular
measures of market stress. In addition, both of our intermediary factors have low correlations
with the illiquidity factor ILiq of corporate bond trading of Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨   utter, and
Lando (2012). We shall control for V IX and ILiq in studying the effects of intermediary
factors on credit spread changes. We now turn to introduce additional measures and controls
variables.

                                              13
2.3    Structural Factors and Control Variables
Following CGM, we consider seven determinants, motivated from the Merton (1974) model,
                                                                                     10y
of credit spread changes: firm leverage Levi,t , 10-year Treasury interest rate rt       , square
                                        10y 2
of 10-year Treasury interest rate rt          , slope of the term structure Slopet measured as
the difference between 10-year and 2-year Treasury interest rates, S&P 500 return RetSP     t , a
jump factor Jumpt based on S&P 500 index options, and V IXt . The firm leverage Levi,t
is computed as the book debt over the sum of the book debt and market value of equity.
The book debt is defined as the sum of "Long-Term Debt - Total" and "Debt in Current
Liabilities - Total" from Compustat, whereas the market value of equity is equal to the
number of common shares outstanding times the share price from CRSP. The debt data
from Compustat are available at the quarterly frequency, and we follow the literature to
assume that such balance sheet information becomes available with a lag of one quarter
(Bao and Hou, 2017).
                               10y    10y 2
    The interest rate factors rt   , rt     , and Slopet are calculated based on the Gurkaynak,
Sack, and Wright (2007) database of Treasury yields (in percent). The S&P 500 return RetSP     t
is from CRSP, while the V IXt is from CBOE. The jump factor Jumpt is computed based
on at-the-money and out-of-the-money options on the S&P 500 index, from OptionMetrics
(see CGM for details on the procedure).


2.4    Institutional Holdings of Corporate Bonds
We obtain data on institutional investors' holdings of corporate bonds from the survivorship-
bias-free Lipper eMAXX database of Thomson Reuters. This data set contains quarter-end
security-level corporate bond holdings of insurance companies, mutual funds, and pension
funds in North America (based on where the holder is located). Data on insurance companies'
holdings are based on National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) annual
holdings files and quarterly transaction reports to the state insurance commissioners. Data
on mutual fund holdings are obtained from Lipper, which is owned by Thomson Reuters,
covering over 90% of the mutual fund universe. Data on pension fund holdings are from state
and local municipal pension funds and large private pension funds who voluntarily submit
data to Thomson Reuters (see Cai, Han, Li, and Li (2019), Bo and Victoria (2015), and
Manconi, Massa, and Yasuda (2012) among others for further details). We use the eMAXX
holdings over 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2, with information on bond characteristics such as historical
outstanding balance and credit rating by matching to FISD based on the CUSIP number.
   Figure 2 provides a summary of the eMAXX institutional holdings, as well as dealer


                                               14
inventories. In particular, the top panel plots quarterly time series of the holding amount
by institutional investors (including mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies)
based on eMAXX data and by dealers based on TRACE data, as well as the aggregate
outstanding balance of U.S. corporate debt securities based on the Federal Reserve's Flow
of Funds, in $trillions of principal value.18 The dollar (par) value of holdings has seen a
significant increase from $1.3 trillion to $2.7 trillion, with much of the increase coming after
plummeting in the 2008 crisis. The rise of holdings is strongest in mutual funds. At the
same time, there has been a sizable expansion of the whole corporate bond market, as the
total outstanding balance increased from less than $5 trillion to more than $8 trillion. The
bottom panel plots quarterly time series of the fraction of U.S. corporate debt securities held
by institutional investors, by dealers, and by both, in percent. The fraction steadily accounts
for 25-35% of the aggregate outstanding balance.


2.5     Yield Spreads and Returns of Other Asset Classes
Our analysis also uses yield spreads and returns of a host of other asset classes including
CDS, agency MBS, CMBS, ABS, and equity options. We obtain CDS quotes on individual
U.S. corporations denominated in U.S. dollars from Markit. We use 1-year, 5-year, and
10-year CDS contracts with modified restructuring (MR) clauses, among which 5-year CDS
are the most traded. We match the CDS data with equity information from CRSP and
accounting information from Compustat. For each entity, we construct quarterly series of
CDS spreads using the last quotation in every quarter.
    We obtain series of yield spreads of agency MBS, CMBS and ABS from major Wall
Street dealers. Specifically, we use (option-adjusted) yield spreads of agency MBS based on
the liquid "to-be-announced" (TBA) contracts of 15-year and 30-year production-coupon
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac MBS (see Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) and
Gao, Schultz, and Song (2017) among others for details of TBA contracts and option-adjusted
spreads). We use the Barclays yield spreads of non-agency 10-year CMBS of three AAA-
rating groups, Super Duper Senior (Duper), mezzanine (AM), and junior (AJ).19 We also
use yield spreads of 5-year AAA-rated ABS on fixed-rate credit card loans and 3-year ABS
  18
     Specifically, the aggregate outstanding balance is the sum of the outstanding debt securities by nonfi-
nancial corporate business, U.S.-chartered depository institutions, foreign banking offices in the U.S., finance
companies, security brokers and dealers, and holding companies in the "L.208 Debt Securities" series.
  19
     These different groups differ in terms of credit enhancement. Moreover, since CMBS usually have
restrictions on prepayment and are different from residential-loans backed agency MBS, we use the yield
spreads for CMBS but option-adjusted spreads for agency MBS. See Manzi, Berezina, and Adelson (2016)
for further details.



                                                      15
on fixed-rate prime auto loans of AAA, A, and BBB ratings.
    In addition, we use monthly returns of portfolios of S&P 500 index options sorted on
moneyness and maturity from Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Savov (2013). These portfolios
are leverage-adjusted in that each option portfolio is combined with risk-free account to
achieve a targeted market beta of one. A leverage-adjusted call option portfolio consists
of long positions in calls and some investment in the risk-free account, while a leverage-
adjusted put portfolio consists of short positions in puts and more than 100% investment in
the risk-free account. For the convenience of interpretation, we take the negative of the put
portfolio return. The holding period of these option portfolios is a month regardless of the
target maturity that is 30, 60, or 90 days. We use the 30-day maturity to match the holding
period precisely, but results are similar using 60-day and 90-day maturities.


3       Main Empirical Results
We discuss the main empirical results in this section. We first replicate the exercise in CGM
and show that the strong commonality persists in the U.S. corporate bond market in the past
decade. Our two intermediary-based variables, intermediary distress and dealer inventory,
can explain more than half of the latent common factor. Especially important to our paper
is the fact that sensitivities to these intermediary-based factors are monotone in credit risk
(i.e., ratings), a pattern that is robust to many other alternative specifications.


3.1      Baseline Analysis
3.1.1     Commonality of Credit Spread Changes

To study the effects of intermediary constraints on corporate bond pricing, we follow CGM
and run a time series regression for each bond i:

        csi,t = i + 1,i × Levi,t + 2,i × V IXt + 3,i × Jumpt
                         10y           10y 2
                 +4,i × rt   + 5,i × (rt  ) + 6,i × Slopet + 7,i × RetSP
                                                                      t  + i,t ,             (1)

by which an estimate of each regression coefficient for each bond is obtained. To avoid
asynchronicity issues, in running this regression for bond i, we match the dates of any
structural regressors available at daily frequency (e.g., V IXt ) to the dates of measured credit
spreads for bond i. Similar to the empirical procedure of CGM, we assign each bond into one
of 15 cohorts based on time-to-maturity and rating, and then report the regression results at


                                               16
the cohort-level. Panel A of Table 3 shows that the sample size is fairly homogenous across
maturity groups but heterogeneous across rating groups.
    Panel A reports the regression results. Following CGM, we report the average regression
coefficients across bonds within each cohort, with associated t-statistics computed as the av-
erage coefficient divided by the standard error of the coefficient estimates across bonds. The
dependence of credit spread changes on the factors is as expected based on structural frame-
works. For example, credit spreads significantly increase with firm leverage and volatility,
and decrease with the risk-free rate and the stock market return. The effects of convex-
ity and slope of the term structure are less consistently significant: convexity shows some
negative significance for long-maturity bonds and slope of the term structure shows some
positive significance for short-maturity bonds, but the coefficients on both switch signs in
certain cohorts. The jump factor shows negative significance for most of the medium and
long term bonds. Finally, the mean adjusted R2 is about 30-40% for bonds rated equal to
or above BBB and about 55% for bonds rated equal or below BB.
    Most importantly, there is a strong common factor structure of the regression residuals.
Panel B of Table 3 reports the principal component analysis of the 15 series of regression
residuals. The residual series g,t of each cohort g are computed as the average of regression
residuals i,t across bonds i in the cohort g . Over 80% of the variation can be explained by
the first PC, whereas the second PC explains an additional 6% (the third PC only explains
less than 2%, so we only report the first two PCs). Credit spread changes contain a large
systematic component that is not captured by structural model factors, as pointed out by
CGM.
    Moreover, the last column of Panel A reports the variation of residuals for each cohort
g , var
     g   (=     t (gt - ¯g )2 with   ¯g the time series mean of gt ), as a fraction of the total
                                  15
variation of the 15 cohorts g=1 var     g . We observe that the BB and B cohorts account for
the majority of the total variation, about 86%. That is, although the structural factors can
explain more than 50% of the raw credit spread changes in these two cohorts, what remains
to be explained is still large compared to higher-rated cohorts.
    It is worth comparing our data sample and results with those of two closely related
studies, CGM and FN. In term of data sample, CGM use a 10-year monthly sample from
July 1988 to December 1997 with a total of 688 bonds and dealer quote prices, while FN
also use a 10-year monthly sample but from January 2003 to December 2013 with a total of
974 bonds and actual transaction prices. We use a 10-year quarterly sample from 2005:Q1
to 2015:Q3 with a total of 2584 bonds and actual transaction prices.
    In terms of the overall explanatory power, the average adjusted R2 is about 25% and


                                              17
22% in CGM and FN, respectively, but about 45% in our study. The much higher adjusted
R2 is likely because we use a 10-year quarterly sample as opposed to the 10-year monthly
sample in the other two studies (indeed, in the monthly regressions reported in Table 7, the
average adjusted R2 drops to 26%.). Most importantly, the fraction of the total unexplained
variance of regression residuals that can be accounted for by the first PC is 76% in CGM and
82% in our study, but only 48% in FN. Overall, all three studies confirm a strong common
factor structure for the credit spread changes beyond those driven structural factors, though
our paper and CGM document a much stronger commonality than FN.20
    A possible explanation for this discrepancy, as proposed by FN, is that CGM's use of
dealer quotes instead of actual transaction prices "potentially works against their conclusion
regarding the magnitude of the latent factor" (page 8 in FN). Our results seem inconsistent
with this conjecture given that actual transaction prices are also used in our analysis. The
same strong comovement persists in our monthly sample: the PC1 accounts for 76% of the
variation of the 15 portfolios of corporate bonds, as shown in Table 7 in the next section,
exactly matching the finding of CGM.

3.1.2    Effect of Intermediary Factors on Common Credit Spread Changes

We study the effect of intermediary factors on common credit spread changes based on the
following time series regressions:

                                              A
                       g,t = g + 1,g Inventoryt + 2,g Distresst + ug,t ,                                     (2)

where g,t is the average residual of cohort g (= 1, . . . , 15). Panels A and B of Table 4
report univariate regressions on dealer inventory and intermediary distress, respectively, and
Panel C reports bivariate regressions. Dealer inventory and intermediary distress both co-
move positively with residuals of credit spread changes. The statistical significance of dealer
inventory is weak in univariate regressions,21 but strong in joint regressions, whereas inter-
  20
      In terms of individual explanatory variables, leverage, volatility, risk-free rate, and stock market return
exhibit uniformly consistent explanatory power, across all three studies, while the significance of convexity,
slope of the term structure, and jump factor are weaker and exhibits different patterns. For example, the
coefficient on slope of the term structure is significantly positive in FN, in contrast to the overall negative
significance documented in CGM and for short-term bonds in our study. The coefficient on jump factor is
significantly positive in CGM, weakly positive in FN, but significantly negative for medium- to long-term
bonds in our study.
   21
      This is likely due to the unbalanced number of bonds assigned into different cohorts. Indeed, for cohorts
based on firm leverage with a much more balanced number of observations in different cohorts, as used
in Table 6 of next section, the statistical significance of both intermediary factors is strong in univariate
regressions.



                                                       18
mediary distress shows strong statistical significance in both univariate and joint regressions.
     Economically, co-movement between spreads and intermediary factors is large. Since we
have standardized the intermediary factors in regressions, the joint regression in Panel C of
Table 4 implies that a one-standard-deviation increase of dealer inventory is associated with
a quarterly increase of about 3-30 basis points in bond yields. For intermediary distress, this
number is about 5-60 basis points.
     The effect of both intermediary factors is stronger for lower-quality bonds. For example,
the coefficients on dealer inventory (intermediary distress) monotonically increase from 0.011
to 0.278 (from 0.048 to 0.499) for medium-term bonds, when the rating goes from AA
and above down to B and below. This monotonic pattern is reminiscent of the principal
component loadings: lower-rated bond residuals have higher loadings on PC1 in Table 3.
     Finally, to evaluate the overall explanatory power of the intermediary factors on credit
spread changes, we compute the fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted
for by Inventory A and N oise. In particular, for each of the 15 time series regressions, we
can compute the total variation of credit spread residuals varg as above and also the variation
  var             2
ug  t (ug,t ) that cannot be explained by the two intermediary factors. For each of the
three maturity groups and all 15 groups, we compute the fraction of variation explained by
the two intermediary factors as

                                                   g G  uvar
                                                         g
                                   FVEG = 1 -            var
                                                             ,                              (3)
                                                    g G g


where G  {short, medium, long, all}. As reported in the last column of Table 4, the two
intermediary factors explain 38%, 55%, and 50% of the total variation of residuals of credit
spread changes for short, medium, and long term bonds, respectively, and about 48% for all
bonds. Similar calculations for dealer inventory and intermediary distress separately show
that 2/3 of this explanatory power can be attributed to intermediary distress and 1/3 to
dealer inventory, which is consistent with the correlations of these two factors and the PC1
reported in the last row of Table 3.
    In sum, our baseline analysis shows that dealer inventory and intermediary distress have
significant positive effects on common credit spread changes. The effects monotonically de-
crease with bond ratings. The two factors together account for about half of the unexplained
total variation of credit spread changes, with one third and two thirds attributable to dealer
inventory and intermediary distress, respectively.




                                              19
3.2     Microstructure Liquidity Factor and Credit Spread Changes
Motivated by the finding of CGM, many studies have focused on microstructure liquidity
factors such as bid-spread and trading intensity as a potential driver of credit spreads (e.g.,
Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) and Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)). It is hence instructive to
understand how much of credit spread changes at the quarterly frequency can be explained
by these microstructure-level factors in comparison to our intermediary factors. We use the
illiquidity measure of Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨utter, and Lando (2012) that is an equally weighted
sum of the Amihud (2002) measure of price impact, the Feldh¨    utter (2012) measure of round-
trip cost, and respective daily standard deviations of these two measures. That is, their
illiquidity measure captures trading illiquidity due to price impact and transaction costs, as
well liquidity risk.
     We first note that the change of illiquidity measure in Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨   utter, and
Lando (2012) exhibit non-significant correlations with our two intermediary factors, as shown
in Table 2. Second, Table 5 reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 credit
spread residuals on ILiq, both in univariate regressions (Panel A) and in multivariate
regressions along with our two intermediary factors (Panel B), respectively. The results
show that ILiq mainly adds to the explanatory power (adjusted R2 ) of high-rated cohorts
but not low-rated cohorts, and its explanatory power is quite small. In particular, Panel A
shows that ILiq accounts for about 3% of the total variation of residuals of credit spread
changes (and significantly positive only for high-rated cohorts).22 In panel B, we observe that
relative to our baseline with two intermediary factors, ILiq only increases the explained
fraction by 0.6% (from 48.2% to 48.8%).23
  22
      The influential measure of corporate bond market illiquidity proposed by Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)
is available at the monthly frequency but only up to 2009. We do not expect any material difference using
either of these two measures in our analysis, as the correlation between them is 0.95 and 0.94 at monthly and
quarterly frequencies over 2003 - 2009 when the Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) measure is available. Indeed,
we conduct monthly regressions using the Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) measure over 2005 - 2009, reported
in Panel B of Table A.6, and find the similar qualitative result that the change of illiquidity mainly affects
credit spread changes of high-rated bonds, just like Table 5 that uses the Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨    utter, and
Lando (2012) measure. This pattern is also found in Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011).
   23
      In an alternative approach, we add ILiq as an explanatory variable to the individual-bond regression
(1). Consistent with the pattern in Table 5, it mainly adds to the explanatory power (adjusted R2 ) of high-
rated cohorts but not low-rated cohorts. Our two intermediary factors explain 45% of the total variation of
residuals, only slightly lower than the 48% in the baseline analysis; and this 3% difference merely reflects
the 3% of explanatory power of ILiq alone reported in Panel A in Table 5.




                                                     20
3.3    Robustness Checks
In this section, we provide further results that elaborate on the explanatory power of in-
termediary factors for credit spread changes and confirm robustness (additional robustness
results are in Appendix A).
    First, Table 6 reports the results using 15 cohorts based on time-to-maturity and firm
leverage. Similar to CGM, we set the breakpoints of leverage to obtain a relatively homoge-
neous distribution of bonds across cohorts.24 Panel B reports a principal component analysis
on the 15 residual series, showing a similar strong common variation, with the PC1 account-
ing for 78% of the total unexplained variation of credit spread changes. Panel C reports
the quarterly bivariate series regressions of each of the 15 residuals on dealer inventory and
intermediary distress. Credit spread changes co-move significantly and positively on inter-
mediary factors, with the loadings monotonically increasing with leverage. Compared with
the baseline results in Table 4, the statistical significance is stronger (especially for univariate
regressions on dealer inventory not reported) probably because of the balanced number of
observations, while the economic magnitudes are similar. The two factors together account
for about 42% of the unexplained total variation of credit spread changes.
    Second, Table 7 reports results following the baseline procedure except using series of
monthly credit spread changes (in percentage). As mentioned in Section 3.1.1, the principal
component analysis in panel B shows that the first PC still accounts for 76% of the total
unexplained variation of credit spread changes, similar to that in CGM but higher than
in FN, both of whom also use monthly series. Panel C shows bivariate regressions on the
intermediary factors for this monthly sample; the results are similar to Table 4, with stronger
statistical significance, especially for dealer inventory, probably because of the large number
of time series observations for each bond. The two factors together account for 20% of the
unexplained total variation of credit spread changes, lower than that in the baseline analysis,
not surprisingly because of a larger number of observations and higher level of variation at
the monthly frequency. But the overall significant explanatory power of intermediary factors
for common credit spread changes remains the same.
    Finally, recall that we have constructed the intermediary distress factor Distress as
the first PC of both N oise and NLevHKM ; this is partly for parsimony and partly for
developing our model in the next section. We could have "let data speak" by regressing
the credit spread residuals on these two factors separately and jointly. The results of this
exercise is reported in Table 8. Similar to Distress, both measures have significant pos-
  24
   As seen from Panel A, the range of the number of bonds is 210-300, 250-450, and 170-500 in short,
medium, and long term cohorts, much more homogeneous than rating-based cohorts.


                                                21
itive effects that monotonically decrease with bond ratings. Individually, N oise accounts
for 32% of the unexplained total variation of credit spread changes, higher than the 17% of
NLevHKM ; jointly, they can explain 38%. Therefore, N oise and NLevHKM have over-
lapping but nontrivial individual explanatory power relative to each other, lending support
to our construction of the intermediary distress measure as a combination of the two.


4     An Economic Framework
We present a simple intermediary-based setting that provides a supply-demand interpretation
to our results. Supply shifts come from shocks to hedgers' endowments: because hedgers
are risk-averse, shocks to their endowments initiate portfolio liquidations that increase bond
supply. Demand shifts come from shocks to intermediary wealth: because intermediaries
face margin constraints, balance sheet shocks affect required returns on intermediation. We
show how model-based regressions with dealer inventory (a proxy for bond supply) and
dealer leverage (a proxy for intermediary wealth) reproduce the qualitative patterns of our
bond-level regressions. Finally, we derive further tests guided by the model.


4.1    Setting and Equilibrium
Assets. There are many risky assets numbered a = 1, . . . , A. Asset cash flows are given
by  , which is normally distributed,   Normal(,     ¯ ). Let p be the equilibrium asset price
vector. There is also a riskless asset that pays 1 per unit of investment, as a normalization.
   For simplicity, the risky assets are in zero net supply, i.e.,

                                        H + I = 0,                                        (4)

where H and I are the asset demand vectors from hedgers and intermediaries, respectively.

Hedgers. As in Kondor and Vayanos (2019), hedgers inherit a random endowment h  ,
with h  0, and have a mean-variance objective:

                                          
                           max E[WH ] -     Var[WH ]                                      (5)
                            H             2
                          WH := 1 - w + h  + H · ( - p - 1A ),                            (6)

where WH is ex-post hedger wealth, and 1 - w is initial hedger wealth. The supply shocks
we consider are shocks to h, to be described below.


                                             22
Intermediaries. Competitive, risk-neutral intermediaries maximize expected wealth, sub-
ject to a margin-type constraint:

                         max E[w + I · ( - p - 1A )] s.t. I · m  w,                                (7)
                          I


where w is initial intermediary wealth. The constraint I · m  w is interpretable as a margin,
or capital-adequacy, constraint, and m is a vector of margin requirements or risk-weights.
The demand shocks we consider are shocks to w, which affect the tightness of this constraint,
hence intermediaries' required returns.
    While the constraint I · m  w is sufficient to generate most of our empirical results, we
also discuss other types of constraints in Appendix B.1. For example, one could argue that
long and short positions should both incur margin costs, or that market prices should be in
the constraint. These nuances should not dramatically alter the mechanisms we highlight.

Equilibrium. Because of the linearity of the intermediary problem, optimization implies a
condition on prices
                                   p=   ¯ - 1A - µm,                                  (8)

where µ is the Lagrange multiplier on the margin constraint. The optimal hedger portfolio
is given by the standard mean-variance optimization:

                                  H = ()-1 (¯ - p - 1A ) - h.                                      (9)

Using (8) in (9), and aggregating using (4), we obtain the intermediary portfolio:

                                                    µ -1
                                         I = h -      m.                                          (10)
                                                    

Plugging this into the margin constraint, we have

                                               (m h - w)+
                                         µ=               .                                       (11)
                                                m -1 m

Thus, the constraint binds (and µ > 0) if and only if w < m h, i.e., if the intermediary
wealth is below the required margin from holding all the hedging demands h.

Corporate bond pricing. We are interested in the pricing of a subset of assets in the
model. This mirrors our empirical exercise, which zooms in on the corporate bond market.
Let 1bond denote the logical vector of indicators corresponding to corporate bond assets. For
instance, if the first two assets are bonds and the others are not, then 1bond = (1, 1, 0, 0, . . . ) .

                                                  23
    Below, we perform comparative statics on the supply of corporate bonds and on the level
of dealer liquidity-provision. The proxy for dealer liquidity-provision is intermediary wealth
w. To proxy bond supply, write total hedging demand as h = sh                 ¯ bond + h
                                                                                       ¯ other for a scalar s
and weakly positive vectors h  ¯ bond and h   ¯ other , where h ¯ bond is only positive for the corporate
bond assets, and the reverse for h  ¯ other , i.e., h
                                                    ¯ bond · h
                                                             ¯ other = 0. We will refer to changes in s a
supply shock and changes in w a demand shock.

Proposition 1. If the intermediary margin constraint is binding, i.e., w < m h,

                                                     p     mh¯ bond
                                ("Supply Shock")       =-           m
                                                     s    m -1 m
                                                     p     1
                            ("Demand Shock")           =            m.
                                                     w   m -1 m
             p       p
Otherwise,   s
                 =   w
                         = 0.

    Proposition 1 says that increases in bond supply and decreases in intermediary demand
both reduce asset prices, as one expects in a supply-demand model. Price declines occur
because intermediary margin constraints "tighten" if they are faced with more bond supply
or if they have lower wealth. These effects are stronger for higher-margin assets; in fact,
both effects are proportional to asset margin. This is reminiscent of the monotonic pattern
in empirical loadings displayed by bonds grouped by ratings or leverage. We formalize this
link in the next section, where we construct model-based proxies for these supply-demand
shocks and insert them into a regression framework.
    One may wonder how these price effects would be modified by a more realistic margin
constraint that includes asset prices, as we discuss in Appendix B.1. With prices in the
constraint, the price effects of Proposition 1 would be dampened: whereas higher supply or
lower demand reduces prices, falling prices then relax the intermediary margin constraint
and allow for less of a risk-sharing disruption.


4.2     Empirical Implementation
Shock proxies. Recall in Section 2.2 our empirical pricing factors are "bond inventory" and
"intermediary distress." Whereas we take as given that the second factor is closely related
to w-1 , we would like to use the model to argue that the bond inventory factor is closely




                                                     24
related to s. Define our inventory and distress factors as

                                           := log(I · 1bond )                                       (12)
                                          := w-1 .                                                  (13)

In equilibrium, assuming the intermediary margin constraint binds, the bond inventory mea-
sure is related to shocks (s, w) as follows:

                                                   ¯ bond · 1bond -  h¯ bond · m
                   ("Supply Shock")      = exp(- )h                                                 (14)
                                       s                            w
                                                   m -1 1bond
                ("Demand Shock")         = exp(- )               .                                  (15)
                                       w             m -1 m

Whatever features make inventory less sensitive to demand shocks (w) make inventory more
sensitive to supply shocks (s), as /w enters /s negatively.25 Given that  is affected
by both s and w shocks, an important question is whether bond inventory increases reflect
bond supply or bond demand. This is ultimately an empirical question that can be settled
by examining the regression coefficient of bond prices on inventory. If this coefficient is
negative, inventory must reflect bond supply to a larger extent, as high bond demand raises
prices.

Bond regressions. Supposing changes to s and w are the only shocks, we can write

                   p      p                             
            dp =     ds +   dw     and d =         ds +   dw        and d = -(/w)dw.
                   s      w                      s      w

Substituting results above, we obtain an exact regression-like characterization.

Proposition 2. If s and w are the only non-fundamental shocks, and margin constraints
bind, then

       dp =  d +  d
                                                    -1                  -1
        := - exp( )m h¯ bond h¯ bond · 1bond - m  1bond h  ¯ bond · m        m
                                                m -1 m                     m -1 m
                                               -1
             w    ¯ bond h¯ bond · 1bond - m  1bond h  ¯ bond · m
                                                                    - 1 m -1 1bond      m
        := -    mh                               -                           -
                                                                                   +1        .
                                             m m   1                     m m   1      m -1 m

If margin constraints are slack, then dp = 0.
  25
    Thus, these expressions help us make sense of our empirical result that "intermediary distress" (and
as well as its two ingredients "noise" and "intermediary leverage") have small negative correlations with
inventory. Indeed, corr(d, d) = -corr(d, dw) < 0.


                                                   25
    Proposition 2 allows us to relate our model directly to the data. First, the model is able
to reproduce our measured pattern of regression coefficients. In Proposition 2, coefficients
 and  are proportional to the margin vector m, as alluded to earlier. Thus, the ratio of
the regression betas of assets i and j are given by their relative margin requirements:

                                       (i)   (j )   (i)    (j )
                                      / =  / = mi /mj .                                                   (16)

Lower-rated bonds and higher-leverage bonds are likely to have larger margin / capital re-
quirements and thus should display larger loadings on both inventory and distress changes.
For example, under the Basel II agreement, implemented during our sample period in many
non-US jurisdictions, corporate bond holdings incur capital charges that decrease with rat-
ings: under the so-called standardized approach, there is a 20% risk weight applied to secu-
rities rated between AAA to AA-; 50% for A+ to A-; 100% for BBB+ to BB-; and 150% for
those below BB-.26 Relatedly, under the SEC's "net capital rule," US broker-dealers' capi-
tal requirements are tied to the riskiness of securities in their portfolios (e.g., using a VaR
approach), and lower-rated corporate bonds tend to be riskier. In line with this discussion,
our empirical results show inventory and dealer distress betas share a similar pattern, both
rising with proxies of margin requirements. In Table 4, we measure     ^AA / ^B  10 to 20 and
                                                                              
 ^AA / ^B  7 to 15, which are in the ballpark of the capital-requirement-implied sensitivity
        
ratios, i.e., mB /mAA = 150%/20% = 7.5 in Basel II.27
    Second, although this model has two factors (inventory and distress), it is also consistent
with a single dominant principal component, as documented in CGM and our Table 3. All
non-fundamental shocks ­ supply and demand ­ alter asset prices by affecting the multiplier
µ of the intermediary margin constraint (see equation (8)), thus both show up as drivers
of the "single" pricing factor in an intuitive way. Here, margin m represents the asset
price loadings on this single factor µ, analogous to bonds' eigenvector loadings on their first
principal component (in the right-hand column of Table 3).
    Unfortunately, the "single factor" µ is not directly measurable. Faced with this challenge,
  26
     See page 23, paragraph 66 of https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs128b.pdf. There is also an alternative
to the standardized approach, the so-called internal ratings-based (IRB) approach, which assigns capital
charges according to self-assessed default probabilities and loss-given-defaults for the underlying securities.
Using the IRB approach generates qualitatively similar patterns of capital charges, because lower-rated
securities have higher default probabilities and default losses.
  27
     Although we have only included corporate bonds inventory in our regression for parsimony, this pro-
portionality test is robust to omission of other non-corporate-bond inventories whose supply shock might
be correlated with s. Under this model, one can show the slope coefficient for the omitted inventory vari-
able inherits the same proportionality to vector m as the included variables  and . Accounting for any
such omitted variable bias will modify the magnitude of  and  but not their patterns. Said differently,
equation (16) still holds for the biased estimates.


                                                      26
we have instead opted to measure proxies for the shocks that drive µ (e.g., inventory as a
proxy for s and leverage as a proxy for w).

Developing new tests. Besides clarifying the results of Section 3, the model also allows
us to design new tests. Below, we develop Predictions 1-3, which we shall take to data in
Section 5.
    First, although assets have many other features besides their margin requirements and
capital charges, the model says that only the asset's margin matters for pricing by inter-
mediary constraints; see equation (16). If two assets differ on some characteristic xi = xj ,
but they have the same margin mi = mj , then they will have the same sensitivities to the
                                  (i)     (j )     (i)     (j )
intermediary factors (, ), i.e.,  =  and  =  . This produces the following
empirical prediction.

Prediction 1. Sorting bonds by any characteristic unrelated to margin or capital require-
ments should not produce any pattern in sensitivities on dealer inventory or intermediary
distress.

    Second, the model features the following "spillover effect": when dealers take into inven-
tory any asset carrying margin requirements, their margin constraint is tightened, and they
will demand a higher premium on all other margin-carrying assets they trade. Of course,
there are intuitive limitations, which are absent from our baseline model, on the extent of this
spillover effect. One leading economic mechanism for such limitations is potential market
segmentation across assets/dealers.
    To develop a formal prediction on the extent of any spillover effects, we modify the model
slightly as follows. Rather than a single margin constraint as in (7), suppose that dealers face
asset-class-specific margin constraints, modeled as different constraints on non-overlapping
sets of assets A1 and A2 :

                               I,a ma  w1    and          I,a ma  w2 .
                         aA1                        aA2


There are two Lagrange multipliers, µ1 and µ2 , associated with each constraint, and the
pricing condition is modified to be p =  ¯ - 1A - diag(m)(µ1 1A + µ2 1A ).
                                                                   1       2

    One interpretation of this modified constraint is that assets in A1 and A2 are being traded
by imperfectly integrated trading desks within a bank, each with independent portfolio limits.
In practice, the bank's lead portfolio manager passes on capital charges to the subsidiary
trading desks, according to their individual trading positions, in the form of costs against
their profit book or even trading restrictions. Under this type of model, A2 traders have

                                              27
little incentive to care about the inventory of A1 assets. Mathematically, we can show that
µ1 is sensitive to A1 inventory, whereas µ2 is not (see Appendix B.2). But when the bank
is in distress globally, in the sense that w1 + w2 = w is reduced, all subsidiary trading desks
become restricted, in the sense that both µ1 and µ2 rise. This model extension leads to the
following prediction.

Prediction 2. Assets traded by corporate bond dealers (or within-dealer trading desks fo-
cused on corporate bonds) will be sensitive to bond inventory, in proportion to their margin
requirements; other assets will not. All margin-carrying assets will be sensitive to aggregate
intermediary distress.

    Lastly, we have used the model to argue bond inventory is a good proxy for bond supply.
For example, we measure  < 0 in our regressions; see Table 4, which shows positive
regression coefficients for bond yields on inventory, implying negative coefficients for bond
prices. The model then implies that /s > 0 (see Proposition 2 and compare with equation
(14)). But this line of reasoning depends on the model structure. A more direct test would
be to extract plausibly exogenous supply shocks ds and observe how inventory  changes.

Prediction 3. If investors liquidate some bond positions for reasons plausibly unrelated to
aggregate intermediary wealth, economic conditions, or firm fundamentals, then (i) dealer
bond inventory should increase; and (ii) bond prices should fall.


5    Empirical Support to the Economic Framework
In this section, we provide additional supporting evidence, corresponding to Predictions 1-3
above, that corroborates the key economic mechanism of dealer margin constraints. First,
sorting bonds based on variables that are unlikely related to margin and capital charges
does not reproduce similar regression patterns as the main findings in Section 3. Second,
dealer inventory has spillover effects within the corporate credit market but not outside, while
intermediary distress affects various asset classes universally. Third, dealer inventory changes
are negatively associated with changes of institutional holdings of substantially downgraded
bonds, lending support to the interpretation of dealer inventory factor as representing supply
shocks. We further provide IV estimates for the effect of dealer inventory on credit spread
changes via the supply channel.




                                              28
5.1    Sorts on Variables Unrelated to Margin
Our margin-based model suggests a placebo test: sorting bonds based on variables unrelated
to margin should produce no pattern in price sensitivities to intermediary factors (see Pre-
diction 1). A result of this type can be observed in Table 4, where the regression coefficients
of both Inventory A and Distress are roughly similar across maturity groups, a sorting
variable not strongly tied to margin requirements.
    To present further evidence along this direction, we sort bonds into cohorts based on
rating and trading volume, the latter of which is plausibly unrelated to a bond's margin
requirements. Specifically, for each bond in each quarter, we compute the total trading vol-
ume (in dollar market value) in the last month of the quarter. Then for each quarter, we
sort bonds independently into one of 15 groups based on quintiles of ratings and terciles of
total trading volume. Panel A of Table 9 reports summary statistics, including the number
of bonds, number of bond-quarter observations, and average total trading volume across all
bonds and quarters, in each group. Within each rating category, the average total trad-
ing volume differs substantially across the tercile groups, about $2, $17, and $100 million
respectively.
    Panel B of Table 9 reports time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly
credit spread changes (in percentage) on Inventory A and Distress. The magnitude and
statistical significance of coefficients on both intermediary factors increase from high-rated
groups to low-rated groups, consistent with the results in Section 3, but remain roughly the
same across the terciles by trading volume.


5.2    Spillover and Segmentation
Closely-related assets are likely to be intermediated by the same dealers, or traded by the
same desks within a dealer firm, and should feature a spillover effect with respect to the bond
inventory factor (see Prediction 2). We provide two tests of this prediction ­ the first splits
bond inventory into high-yield and investment-grade inventories; the second considers CDS
responses to bond inventory. We expect high-yield bonds to be sensitive to investment-grade
inventory (and vice versa) and CDS spreads to be sensitive to bond inventory, because these
are all closely-related assets. But there is no spillover effect from corporate bond inventory
to other non-corporate-credit asset classes, indicating market segmentation on this front.




                                              29
5.2.1    High-Yield and Investment-Grade Bonds

Similar to the aggregate inventory measure, we construct dealer inventory of high-yield (HY )
and investment-grade (IG) bonds separately, denoted Inventory HY and Inventory IG .
Table 10 reports time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of credit spread changes,
on Inventory IG and Inventory HY separately, as well as Distress.
    Both Inventory IG and Inventory HY have explanatory power for credit spread changes
of the bonds that are not in the rating categories used to compute the inventory mea-
sures, consistent with the spillover effect. As the model predicts, Inventory HY has overall
stronger effects than Inventory IG because an increase in the former tightens dealers' mar-
gin constraints more than a similar increase in the latter. Loadings on both inventory
measures also feature a similar monotone effect from high-rated to low-rated bonds, as with
the aggregate inventory Inventory A in Table 4.
    One concern with the interpretation of these results as evidence of spillover effect is that
HY and IG grade inventories may be simply correlated or driven by an unobserved common
factor. Table A.8 reports correlations of the inventory measures that are inconsistent with
this alternative interpretation: Inventory HY and Inventory IG are negatively correlated
in raw changes and near zero in percentage changes.

5.2.2    CDS Spreads

The second test considers CDS spreads, which are tightly-linked to corporate bonds by
arbitrage, and so likely to be traded by corporate bond desks. Moreover, CDS carry capital
charges, and CDS of riskier, lower-rated firms tend to have higher capital requirements.
Agreements such as Basel II treat CDS as "credit risk mitigation" and, ignoring counterparty
risk, tie CDS capital charges directly to the capital charges of the underlying bond (Shan,
Tang, and Yan, 2016).28 Similarly, through its VaR approach, the SEC's "net capital rule"
would require CDS of higher-risk firms to be held with higher capital charges.
    Panel A of Table 11 reports summary statistics of our sample of quarterly CDS spread
changes (in percentage). We have 1038 distinct entities, with a total of 55,744 observations at
the firm-quarter level. The fraction of observations across the five rating categories remains
roughly the same for different CDS maturities, about 80% with a credit rating equal to and
above BBB.
  28
    See page 46, section 5, paragraph 196 of https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs128b.pdf. If the long bond
position is completely hedged by a long CDS position, then the net capital charge is only related to coun-
terparty risk. Thus, for our argument to hold, some banks trading in both bonds and CDS must not be
completely hedged.



                                                   30
   We conduct quarterly time series regressions of CDS spread changes on the same set of
variables as for bond yield spreads, and compute the quarterly series of residuals. For each
quarter and each maturity, we sort firms into one of the five groups of credit rating and
take an average of the residuals within each group and in each quarter. Panel B of Table 11
reports the principal component analysis of the CDS spread change residuals. Similar to the
baseline evidence in Table 3, the first PC accounts for over 80% of the common variation
in CDS spread changes. Panel C reports regressions of these residuals on dealers' bond
inventory and intermediary distress. The patterns of regression coefficients mirror those for
bonds themselves, i.e., positive and monotonically decreasing with bond rating. The total
explanatory power is lower than the 48% in the bond evidence, but still reaches 37%.29

5.2.3    Non-Corporate-Credit Asset Classes

These spillover effects may be limited by the presence of some market segmentation. To
investigate this, we perform a similar analysis on a host of non-corporate-credit asset classes,
which are less likely to be traded by corporate bond dealers or corporate credit trading desks
within a dealer firm. Specifically, we regress quarterly changes of yield spreads (relative to
Treasury) of agency MBS, CMBS, ABS, and monthly S&P 500 index option returns on the
time series variables to extract the residuals. We then run time series regressions of these
residuals on Inventory A and Distress. According to Prediction 2, these assets should
be insensitive to bond inventory changes, but should still respond to aggregate intermediary
distress. Table 12 shows results consistent with this prediction.


5.3     Bond-Level Evidence of Supply Shocks and IV Regressions
In this section, by delving into bond-level dealer inventories and institutional holdings, we
provide evidence that the change of dealer inventory is driven by the supply of bonds from
investors who experience liquidity shocks. Based on such micro-level evidence, we then
construct instruments for the dealer inventory factor at the aggregate level and conduct IV
analysis of the effect of dealer inventory on credit spread changes.
    A word of caution: bond downgrades clearly contain information about firm fundamen-
tals and economic conditions, so we cannot argue that investor sell-offs are truly exogenous
  29
    One may concern that the sensitivity of CDS spreads to bond inventory reflects some latent unobservable
common credit risk factor. We provide two results to mitigate this concern. First, time series credit risk
controls are included in regressions to obtain CDS spread change residuals. Second, results remain the same
using the sample of CDS for which the underlying entities are not matched to the firms in the sample of
TRACE transactions of corporate bonds used to construct the dealer inventory measure.



                                                    31
"supply shocks" (as in Prediction 3). But recall that when constructing the residuals of
credit spread changes we have controlled for firm- and market-level structural factors. More-
over, severe downgrades from IG rating to HY rating, also called "fallen angels," are more
likely to serve as pure supply shocks, thanks to regulatory constraints imposed on finan-
cial institutions. Our later IV analysis uses "fallen angels" (controlling normal downgrades)
together with the insured losses due to natural disasters to instrument the supply shock.

5.3.1    Bond-Level Evidence of Supply Shocks

Our bond-level analysis makes use of rating downgrades of bonds that can lead to large
sell-offs from institutional investors. We provide evidence that a significant amount of such
sell-offs are absorbed into dealers' balance sheet as inventories.

Holding Changes in Downgrades and Fallen Angels: Raw Data We proceed with
the data as follows. From Mergent FISD, we obtain the dates and reasons of all bonds'
historical rating changes. From TRACE, we compute the total inventory change of all dealers
for each bond i in each quarter t, denoted as Inventoryi,t . From eMAXX, we compute
the change of total holdings for each bond i and in each quarter t, denoted as Holdingi,t ,
by each of three groups of institutional investors ­ insurance companies, mutual funds, and
pension funds. We identify observations of Inventoryi,t and Holdingi,t as "downgrade"
observations if bond i is downgraded from IG rating to IG or HY rating in quarter t and as
"no rating change" observations if the credit rating remains unchanged. Among "downgrade"
observations, we further identify "fallen angels" that have been downgraded from IG rating
to HY rating (Ambrose, Cai, and Helwege (2008), Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad (2011))
and "downgrade (IG)" observations with bonds downgraded from IG rating to a lower IG
rating. Our analysis relies on the sell-offs induced by bond downgrading, so we exclude
"upgrade" observations.30 We also exclude observations with bonds downgraded from HY
rating to a lower HY rating, as the different initial rating category makes it hard to compare
with "fallen angel" observations.
    Table 13 reports the average quarterly change of holdings by insurance companies, mutual
funds, and pension funds, in panels A, B, and C, respectively, and the average quarterly
change of dealers' inventories in panel D. In particular, for each of these four groups of
investors, we report the average of Holdingi,t or Inventoryi,t across "downgrade (IG)",
"fallen angels", and "no rating change" observations. Both the number of observations and
  30
     Including "upgrade" observations as a comparison group leads to stronger results in quantifying the
sell-offs of downgraded bonds by institutional investors, not surprisingly.


                                                  32
average holdings change (in $million) are reported. We also include the average of changes
in quarter t + 1, i.e., one quarter following the rating change, because it may take time for
investors to adjust their positions. To put the magnitudes in context, we report the average
level of institutional holding Holdingi,t-1 and dealer inventory Inventoryi,t-1 as of quarter
t - 1 in the last row of each panel.
    For the set of "downgrade (IG)" bonds, both at the quarter of downgrade (t) and the
following quarter (t + 1), insurance companies decreased their holdings by about $0.92-1.01
million, while mutual funds and pension funds increased their holdings by about $0.29-0.38
million at quarter t but sold about $0.16-0.25 million at quarter t + 1. Similar patterns
are found for "fallen angels." In particular, insurance companies sold off "fallen angels" in
both quarters, about $1.27-1.35 million, while mutual funds and pension funds bought about
$0.12-0.20 million at quarter t and sold about $0.24-0.47 million at quarter t + 1. In other
words, the sell-offs by insurance companies are larger for "fallen angels" than for "downgrade
(IG)" bonds, whereas purchases by mutual funds and pension funds are smaller for "fallen
angels" than "downgrade (IG)" bonds. This is consistent with insurance companies being
forced to sell downgraded bonds, especially "fallen angels" due to regulatory constraints,
and mutual funds and pension funds purchasing these bonds to take advantage of "fire-sale"
discounts (Cai, Han, Li, and Li (2019), Anand, Jotikasthira, and Venkataraman (2018)).
    Importantly, panel D of Table 13 shows that dealers buy a similar amount of "downgrade
(IG)" bonds in quarter t to mutual funds and pension funds, about $0.34 million, but a much
larger amount of "fallen angels", about $1.31 million. Dealers also buy "downgrade (IG)"
bonds and sell "fallen angels" in quarter t + 1, but in small amounts. Compared with the
level of inventory as of quarter t - 1, dealers' purchase amount of "fallen angles" is strikingly
large, an increase of about 78%, substantially larger than those of mutual funds and pension
funds that are below 1%.

Holding Changes in Downgrades and Fallen Angels: Regression Next, we conduct
regression analysis ­ which allows us to control bond characteristics ­ to formally test the
relation between institutional investors' sell-offs and dealers' inventory changes. The first
three columns of Table 14 report results based on the following regression:

      Holdingi,t+
  = Intercept + 1 × Falleni,t + 2 × Downgradei,t + 3 × log (Amti,t+ ) + 4 × log (Sizei )
      +5 × Agei,t+ + 6 × Time-to-Maturei,t+ +               FEt + i,t+ ,                    (17)
                                                        t




                                               33
where  = 0 for the change in quarter t (reported in panel A) and  = 1 for the change in
quarter t + 1 (reported in Panel B). The indicator variable Downgradei,t equals 1 if bond i
is downgraded in quarter t and 0 otherwise, whereas Falleni,t equals 1 if bond i is a "fallen
angel" in quarter t and 0 otherwise.
    The sample includes "downgrade (IG)", "fallen angels", and "no rating change" obser-
vations. Thus, the coefficient on Downgradei,t captures the (t +  ) change of institutional
investors' holdings of a average downgraded bond in quarter t, relative to that of a bond that
has no rating change contemporaneously. Similarly, the coefficient on Falleni,t captures the
(t +  ) change of institutional investors' holdings of a bond downgraded from IG rating to
HY rating in quarter t, relative to the average of those that have no rating change and that
are downgraded from IG rating to IG rating contemporaneously. We control for various bond
characteristics including the log of outstanding balance (log (Amti,t+ )), the log of issue size
(log (Sizei )), bond age (Agei,t+ ), and time-to-maturity (Time-to-Maturei,t+ ), and also in-
clude time fixed effects. Panel regressions of changes in dealers' inventories Inventoryi,t+ ,
similar to (17) are reported in the last column.
    Consistent with summary statistics in Table 13, we observe that insurance companies
decrease their holdings of downgraded bonds in both quarters, about $0.48-0.80 million,
relative to the bonds with no rating changes. Mutual funds and pension funds seem to take
some of the downgraded bonds sold by insurance companies in quarter t, about $0.51 and
$0.36 million respectively, but no detectable patterns in the following quarter. Insurance
companies sell "fallen angels" even more aggressively, about $0.67 million in quarter t and
$0.33 million in quarter t + 1, relative to average bonds that experience no rating changes
and that are downgraded from IG rating to IG rating. Mutual funds and pension funds
do not conduct significant purchases of "fallen angles". In contrast, dealers' inventories of
"fallen angels" increase substantially in quarter t (about $1.61 million) and then decrease
somewhat in quarter t + 1 (about $0.45 million). That is, dealers first take inventories of
"fallen angels" in providing liquidity to insurance companies, and then unwind (part of)
these inventories at a later time, consistent with standard inventory control behavior (Ho
and Stoll, 1981). Interestingly, dealers' inventories of average downgraded bonds do not seem
to be significantly different from those with no rating change.
    In sum, insurance companies dump a large amount of "fallen angels", and dealers take
them into their inventories. Taking as a premise that insurance companies face constraints
due to regulations for holding low-rated bonds (Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad, 2011), we
interpret downgrade-induced sell-offs by insurance companies as a supply shock to increase
dealers' inventories, independent of their balance sheet condition (wealth or leverage). In the


                                              34
following, we construct an IV for the dealer inventory factor based on institutional investors'
liquidations of "fallen angels."

5.3.2    IV Regressions
                                                                                 A
To construct a time series IV for the dealer inventory factor Inventoryt           , we aggregate the
changes of institutional holdings of downgraded bonds in each quarter. In particular, we use
                                           FA
the sell-offs of "fallen angels" Holdingt      as the IV and the sell-offs of all downgraded bonds
            D                                 D
Holdingt as a control. Using Holdingt as a control (partially) takes care of the confound
that downgrading contains information on the fundamental value of bonds, which then leads
to both sell-offs and price effects. In addition, recall that the sell-offs of "fallen angels" come
                                                                                                   FA
mainly from insurance companies that face clear-cut regulatory constraints, so Holdingt
                                                                     D
is likely a purer proxy for bond supply shocks than Holdingt           . Still, we include all types
                                                          FA                  D
of institutional investors when computing Holdingt           and Holdingt       , not only insurance
companies, to capture the net selling to dealers, given that mutual funds and pension funds
seem to take some amount of downgraded bonds sold by insurance companies.31 We scale
            FA                  D
Holdingt        and Holdingt      by their respective levels of holdings as of t - 1, corresponding
                                      A
to our construction of Inventoryt        as a percentage change.
                                                       FA
     To complement the analysis using Holdingt            , we also construct a second IV using
insured losses due to natural disasters. In particular, we obtain from the Insurance Informa-
tion Institute an annual series of realized industry-wide losses from catastrophes, capturing
the total net insurance payment for personal and commercial property lines of insurance.32
A linear time series model is fitted to the logarithm of this annual series with the residu-
als as the payout shocks. As catastrophes mostly happen in the third quarter of the year
(e.g., hurricanes), we assign each year's payout shock to the third quarter and zero to other
quarters. The resulting quarterly series is denoted by InsuredLosst .
     The rationale for using InsuredLosst as an IV is that unexpected insured losses are likely to
induce sell-offs of corporate bonds by insurance companies to make payments. The advantage
                                 FA
of InsuredLosst to Holdingt         as an IV is its clear-cut exogeneity to bond-value shocks.
  31
     Of course, this will overestimate (underestimate) the net selling amount to dealers if other investors like
hedge funds also buy (sell) some amount of.
  32
     The included catastrophes, following definitions of the Property Claim Services division of Verisk
Analytics, are those that caused insured property losses of $25 million or more in 1997 dollars and af-
fected a significant number of policyholders and insurers, excluding losses covered by the federally ad-
ministered National Flood Insurance Program. The types of catastrophes include, for example, wildfires,
heat waves, droughts, tropical cyclones, severe thunderstorms, winter storms, cold waves, floods, and
earthquakes. See https://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-us-catastrophes#Loss%
20Events%20in%20the%20U.S.,%201980-2018 for detailed information about natural catastrophes and
https://www.iii.org/table-archive/20922 for our data series.


                                                      35
The disadvantage is that selling of corporate bonds may only be one of the strategies for
insurance companies to collect payment money, which, for example, can be achieved by
selling other fixed-income securities like Treasuries or agency MBS, or by withdrawing their
cash lent out in short-term funding markets. Moreover, insured looses are only available at
the annual level, and they are only shocks to P&C insurers, leaving life insurers unaffected.
These issues may make InsuredLosst a statistically-weak IV, which needs to be addressed
using proper econometric procedures.
    Table 15 reports first-stage regressions of Inventory A on Holdingt     FA
                                                                               and InsuredLosst ,
separately in the first two columns and jointly in the third column. As mentioned above,
                        D
we include Holdingt       as a control, in addition to the intermediary distress factor and six
time series variables also used in the baseline bond-level regressions (1). All variables are
scaled to have zero mean and unit variance except the six time series variable from (1). We
observe that a one-standard-deviation decrease in institutional holdings of "fallen angels"
is associated with about a 0.37 standard deviation increase in dealer inventory, indicat-
                                  FA
ing the relevance of Holdingt         for Inventory A . A one-standard-deviation increase of
InsuredLosst is associated with a 0.07 standard derivation increase in dealer inventory, but
as expected, the statistical significance is weak.
    Table 16 reports second-stage regressions of quarterly residuals of credit spread changes
(as in the baseline analysis of Table 4) on Distress and Inventory A , using Holdingt           FA

as an inventory IV in Panel A, using InsuredLosst as an inventory IV in Panel B, and
using both as IVs in Panel C. The last two rows in each panel reports the test statistic
for weak instruments by Montiel-Olea and Pflueger (2013) (MP) and associated critical
values (Pflueger and Wang, 2015), which allow for conditionally-heteroskedastic and serially-
correlated errors.33
    From Panel A of Table 16, the value of the MP-statistic is larger than the critical value,
                                          FA                                         A
so the null hypothesis that Holdingt         is a weak investment for Inventoryt       is rejected
at a significance level of 10% with a worst-case bias greater than 20% of the OLS bias. The
regression coefficients and t-statistics reported in parentheses show that the dealer inven-
tory factor instrumented by institutional holdings of "fallen angels" is highly significant in
affecting credit spread changes positively, consistent with the baseline results in Section 3.
    The MP test reported in Panel B of Table 16 is below the critical value, so we cannot
reject the null hypothesis that InsuredLosst is a weak instrument. Therefore, for testing the
                                                A
significance of the instrumented Inventoryt       , we choose to report p-values of the Anderson
  33
    The widely used Cragg and Donald (1993) test and associated critical values by Stock and Yogo (2005)
are only valid for conditionally-homoskedastic and serially-uncorrelated errors.



                                                  36
and Rubin (1949) Wald-test in the left bracket and p-values of the Stock and Wright (2000) S-
statistic in the right bracket, both of which are weak-instrument robust. The dealer inventory
factor instrumented by InsuredLosst affects credit spread changes significantly at the 10%
level mainly for groups of short to medium maturities and low ratings based on the Anderson
and Rubin (1949) Wald-test, but only at the 15% significance level based on the Stock and
Wright (2000) S-test. The value of the MP-statistic in Panel C is larger than the critical value,
                                                                        FA
so weak instrument is less of a concern when we use both Holdingt          and InsuredLosst as
IVs. The regression coefficients and t-statistics further confirm the positive effect of dealer
inventory on credit spread changes.
                                                                                  A
    We note that the coefficients in IV regressions, especially on Inventoryt       , are signif-
                                                                     34
icantly larger than those in the baseline regressions of Table 4.        One potential reason
is that dealer inventory changes could be driven by (unobserved) demand shocks (e.g., in-
creased optimism of dealers regarding bond fundamentals, higher risk taking of dealers' bond
trading desks, or looser regulatory requirements).35 Such a demand shock leads to higher
dealer inventory but lower credit spreads, which biases against the positive supply-driven
co-movement of dealer inventory and credit spreads. Using the two IVs, which we claim are
purely about supply, can purge our price-inventory sensitivity of demand effects.


6      Conclusion
It has been almost two decades since CGM raised one of the canonical puzzles in asset
pricing of credit risk, i.e., there is a large common variation in credit spread changes beyond
structural factors. In this paper, we build on recent developments in intermediary asset
pricing (He and Krishnamurthy, 2013; He, Kelly, and Manela, 2017) and demonstrate the
importance of intermediary constraints to explain this canonical puzzle.
    In particular, we show that two intermediary-based factors, an intermediary distress
measure that captures financial constraints of the whole intermediary sector and a dealer
inventory measure that captures inventory held by dealers specializing in corporate bonds,
explain about 50% of the puzzling common variation documented in CGM. A simple eco-
  34
     Another difference between the IV regressions and baseline regressions (2) is that the former includes
additional time series controls. These controls are not included in the baseline regressions because they have
been controlled for in the bond-level regressions (1) used to construct the residuals. We include them in IV
regressions to make sure the IV analysis is robust to them, which, however, is not the reason for the larger
                                       A
regression coefficients on Inventoryt    .
  35
     The demand shock could theoretically also be a distress-type shock, which affects bond inventory, as we
show in our model. However, we view this possibility as unlikely, given we find the IV-OLS discrepancy in
a multivariate setting, with our Distress measure included.



                                                     37
nomic framework in which intermediaries face margin constraints and absorb assets sales from
customers delivers the robust empirical pattern that both intermediary distress and bond
inventory factors are associated with credit spread changes, and these effects are monotone
in bond ratings.
    We construct the aggregate corporate bond inventory for the broker-dealer sector, which
can facilitate future research. We also augment this inventory measure with data on corpo-
rate bond holdings by other institutional investors (insurance companies, mutual funds, and
pension funds). An important component of dealers' inventory change is tied to institutional
investors' sales of (severely) downgraded bonds, which we interpret as a supply shock.
    Following the spirit of CGM, we have mainly focused on using non-bond-return-based
factors to explain the time series variations of credit spreads. Given that credit spread
changes are inherently tied to bond returns, a natural question is whether our non-bond-
return-based intermediary factors are related to bond-return-based factors proposed in the
literature that focus on explaining cross-sectional bond returns. As an exploratory analysis,
Table 17 presents regressions of four bond-return factors of Bai, Bali, and Wen (2019) on
our two intermediary factors. After orthogonalizing all factors ­ their return-based factors
and our non-return-based factors ­ to time series variables in the individual bond regressions
(1), we find that intermediary distress comoves with all return-based factors significantly,
but not dealer inventory. This result suggests that intermediary distress provides a potential
fundamental-based explanation for these return-based factors of Bai, Bali, and Wen (2019),
while we have yet to find some other return-based-factors to proxy for dealer inventory. This
can be a fertile future research direction.




                                             38
   Figure 1: Quarterly Time Series of Intermediary Factors and CGM PC1




                                                                                       4
    2




                                                                                       2
    1




                                                                                       0
    0




                                                                                       -2
    -1




                                                                                       -4
    -2




     2005q1     2007q3             2010q1          2012q3                2015q1           2005q1        2007q3    2010q1       2012q3   2015q1
                                            A
                                    Inventory                                                                       Distress
    4




                                                                                           4
                                                                            2




                                                                                           2
    2




                                                                            0




                                                                                                0
                                                                                        percent
    0




                                                                                       -2
                                                                            -2
    -2




                                                                                           -4
                                                                            -4




                                                                                           -6
    -4




     2005q1    2007q3          2010q1            2012q3            2015q1                      2005q1    2007q3   2010q1       2012q3   2015q1
                                                   HKM
              Noise (Left Scale)                NLev     (Right Scale)                                                 PC1




Note: This figure plots quarterly time series of Inventory A , Distress, N oise, NLevHKM ,
and the first principal component of regression residuals of credit spread changes on structure
factors (CGM PC1) as reported in Table 3. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.
The four intermediary variables are standardized to zero mean and unit standard deviation, and
the CGM PC1 is based on 90-day change of credit spreads in percent.




                                                                                  39
Figure 2: Summary of Amount of Institutional Holdings and Dealer Inventories

                                   Amount of Institutional Holding and Dealer Inventory




                          8
                          7
                          6
                        4 5
                      $ trillion
                          3
                          2
                          1
                          0




                              2005q1         2007q3             2010q1              2012q3               2015q1

                                                Aggregate Outstanding                     Dealer
                                                Pension Fund                              Mutual Fund
                                                Insurance Company



                                         Fraction of Aggregate Outstanding




                                                                                                          2.5
                          40
                          35
                          30




                                                                                                          2
                      15 20 25
                        Percent




                                                                                                          Percent
                                                                                                            1.5
                          10




                                                                                                          1
                          5




                                                                                                          .5
                          0




                             2005q1        2007q3           2010q1               2012q3          2015q1

                                        By Dealers and Institutional Investors              By Dealers
                                        By Institutional Investors



Note: The top panel plots quarterly time series of the holding amount by institutional investors
(including mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies) based on eMAXX data and by
dealers based on TRACE data, as well as the aggregate outstanding balance of U.S. corporate debt
securities ("L.208 Debt Securities" series) based on the "Financial Accounts of the United States"
(Z.1) data release by the Federal Reserve, in $trillions of principal value. The bottom panel plots
quarterly time series of the fraction of U.S. corporate debt securities held by institutional investors,
by dealers, and by both, respectively, in percent. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through
2015:Q2.




                                                               40
                     Table 1: Summary of the Credit Spread Sample
                                              All Bonds
                  Number of bonds           2,584
                  Number of firms            653
                  Number of bond-quarters  55,398
                                            mean      std   p25            p50        p75
                  Yield spread               2.51    2.69   0.95           1.60      3.12
                  Coupon                     6.32    1.59   5.38           6.30      7.25
                  Time-to-Maturity           9.78    8.07   4.19           6.80     11.84
                  Age                        5.12    4.32   2.14           3.86      6.67
                  Issuance                 550.50 471.97 250.00           400.00    650.00
                  Rating                     9.25    3.43   7.00           9.00      11.00
                                      Investment Grade Bonds
                  Number of bonds           1,980
                  Number of firms            383
                  Number of bond-quarters 40,828
                                            mean      std   p25            p50       p75
                  Yield spread               1.52    1.17   0.81           1.22      1.85
                  Coupon                     5.87    1.42   5.00           5.90      6.75
                  Time-to-Maturity          10.85    8.76   4.21           7.38     17.56
                  Age                        5.34    4.46   2.21           4.01      7.06
                  Issuance                 605.62 505.64 300.00           500.00    750.00
                  Rating                     7.58    1.90   6.00           8.00      9.00
                                         High Yield Bonds
                  Number of bonds            900
                  Number of firms            373
                  Number of bond-quarters 14,570
                                            mean      std   p25             p50       p75
                  Yield spread               5.27    3.65   3.15           4.46      6.12
                  Coupon                     7.60    1.33   6.75           7.50      8.25
                  Time-to-Maturity           6.78    4.50   4.14           5.92      7.80
                  Age                        4.53    3.87   1.97            3.49      5.69
                  Issuance                 396.04 313.28 200.00           300.00    500.00
                  Rating                    13.96    2.15  12.00           14.00     16.00

Note: This table reports bond characteristics for our baseline sample of credit spreads. We report the mean,
standard deviation (sd), median (p50), 25th percentile (p25), and 75th percentile (p75) for the whole sample,
investment grade subsample, and high yield subsample. The total number of bonds is smaller than the sum
of the number of bonds in the investment grade and high yield subsamples because rating change make
some bonds of investment grade in one part of the sample period but of high yield in the other part. Credit
spread (in percentage) is the difference between the annualized yield-to-maturity of a corporate bond and a
Treasury with the same maturity calculated with linear interpolations whenever necessary. Coupon is the
coupon rate in percent. Time-to-maturity is in units of years. Age is the number of years since issuance.
Issuance size is in $millions of face value. Rating is the Moody's credit rating of a bond coded numerically
so that a higher number means lower rating, e.g., Aaa=1 and C=21. The overall sample period is 2005:Q1
- 2015:Q2


                                                     41
                     Table 2: Correlations of Empirical Measures

                        Inventory A    Distress        N oise    NLevHKM    V IX      ILiq
                    A
        Inventory       1.000
        Distress        -0.116         1.000
        N oise          -0.094         0.833***        1.000
        NLevHKM         -0.099         0.833***        0.388**   1.000
        V IX            -0.094         0.357***        0.167     0.427***   1.000
        ILiq            -0.106         0.228           0.192     0.188      0.381**   1.000

Note: This table reports correlations of quarterly time series of Inventory A , Distress, NLevHKM ,
N oise, V IX , and ILiq. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2. Significance levels are
represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value.




                                                  42
                        Table 3: Individual-Bond Regressions of Credit Spread Changes on Structural Factors
                      Groups                                                           A: Individual Bond Regressions                                                          B: PC
                                                                                                                                                           15
              Maturity     Rating    Levi         V IX         Jump        r 10y     (r 10y )2    Slope      RetSP      R2
                                                                                                                         adj    Bond#      Obs     var
                                                                                                                                                   g   /   g =1   var
                                                                                                                                                                  g        PC1      PC2
              Short        AA         1.321           0.018     1.150      -0.164     -0.137       0.234      0.121     0.273      60      628          0.53%              0.056    -0.035
                                      1.306           2.223     1.502      -3.475     -1.597       3.864      2.007
              Short        A          -0.550          0.022     -0.094     -0.229     -0.115       0.163     -0.823     0.320     446      4717         0.77%              0.086    -0.028
                                      -0.737          7.244     -0.203     -7.503     -2.388       4.871     -24.599
              Short        BBB        2.303           0.021     -0.435     -0.398     -0.063       0.222     -2.413     0.429     751      7645         1.58%              0.128    -0.038
                                      6.178           7.302     -0.974    -11.257     -1.206       6.113     -66.34
              Short        BB         5.412           0.044     -2.498     -1.043      0.362       0.585     -2.282     0.562     319      2358         4.79%              0.237    -0.136
                                      7.911           6.257     -2.343    -13.821      3.705       7.564     -29.493
              Short        B         10.609           0.090     2.986      -1.474      0.09        0.449     -5.495     0.560     369      2953         18.25%             0.443    -0.517
                                     10.791           5.105     1.152     -10.613      0.373       2.433     -29.758
              Medium       AA         0.912           0.01      -0.457     -0.148     -0.204       0.049     -0.797     0.296      56      493          0.58%              0.055    -0.073
                                      1.266           3.703     -0.992     -2.808     -5.760       0.945     -15.408
              Medium       A          0.481           0.011     -0.929     -0.125     -0.138      -0.010     -1.404     0.331     382      3161         1.01%              0.089    -0.026
                                      1.455           6.079     -2.534     -4.556     -4.097       -0.35     -48.926
              Medium       BBB        2.211           0.012     -2.690     -0.278     -0.013       0.024     -2.361     0.444     720      5736         2.09%              0.143    -0.038
                                      7.590           4.379     -7.246     -7.395     -0.325       0.616     -59.832
              Medium       BB         4.659           0.022     -3.541     -0.969      0.169       0.517     -3.299     0.607     376      2564         6.10%              0.237    0.101
                                      9.057           4.401     -4.018    -10.449      2.412       4.317     -27.551
              Medium       B          8.758           0.07      -2.517     -1.362      0.039       0.250     -3.489     0.617     417      3307         15.93%             0.431    0.061
                                      9.767           4.614     -0.951     -7.651      0.148       1.178     -16.451




43
              Long         AA         0.746           0.011     -1.475     -0.058     -0.119      -0.145     -0.895     0.441      95      1289         0.36%              0.047    -0.013
                                      1.539           5.901     -4.667     -1.575     -5.048      -3.782     -23.341
              Long         A          0.969           0.011     -1.939     -0.102     -0.102      -0.150     -1.239     0.428     534      7269         0.64%              0.075    -0.017
                                      4.469           8.261     -7.822     -4.420     -4.722      -6.467     -53.45
              Long         BBB        5.472           0.032     -2.914     0.008      -0.249       0.095     -1.256     0.492     855      9890         6.36%              0.103    0.797
                                      3.056           2.493     -9.741     0.071      -2.384       0.701     -9.263
              Long         BB         5.322           0.013     -4.821     -0.834     -0.047       0.252     -3.346     0.550     268      1789         5.89%              0.220    0.090
                                      8.434           2.172     -4.675     -5.695     -0.588       1.159     -15.412
              Long         B          6.359           0.048     -4.522     -1.219     -0.850      -0.180     -6.229     0.579     218      1599         35.12%             0.617    0.214
                                      8.823           3.704     -1.360     -6.925     -3.470      -0.908     -31.39
              Pct Explained                                                                                                                                                0.817    0.056
              Corr(Inventory A , PC)                                                                                                                                       0.286    -0.253
              Corr(Distress, PC)                                                                                                                                           0.625    0.321

     Notes: Panel A reports individual-bond quarterly time series regressions of credit spread changes (scaled as 90-day change in percentage) on seven structural factors as in (1). We

     assign each bond into one of 15 cohorts based on maturity and rating. Bonds with short, medium, and long maturities are those with maturity less than 5 years, between 5 and 8

     years, and larger than 8 years. Bonds in the AA cohort are those with a rating of AAA or above, whereas bonds in the B cohort are those with a rating of B or below. The reported

     regression coefficient is the average of regression coefficients across bonds within each cohort, with associated t-statistics (in the row below that of the regression coefficient) computed
                                                                                                              2
     as the average coefficient divided by the standard error of the coefficient estimates across bonds. The Radj is the mean adjusted R2 s of individual bond regressions within a cohort.

     The last three columns report, for each cohort i, the total number of bonds, number of bond×quarter observations, and the ratio of the variation of residuals var
                                                                                                                                                                   g   (=          t (gt   -¯g )2 ) to
                                               15
     the total variation of the 15 cohorts     g =1   var
                                                      g   , respectively. Panel B reports the first two components of the covariance matrix of the 15 residual series, each computed as the average

     of regression residuals across bonds in a cohort. The last three rows report the fraction of the total variation of the 15 residuals explained by the first two PCs and the correlations of

     Inventory A and Distress with the two PCs. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.
Table 4: Regressions of Credit Spread Change Residuals on Intermediary Factors


         Groups          A: Inventory A          B: Distress               C: Inventory A + Distress
 Maturity     Rating   Inventory A   R2
                                      adj      Distress    R2
                                                            adj      Inventory A   Distress    R2
                                                                                                adj    FVE
 Short        AA          0.023      0.040       0.039*    0.114        0.026       0.053***   0.212   0.378
                         (1.275)                (1.946)                (1.341)       (3.302)
 Short        A           0.019      0.018      0.059***   0.167        0.033*      0.078***   0.297
                         (0.916)                (2.669)                (1.935)       (4.688)
 Short        BBB         0.025      0.015      0.105***   0.260       0.046**      0.133***   0.411
                         (0.944)                (3.209)                (2.204)       (4.825)
 Short        BB          0.062      0.017      0.161***   0.153       0.095**      0.203***   0.337
                         (0.860)                (3.002)                (2.143)       (5.384)
 Short        B          0.198**     0.078       0.298*    0.170       0.294***     0.370***   0.383
                         (2.269)                (1.929)                (3.909)       (3.740)
 Medium       AA          0.022      0.032      0.046***   0.130        0.011       0.048***   0.140   0.550
                         (1.105)                (3.436)                (0.591)       (3.956)
 Medium       A           0.041*     0.060      0.087***   0.264       0.048**      0.093***   0.342
                         (1.733)                (2.588)                (2.132)       (3.661)
 Medium       BBB        0.064**     0.071      0.137***   0.317       0.075**      0.146***   0.410
                         (2.097)                (2.730)                (2.543)       (4.030)
 Medium       BB          0.130*     0.098      0.235***   0.321       0.129***     0.251***   0.414
                         (1.902)                (4.230)                (3.050)       (5.934)
 Medium       B          0.172**     0.067      0.465***   0.465       0.278***     0.499***   0.647
                         (2.041)                (3.444)                (5.455)       (6.477)
 Long         AA          0.018      0.030       0.040*    0.151        0.017       0.042**    0.184   0.503
                         (1.025)                (1.852)                (1.302)       (2.274)
 Long         A           0.022      0.027      0.065**    0.231        0.034*      0.069***   0.295
                         (1.118)                (2.194)                (1.936)       (2.909)
 Long         BBB         -0.074     0.031      0.157***   0.136        -0.045      0.153***   0.149
                         (-1.243)               (5.208)                (-0.896)      (5.493)
 Long         BB          0.103      0.066      0.226***   0.302       0.124***     0.240***   0.394
                         (1.550)                (4.321)                (2.910)       (5.855)
 Long         B           0.211*     0.046      0.676***   0.448       0.362***     0.722***   0.591
                         (1.771)                (2.819)                (3.662)       (4.303)
 Total                                                                                                 0.482


Notes: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit
spread changes (in percentage), for cohorts based on time-to-maturity and credit rating, on Inventory A
(in panel A), on Distress (in panel B), and on both (in panel C). Robust t-statistics based on Newey
and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in
parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the
p-value. The last column reports the fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for by
Inventory A and Distress, denoted as FVE and computed as in (3) for short, medium, and long term
bonds, as well as all bonds. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.


                                                    44
Table 5: Regressions of Credit Spread Changes Residuals on Liquidity Factor
             Groups                    A: ILiq                     B: Inventory A + Distress + ILiq
     Maturity     Rating     ILiq         R2
                                           adj   FVE     Inventory A     Distress     ILiq      R2
                                                                                                 adj    FVE
     Short        AA       0.053***      0.181   0.028         0.027      0.041***   0.041***   0.318   0.385
                            (3.299)                           (1.466)      (4.686)   (3.872)
     Short        A          0.032       0.044                0.034**     0.074***    0.011     0.302
                            (1.083)                           (1.993)      (4.978)   (1.037)
     Short        BBB        0.042       0.039                0.046**     0.131***    0.005     0.411
                            (0.795)                           (2.231)      (5.044)   (0.394)
     Short        BB         0.056       0.023                0.095**     0.203***    0.002     0.337
                            (0.960)                           (2.164)      (5.021)   (0.061)
     Short        B          0.037       0.003                0.292***    0.387***    -0.060    0.390
                            (0.207)                           (3.801)      (3.747)   (-1.290)
     Medium       AA       0.034***      0.070   0.023         0.011      0.042***    0.022     0.167   0.555
                            (2.769)                           (0.626)      (3.381)   (1.628)
     Medium       A          0.048       0.080                0.048**     0.085***    0.025*    0.363
                            (1.346)                           (2.235)      (4.157)   (1.850)
     Medium       BBB        0.045       0.034                0.075**     0.144***    0.006     0.411
                            (0.705)                           (2.558)      (4.320)   (0.356)
     Medium       BB         0.027       0.004                0.128***    0.263***    -0.043    0.424
                            (0.393)                           (3.000)      (5.804)   (-0.764)
     Medium       B          0.101       0.022                0.277***    0.509***    -0.036    0.650
                            (0.475)                           (5.322)      (6.817)   (-0.854)
     Long         AA        0.042**      0.168   0.039         0.017      0.033***   0.033***   0.280   0.508
                            (2.543)                           (1.448)      (2.784)   (4.728)
     Long         A          0.049*      0.130                0.034**     0.059***   0.033**    0.349
                            (1.827)                           (2.139)      (3.366)   (2.562)
     Long         BBB        0.065       0.023                 -0.044     0.147***    0.018     0.151
                            (1.478)                           (-0.896)     (5.882)   (0.670)
     Long         BB         -0.002      0.000                0.122***    0.261***   -0.072*    0.422
                            (-0.032)                          (2.829)      (6.263)   (-1.775)
     Long         B          0.214       0.045                0.362***    0.716***    0.020     0.592
                            (0.687)                           (3.671)      (4.461)   (0.236)
     Total                                       0.032                                                  0.488

Notes: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit spread
changes (in percentage), for cohorts based on time-to-maturity and credit rating, on ILiq in univariate
regressions (in panel A) and in multivariate regressions along with Inventory A and Distress (in panel
B), respectively. Robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal
bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in parentheses. Significance levels are represented by *
p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last column in each panel reports the
fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for, denoted as FVE and computed as in (3)
for short, medium, and long term bonds, as well as all bonds. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through
2015:Q2.


                                                         45
                        Table 6: Quarterly Series by Leverage Cohort

         Groups             A: Sample             B: PC                  C: Regressions of Residuals
 Maturity    Leverage     Bond #    Obs       First   Second     Inventory A     Distress      R2
                                                                                                adj    FVE
 Short       <15%           295     3434      0.095    -0.004       0.048***      0.087***    0.322    0.324
                                                                     (2.773)       (3.579)
 Short       15-25%         476     5714      0.137   -0.0002       0.064**       0.119***    0.259
                                                                     (2.271)       (4.030)
 Short       25-35%         414     4691      0.177    -0.035       0.109***      0.151***    0.323
                                                                     (3.322)       (3.870)
 Short       35-45%         212     2112      0.271    -0.025       0.144**       0.238***    0.293
                                                                     (2.515)       (3.962)
 Short       >45%           249     2350      0.442    -0.163       0.273***      0.393***    0.342
                                                                     (3.296)       (3.446)
 Medium      <15%           276     2687      0.105    -0.018       0.056**       0.099***    0.336    0.547
                                                                     (2.575)       (3.091)
 Medium      15-25%         453     4055      0.188    0.029        0.103***      0.237***    0.563
                                                                     (3.108)       (6.545)
 Medium      25-35%         436     3919      0.217    0.001        0.127***      0.252***    0.526
                                                                     (3.436)       (5.382)
 Medium      35-45%         255     2331      0.269    0.062        0.150***      0.279***    0.385
                                                                     (2.881)       (5.288)
 Medium      >45%           263     2269      0.441    -0.028       0.356***      0.544***    0.623
                                                                     (4.793)       (4.474)
 Long        <15%           361     5059      0.079    0.004        0.036**        0.078**    0.322    0.392
                                                                     (2.008)       (2.360)
 Long        15-25%         506     7063      0.102    0.978         -0.047       0.191***    0.112
                                                                    (-0.739)       (4.370)
 Long        25-35%         418     6038      0.129    0.029        0.074**       0.136***    0.405
                                                                     (2.459)       (3.485)
 Long        35-45%         174     1885      0.190    0.051        0.139***      0.227***    0.523
                                                                     (4.231)       (6.776)
 Long        >45%           166     1791      0.493    -0.075       0.322***      0.554***    0.513
                                                                     (3.169)       (3.220)
 Pct Explained                                0.781    0.102                                           0.422

Notes: This table reports results using 15 cohorts based on time-to-maturity and firm leverage. Panel A
reports the number of bonds and observations for each cohort. Panel B reports the loadings of the first two
PCs on the 15 regression residuals and the fraction of total variation these two PCs account for. Panel C
reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit spread changes (in
percentage) on Inventory A (in panel A) and Distress, with robust t-statistics based on Newey and
West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) reported in parentheses.
Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The
last column of Panel C reports the fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for by the
two intermediary factors, denoted as FVE and computed as in (3) for short, medium, and long term bonds,
as well as all bonds. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.
                                                      46
                         Table 7: Monthly Series by Rating Group

       Groups           A: Individual Bond Regressions          B: PC                  C: Regression of Residuals
 Maturity Rating        Bond #     Obs        R2
                                               adj          First Second        Inventory A Distress         R2
                                                                                                              adj   FVE
 Short      AA             87      2611          0.133      0.065    0.124        0.016*          0.014     0.045   0.192
                                                                                  (1.801)       (1.285)
 Short      A             525      15871         0.164      0.093    0.142         0.012       0.037***     0.129
                                                                                  (1.494)       (3.131)
 Short      BBB           881      25114         0.187       0.15     0.16         0.009        0.053**     0.131
                                                                                  (0.797)       (2.206)
 Short      BB            401      7835          0.324      0.291    0.251       0.042**       0.127***     0.195
                                                                                  (2.095)       (3.818)
 Short      B             485      10061         0.347       0.48    0.065       0.077**       0.172***     0.191
                                                                                  (2.097)       (4.422)
 Medium     AA             73      1680          0.171      0.061    0.106         0.013        0.022**     0.077   0.138
                                                                                  (1.530)       (2.338)
 Medium     A             448      9885          0.166      0.087    0.153       0.016**          0.016     0.043
                                                                                  (2.022)       (1.029)
 Medium     BBB           880      18088         0.218      0.146     0.21        0.023*        0.046**     0.104
                                                                                  (1.893)       (2.038)
 Medium     BB            491      8989          0.399      0.274    0.218       0.061***      0.122***     0.246
                                                                                  (3.482)       (2.875)
 Medium     B             593      13111         0.392      0.402    0.163         0.047         0.106*     0.091
                                                                                  (1.353)       (1.828)
 Long       AA            119      4495          0.197      0.058    0.117       0.014**         0.011      0.046   0.235
                                                                                  (1.966)       (0.965)
 Long       A             638      24132         0.216      0.082    0.131       0.015**         0.024*     0.092
                                                                                  (2.082)       (1.731)
 Long       BBB           1049     33504         0.260      0.114    0.262         0.015         0.033*     0.032
                                                                                  (1.422)       (1.946)
 Long       BB            352      6768          0.352      0.232    0.204         0.029       0.070***     0.101
                                                                                  (1.450)       (2.935)
 Long       B             277      5715          0.361      0.551   -0.761       0.098**       0.261***     0.264
                                                                                  (1.986)       (3.070)
 Pct Explained                                              0.757   0.092                                           0.196

Notes: This table reports results at the monthly frequency using 15 cohorts based on time-to-maturity and
credit rating. Panel A reports the number of bonds, number of observations, and mean adjusted R2 s for
each cohort. Panel B reports the loadings of the first two PCs on the 15 regression residuals and the fraction
of total variation these two PCs account for. Panel C reports monthly time series regressions of each of
the 15 residuals of monthly credit spread changes (in percentage) on Inventory A and Distress, with
robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in
Andrews (1991) reported in parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and
*** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last column of Panel C reports the fraction of the total variation
of residuals that is accounted for by the two intermediary factors, denoted as FVE and computed as in (3)
for short, medium, and long term bonds, as well as all bonds. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through
2015:Q2.


                                                     47
                           Table 8: Measures of Intermediary Distress

             Groups             A: N oise            B: NLevHKM               C: N oise + NLevHKM
     Maturity     Rating      N oise     R2
                                          adj     NLevHKM        R2
                                                                  adj      N oise     NLevHKM       R2
                                                                                                     adj

     Short        AA           0.043*    0.113       0.021      0.026       0.042*       0.005      0.114
                              (1.683)               (0.845)                 (1.883)     (0.199)
     Short        A           0.082**    0.225       0.029      0.028      0.083**       -0.004     0.226
                              (2.429)               (1.026)                 (2.494)     (-0.141)
     Short        BBB         0.132***   0.306       0.069*     0.083      0.124***      0.021      0.312
                              (3.368)               (1.682)                 (2.973)     (0.619)
     Short        BB          0.320***   0.399       0.010      0.000      0.373***     -0.135*     0.459
                              (2.804)               (0.097)                 (3.610)     (-1.958)
     Short        B           0.389***   0.221       0.206      0.062      0.363***      0.065      0.226
                              (2.762)               (1.115)                 (2.668)     (0.399)
     Medium       AA          0.058***   0.188       0.023      0.029      0.058**       0.001      0.188
                              (2.614)               (1.363)                 (2.358)     (0.030)
     Medium       A           0.077**    0.182      0.070**     0.152        0.058       0.047      0.241
                              (1.980)               (2.180)                 (1.431)     (1.601)
     Medium       BBB         0.127**    0.224      0.115**     0.184       0.097*       0.077*     0.295
                              (2.376)               (2.284)                 (1.868)     (1.771)
     Medium       BB          0.310***   0.448       0.107      0.053      0.316***      -0.016     0.449
                              (3.550)               (1.224)                 (2.951)     (-0.286)
     Medium       B           0.432***   0.304      0.422***    0.290      0.316**     0.300***     0.429
                              (2.669)               (3.070)                 (2.352)     (2.700)
     Long         AA           0.034     0.076       0.021      0.030        0.030       0.010      0.081
                              (1.102)               (0.734)                 (1.425)     (0.367)
     Long         A            0.066*    0.186       0.043      0.079       0.058*       0.021      0.202
                              (1.815)               (1.354)                 (1.715)     (0.711)
     Long         BBB         0.177***   0.155      0.114***    0.064      0.156***      0.054*     0.167
                              (3.037)               (4.169)                 (2.762)     (1.806)
     Long         BB          0.291***   0.457       0.114      0.071      0.290***      0.002      0.457
                              (4.632)               (1.423)                 (3.664)     (0.047)
     Long         B           0.672***   0.374      0.566**     0.265      0.533**       0.359*     0.465
                              (2.851)               (2.412)                 (2.282)     (1.769)
     FVE                                 0.321                  0.168                               0.380

Notes: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit
spread changes (in percentage), for cohorts based on time-to-maturity and credit rating, on N oise (in
panel A), on NLevHKM (in panel B), and on both (in panel C). Robust t-statistics based on Newey
and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in
parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the
p-value. The last row reports the fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for by N oise,
NLevHKM and both, respectively, denoted as FVE and computed as in (3) for all cohorts. The sample
period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.


                                                      48
                          Table 9: Groups by Trading Volume

        Groups                      A: Sample Summary                    B: Regressions of Residuals
 Leverage Trd Volume        TrdVolume ($ million) Bond#      Obs      Distress Inventory A R2        adj
 AA        Low                     2.462            92       530        0.036          0.018       0.067
                                                                       (1.517)        (0.934)
 AA         Medium                 17.779            113     796      0.051***         0.017       0.177
                                                                       (3.100)        (1.040)
 AA         High                   136.25            129    1084        0.038          0.016       0.098
                                                                       (1.161)        (0.938)
 A          Low                     1.995            684    6201      0.072***        0.039*       0.260
                                                                       (2.892)        (1.803)
 A          Medium                 16.882            741    4700      0.086***        0.045*       0.302
                                                                       (3.300)        (1.907)
 A          High                   110.411           699    4246       0.073*          0.035       0.207
                                                                       (1.759)        (1.509)
 BBB        Low                     2.011            1199   9465      0.146***         0.023       0.085
                                                                       (3.556)        (0.564)
 BBB        Medium                 17.056            1209   7401      0.174***        0.057*       0.426
                                                                       (5.770)        (1.848)
 BBB        High                   106.026           1137   6405      0.150***       0.070**       0.355
                                                                       (2.698)        (2.329)
 BB         Low                     2.584            431    1973      0.251***       0.160***      0.369
                                                                       (4.007)        (2.688)
 BB         Medium                 17.777            471    2435      0.262***        0.155**      0.358
                                                                       (4.540)        (2.118)
 BB         High                   100.298           451    2303      0.227***        0.123*       0.279
                                                                       (4.774)        (1.732)
 B          Low                     2.36             412    2282      0.450***       0.317***      0.411
                                                                       (4.502)        (3.473)
 B          Medium                 17.342            468    2973      0.526***       0.270***      0.461
                                                                       (3.459)        (2.996)
 B          High                   89.654            437    2604      0.586***       0.304***      0.481
                                                                       (3.283)        (3.155)

Note: This table reports results using 15 cohorts based on credit rating and trading volume (dollar
value of the total trading volume in the last month of a quarter). Panel A reports the total dollar
trading volume in $millions, number of bonds, and number of observations for each cohort. Panel
B reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit spread
changes (in percentage) on Inventory A and Distress, with robust t-statistics based on Newey
and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) reported
in parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with
p as the p-value. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.



                                                49
                         Table 10: Inventories of HY vs IG Bonds
        Groups                     A: Inventory HY                             B: Inventory IG
  Maturity Rating         Distress Inventory HY            R2adj      Distress Inventory IG           R2adj
  Short      AA              0.041         0.016           0.107         0.042         0.024          0.126
                           (1.472)       (0.894)                       (1.627)       (1.340)
  Short       A            0.071**        0.042*           0.218       0.070**         0.021          0.174
                           (2.492)       (1.748)                       (2.439)       (1.073)
  Short       BBB         0.127***       0.062**           0.327      0.126***         0.033          0.282
                           (3.294)       (1.979)                       (3.327)       (1.160)
  Short       BB          0.210***         0.119           0.207      0.215***      0.121**           0.210
                           (2.994)       (1.278)                       (3.876)       (2.137)
  Short       B            0.376**        0.191            0.238      0.391***      0.251**           0.276
                           (2.097)       (1.373)                       (2.735)       (2.231)
  Medium      AA          0.052***         0.030           0.184      0.049***         0.002          0.136
                           (3.561)       (1.583)                       (3.034)       (0.132)
  Medium      A            0.093**       0.053**           0.325       0.090**         0.016          0.252
                           (2.319)       (2.412)                       (2.082)       (0.697)
  Medium      BBB         0.154***       0.083**           0.389       0.149**         0.025          0.307
                           (2.661)       (2.522)                       (2.443)       (0.765)
  Medium      BB          0.264***       0.142**           0.381      0.261***         0.076          0.319
                           (4.082)       (1.971)                       (4.628)       (1.569)
  Medium      B           0.538***       0.237**           0.529      0.541***      0.197***          0.504
                           (3.609)       (2.368)                       (4.190)       (2.912)
  Long        AA             0.036       0.029**           0.129         0.034         0.001          0.077
                           (1.137)       (2.063)                       (0.960)       (0.051)
  Long        A             0.069*        0.033*           0.232        0.070*         0.025          0.215
                           (1.816)       (1.703)                       (1.829)       (1.335)
  Long        BBB         0.177***         0.012           0.156      0.175***        -0.009          0.155
                           (5.107)       (0.280)                       (4.966)      (-0.348)
  Long        BB          0.256***        0.129*           0.412      0.255***       0.089*           0.369
                           (4.416)       (1.888)                       (5.734)       (1.770)
  Long        B           0.772***        0.244*           0.526      0.788***      0.306***          0.554
                           (2.991)       (1.748)                       (3.446)       (2.693)
  FVE                                                      0.397                                      0.322

Note: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit
spread changes (in percentage), for cohorts based on time-to-maturity and credit rating, on Inventory HY
(in panel A), on Inventory IG (in panel B). Robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard
errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in parentheses. Significance levels
are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last row reports the
fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for, denoted as FVE and computed as in (3), for
all cohorts. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.


                                                     50
                                   Table 11: Credit Default Swaps
        Groups               A: Sample               B: PC                    C: Regression of Residuals
  Maturity    Rating       Firm #     Obs       First   Second        Inventory A     Distress       R2
                                                                                                      adj    FVE
  1y          AA              20      939       0.039     -0.029          0.007         0.030**     0.121    0.375
                                                                         (0.542)        (2.012)
  1y          A              111      5742      0.041     0.042         0.032***        0.040***    0.463
                                                                         (4.218)        (6.210)
  1y          BBB            200      7942      0.067     0.062         0.048***        0.057***    0.414
                                                                         (3.882)        (5.025)
  1y          BB             128      2309      0.149     0.151         0.099***        0.141***    0.367
                                                                         (3.615)        (7.691)
  1y          B               64      1377      0.651     0.686         0.305***        0.492**     0.377
                                                                         (2.721)        (2.521)
  5y          AA              21      1140      0.031     -0.010         0.013*         0.026***    0.185    0.354
                                                                         (1.725)        (2.914)
  5y          A              112      5688      0.043     0.035         0.030***        0.042***    0.356
                                                                         (2.950)        (7.351)
  5y          BBB            208      7995      0.067     0.003         0.046***        0.067***    0.379
                                                                         (2.752)        (4.479)
  5y          BB             132      2377      0.127     0.072           0.007         0.112***    0.165
                                                                         (0.176)        (4.294)
  5y          B               71      1601      0.583     -0.643        0.287***        0.440***    0.376
                                                                         (2.666)        (2.912)
  10y         AA              20      1117      0.023     -0.018          0.011          0.012      0.063    0.395
                                                                         (1.375)        (1.440)
  10y         A              111      5611      0.036     0.035          0.025**        0.039***    0.314
                                                                         (2.228)        (6.795)
  10y         BBB            198      8071      0.055     -0.001         0.036**        0.058***    0.350
                                                                         (2.263)        (5.811)
  10y         BB             127      2426      0.094     0.039           0.026         0.074***    0.122
                                                                         (0.792)        (4.387)
  10y         B               65      1409      0.413     -0.277         0.206**        0.354***    0.438
                                                                         (2.515)        (2.667)
  Pct Explained                                 0.830    0.070                                               0.371

Note: This table reports results using 15 cohorts of CDS based on the CDS maturity and credit rating of the
underlying entity. Panel A reports the number of firms and observations for each cohort. Panel B reports the
loadings of the first two PCs on the 15 regression residuals (computed from time series regressions of quarterly CDS
spread changes in percentage similar to (1)) and the fraction of total variation these two PCs account for. Panel C
reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly CDS spread changes (in percentage)
on Inventory A and Distress, with robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors using
the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) reported in parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p
< 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last column of Panel C reports the fraction of the
total variation of residuals that is accounted for by the two intermediary factors, denoted as FVE and computed as
in (3) for 1-year, 5-year, and 10-year CDS cohorts, as well as all cohorts. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through
2015:Q2.
                                                         51
                             Table 12: Non-Corporate-Credit Assets
                                               A: Agency MBS
                                FN30y          FN15y        FG30y         FG15y
             Inventory A         3.70**          2.64         3.30          1.05
                                 (2.10)         (1.58)       (1.64)        (0.55)
             Distress           5.79***        6.21***      6.55***       5.12***
                                 (3.08)         (3.65)       (3.60)        (2.81)
              2
             Radj                 0.18           0.26         0.17          0.15
                                                  B: CMBS
                                 Duper           AM            AJ
             Inventory A         15.48*          2.94         4.33
                                 (1.89)         (0.16)       (0.21)
             Distress          28.06***       84.50***     87.38***
                                 (5.10)         (4.24)       (5.14)
              2
             Radj                 0.27           0.36         0.31
                                                   C: ABS
                              Credit Card Auto AAA         Auto A        Auto BBB
             Inventory A          1.35           1.86        22.44          7.86
                                 (0.40)         (0.44)       (1.39)        (0.34)
             Distress          21.63***          6.58     145.86***       138.35**
                                 (4.77)         (1.17)       (3.25)        (2.06)
              2
             Radj                 0.37           0.02         0.51          0.39
                                          D: S&P 500 index options
                               Call: 0.90     Call: 0.95 Call: ATM       Call: 1.05   Call: 1.10
                         A
             Inventory           0.034          0.020        0.007         0.013        -0.148
                                (0.320)        (0.183)      (0.064)       (0.100)      (-1.101)
             Distress            0.263          0.257        0.314         0.272         0.225
                                (0.601)        (0.538)      (0.604)       (0.483)      (0.371)
              2
             Radj                0.027          0.023        0.028         0.017         0.013
                               Put: 0.9       Put: 0.95   Put: ATM       Put: 1.05    Put: 1.10
             Inventory A         0.241          0.165        0.121         0.088         0.078
                                (0.823)        (0.746)      (0.723)       (0.674)      (0.675)
             Distress          0.503***       0.355***      0.300**       0.277*         0.227
                                (3.660)        (3.076)      (2.247)       (1.739)      (1.221)
              2
             Radj                0.043          0.034        0.034         0.037         0.028

Note: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of residuals of quarterly yield spread changes (in
basis points) of agency MBS (in panel A), CMBS (in panel B), and ABS (in panel C) on Inventory A and
Distress and monthly series regressions of residuals of one-month unannualized returns (in percentage) of
S&P 500 index option portfolios (in panel D). Each residual series is computed from the regression of the
yield spread change or return on the six time series factors included in (1). Robust t-statistics based on
Newey and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported
in parentheses, with significance levels indicated by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01, where p is the
p-value. The overall sample period is 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2 for yield spreads, and January 2005 - January 2012
for options.

                                                     52
Table 13: Average Quarterly Changes of Institutional Investors' Holdings and
Dealers' Inventories of Individual Bonds

                                   A: Insurance Companies
                             Downgrade (IG)     Fallen Angels         No Rating Change
                              Obs    mean       Obs mean               Obs      mean
          Holdingi,t         9673   -0.916      3261 -1.353           416254    -0.390
          Holdingi,t+1       9604   -1.008      3185 -1.274           416965    -0.404
          Holdingi,t-1              73.359             71.075                   87.087
                                       B: Mutual Funds
                             Downgrade (IG)     Fallen Angel          No Rating Change
                              Obs    mean       Obs mean               Obs      mean
          Holdingi,t         5265    0.376      1760 0.116            345154    -0.423
          Holdingi,t+1       5204   -0.161      1701 -0.237           345385    -0.390
          Holdingi,t-1              76.882             75.998                   65.153
                                      C: Pension Funds
                             Downgrade (IG)     Fallen Angel          No Rating Change
                              Obs    mean       Obs mean               Obs      mean
          Holdingi,t         4566    0.285      1484 0.204            304541    -0.321
          Holdingi,t+1       4508   -0.246      1443 -0.474           304883    -0.309
          Holdingi,t-1              19.621             18.110                   11.971
                                          D: Dealers
                             Downgrade (IG)     Fallen Angel          No Rating   Change
                              Obs    mean       Obs mean               Obs        mean
          Inventoryi,t       20254   0.343      6792 1.311            687927      0.254
          Inventoryi,t+1     18949   0.022      6449 -0.275           614380      0.028
          Inventoryi,t-1             1.949              1.708                     1.188

Note: This table reports the average quarterly change of holdings by insurance companies, mutual
funds, and pension funds, in panels A, B, and C, respectively, and the average quarterly change
of dealers' inventories in panel D. The average quarterly change for three sets of observations
is computed separately: "downgrade (IG)" observations (in the first two columns) with bonds
downgraded from IG rating to IG rating, "fallen angels" observations (in the second two columns)
with bonds downgraded from IG rating to HY rating, and "no rating change" observations (in the
last two columns) with bond experiencing no rating change. Both the number of observations and
average amount change (in $millions) are reported. Both the change in the current quarter and the
change in the subsequent quarter are included. For comparison, the average level of institutional
holding and dealer inventory (in $millions) as of the current quarter is reported in the last row of
each panel. The sample period is 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2.




                                                53
Table 14: Changes in Institutional Holdings and Dealers' Inventories of Down-
graded Bonds
            A: Changes of Institutional Holdings and Dealer Inventories in quarter t
                           Insurance         Mutual         Pension            Dealer
                              (1)             (3)             (5)              (7)
          Fallen          -0.665***         -0.219          -0.058         1.607**
                           (-3.383)        (-0.574)       (-0.270)          (1.980)
          Downgrade       -0.480***        0.509**       0.363***            -0.127
                           (-4.007)        (2.310)         (2.811)         (-0.158)
          Obs              423,766         348,092        306,971          705,516
           2
          Radj               0.070          0.013           0.036           0.0004
          Bond Controls       Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes
          Time FE             Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes
          B: Changes of Institutional Holdings and Dealer Inventories in quarter t + 1
                           Insurance         Mutual         Pension            Dealer
                              (1)             (3)             (5)              (7)
          Fallen           -0.326*          -0.010          -0.088        -0.447***
                           (-1.654)        (-0.028)       (-0.434)         (-3.187)
          Downgrade       -0.795***         -0.073          0.069             0.124
                           (-7.125)        (-0.332)        (0.590)          (1.371)
          Obs              424,413         348,266        307,265          630,957
          R2
           adj               0.071          0.013           0.036            0.001
          Bond Controls       Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes
          Time FE             Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes
Note: The first three columns report panel regressions in (17) of changes in institutional holdings
of bond i in quarter t +  ( equals 0 in in panel A and 1 in panel B) on indicator variables
Downgradei,t , which equals 1 if bond i is downgraded from IG rating to either IG or HY rating in
quarter t and 0 otherwise and indicator Falleni,t that equals 1 if bond i is downgraded from IG rating
to HY rating in quarter t and 0 otherwise, for insurance companies, mutual funds, and pension
funds, respectively. Similar panel regressions of changes in dealers' inventories Inventoryi,t+ are
reported in the last column. Bond controls include the log of outstanding balance in $thousands
(log (Amti,t+ )), the log of issue size in $millions (log (Sizei )), bond age in years (Agei,t+ ), and
time-to-maturity in years (Time-to-Maturei,t+ ). For simplicity, we suppress the coefficients on
these controls and the intercept. The sample includes observations of bonds downgraded from
investment grade to either investment grade or high yield and of bonds with no rating change.
Robust t-statistics based on clustered standard errors at the bond level are reported in parentheses
with significance levels represented by * for p < 0.1, ** for p < 0.05, and *** for p < 0.01, where
p is the p-value. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2.




                                                 54
                                  Table 15: First-Stage Regressions
                                                 A                   A             A
                                        Inventoryt          Inventoryt    Inventoryt
                            FA
                     Holdingt             -0.377***                          -0.369***
                                           (-2.618)                           (-3.983)
                     Insurance Losst                            0.101           0.073
                                                               (1.188)         (1.413)
                     Distress              0.552***           0.456***        0.545***
                                            (4.890)            (3.423)         (5.738)
                            D
                     Holdingt                 0.045            -0.179*          0.047
                                            (0.255)           (-1.701)         (0.273)
                     V IX                     0.003             0.005           0.002
                                            (0.114)            (0.176)         (0.146)
                     Jump                 -15.995***         -13.876**      -15.775***
                                            (-3.260)          (-2.156)        (-6.003)
                     r10y                    0.806*             0.654         0.728***
                                            (1.934)            (1.547)         (4.242)
                              2
                      r10y                   -0.294            -0.396          -0.314
                                           (-1.043)          (-1.270)        (-1.014)
                     Slope                   -0.400            -0.359        -0.352**
                                           (-1.158)          (-0.909)        (-2.302)
                     RetSP
                        t                  7.591***          7.088***        7.842***
                                            (4.462)           (3.194)         (9.014)
                     Intercept               0.041              0.066          0.040
                                            (0.258)           (0.417)         (0.324)
                     R2
                      adj                     0.547             0.482          0.552

Note: This table reports the first-stage regressions of Inventory A on Holdingt         FA
                                                                                            and InsuredLosst ,
separately in the first two columns and jointly in the third column. The change in institutional holdings of
                                   D
all downgraded bonds Holdingt        is included as a control, in addition to Distress and the six time series
variables used in the baseline bond-level regression (1). All measures except the six time series variable from
(1) are scaled to have zero mean and unit variance. Robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987)
standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in parentheses, with
significance levels indicated by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01, where p is the p-value. The sample
period is 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2.




                                                       55
                              Table 16: Second-Stage Regressions
     Groups                         FA
                          A: Holdingt                         B: Insurance Losst             C: HoldingtF A + Insurance Loss
                                                                                                                             t
 Maturity Rating                A
                       Inventoryt Distresst                InventorytA     Distresst                  A
                                                                                             Inventoryt        Distresst
 Short       AA           0.208**               0.004          0.188               0.014       0.206***              0.005
                          (2.375)              (0.057)    [0.254]    [0.164]      (0.177)       (2.945)             (0.090)
 Short       A             0.208*               0.081          0.214               0.078        0.208**              0.081
                          (1.828)              (1.015)    [0.074]    [0.157]      (1.041)       (2.459)             (1.383)
 Short       BBB           0.188               0.199***        0.191              0.197***      0.188**             0.198***
                          (1.642)              (2.662)    [0.089]    [0.156]      (3.596)       (2.205)             (3.660)
 Short       BB            0.508*               0.311*         0.762               0.185        0.535**             0.298**
                          (1.679)              (1.762)    [0.070]    [0.145]      (0.916)       (2.541)             (2.262)
 Short       B            0.740**              0.630**         1.463               0.270       0.818***             0.591***
                          (2.181)              (2.448)    [0.0004] [0.135]        (0.666)       (3.822)             (3.491)
 Medium      AA           0.208**               -0.003          0.140              0.031        0.201**              0.001
                          (1.973)              (-0.038)   [0.265]    [0.157]      (0.603)       (2.249)             (0.012)
 Medium      A            0.194*                 0.096          0.165              0.110**      0.191**               0.097
                          (1.751)               (1.217)   [0.143]    [0.147]       (2.199)      (2.075)              (1.544)
 Medium      BBB          0.200*               0.223***         0.260             0.193***      0.206**             0.220***
                          (1.873)               (2.994)   [0.026]    [0.146]       (2.960)      (2.345)              (3.762)
 Medium      BB           0.544*                0.294*          0.561              0.285**      0.546**              0.293**
                          (1.792)               (1.726)   [0.037]    [0.137]       (1.993)      (2.428)              (2.495)
 Medium      B            0.671***             0.668***         0.461             0.773***     0.648***             0.679***
                           (2.621)              (4.116)   [0.023]    [0.174]       (4.419)      (3.492)              (6.637)
 Long        AA           0.123***              0.012          -0.030              0.088        0.106**              0.020
                           (2.784)             (0.278)    [0.757]    [0.642]      (1.553)       (2.553)             (0.542)
 Long        A             0.214**              0.035           0.057             0.113**       0.197**              0.043
                           (2.225)             (0.472)    [0.533]    [0.383]      (2.432)       (2.426)             (0.697)
 Long        BBB            0.144                0.213          0.141              0.215*        0.144               0.213*
                           (0.848)              (1.214)   [0.598]    [0.295]       (1.886)      (1.345)              (1.807)
 Long        BB           0.388***             0.362***         0.151             0.481***     0.363***             0.375***
                           (2.768)              (4.681)   [0.480]    [0.286]       (5.128)      (2.929)              (6.161)
 Long        B            0.654***             1.219***         0.759             1.167***     0.666***             1.213***
                           (2.795)              (7.768)   [0.002]    [0.127]       (4.331)      (3.875)             (12.307)
 MP Test                             15.815                              2.100                             9.678
 Critical Value                     [12.374]                           [12.374]                           [7.749]

Note: This table reports second-stage regressions of quarterly residuals of quarterly credit spread changes
(in percentage) on Distress and Inventory A , using Holdingt        FA
                                                                       as instrument in panel A, InsuredLosst
as instrument in panel B, and both as instruments in panel C. Regression coefficients on Inventory A and
                                                                       D
Distress are reported, but those on control variables (Holdingt          , Distress, and the six time series
variables used in (1)) are omitted for simplicity of reporting. The last two rows in each panel report the
test statistic for weak instruments by Montiel-Olea and Pflueger (2013) (MP) and associated critical values
(Pflueger and Wang (2015)). An MP-statistic greater than critical values in brackets below rejects the hy-
pothesis of weak instruments (with a worst-case bias greater than 20% of the OLS bias) at a significance level
of 10%. Robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth
choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in parentheses, with significance levels indicated by * p < 0.1, ** p
< 0.05, and *** p < 0.01, where p is the p-value. For the coefficient on Inventory A in panel B, p-values of
the Anderson and Rubin (1949) Wald-test and the Stock and Wright (2000) S-statistic are reported in the
                                                                                                            A
left and right brackets, which are both weak-instrument robust for testing the significance of Inventoryt     .
The sample period is from 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2.

                                                          56
     Table 17: Regressions of Bond-Return Factors on Intermediary Factors

                                       MKTBond        DRF         CRF          LRF
                                    A: Regressions on Dealer Inventory
                               A
                      Inventoryt         0.027       -0.008       0.111       -0.149
                                        (0.280)      (-0.038)    (0.508)     (-0.812)
                      R2
                       adj               0.002        0.000       0.009       0.017
                                  B: Regressions on Intermediary Distress
                      Distresst        -0.388***    -0.941***   -0.651***   -1.120***
                                        (-2.807)     (-5.201)    (-3.635)    (-6.280)
                      R2
                       adj               0.235        0.324       0.202       0.586
                       C: Regressions on Dealer Inventory and Intermediary Distress
                               A
                      Inventoryt         0.103        0.173       0.242       0.058
                                        (1.341)      (1.064)     (1.304)      (0.485)
                      Distresst        -0.418***    -0.995***   -0.721***   -1.136***
                                        (-3.231)     (-5.558)    (-4.287)    (-6.566)
                      R2
                       adj               0.263        0.367       0.244       0.593

Note: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of return-based factors, including corporate bond
market return (MKTBond ), downside risk factor (DRF), credit risk factor (CRF), and liquidity risk factor
(LRF) of Bai, Bali, and Wen (2019), on Inventory A and Distress. The original series of return factors
are one-month returns (in percent) of monthly rebalanced portfolios, and we construct quarterly return
factors using geometric mean of the three monthly returns for each quarter. We orthogonalize both the
return factors and intermediary factors against the six time series structural factors as used in (1). Robust
t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews
(1991) are reported in parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p
< 0.01 with p as the p-value. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.




                                                     57
Appendices

A     Additional Data Summary and Empirical Results
In this appendix, we provide additional data summary statistics and empirical results.
    First, Table A.1 reports the detailed procedure of sample cleaning and construction.
    Second, Figure A.1 and Table A.2 provide a summary of the eMAXX institutional hold-
ings. The top panel of Figure A.1 shows the quarterly series of the total number of insti-
tutions, which increased from about 5000 to more than 6000. This increase is mainly due
to the growth of mutual funds, whereas the number of insurance companies remains stable
around 2800. As shown in the middle panel, the total number of bonds held by these in-
stitutions is about 15000 steadily, and largest by insurance companies. Finally, the bottom
panel plots quarterly series of the total holding amount by all institutions and outstanding
balance of an average bond, calculated as the respective average of the total holding amount
and outstanding balance across all bonds in each quarter. The average holding amount and
outstanding have increased roughly in parallel to each other, so the institutional holding
steadily accounts for 30-35% of the outstanding except a brief drop during the 2008 crisis.
    Panel A of Table A.2 reports the number of institutional investors, panel B reports the
number of bonds, and panel C reports the aggregate holding amount in principal value, by
insurance companies, mutual funds, pension funds, and all institutions separately. Panel D
reports summary statistics of quarterly series of the total holding amount by all institutions
and the outstanding balance, of an average bond. Specifically, for each bond in each quar-
ter, we first sum the holding amounts by all institutions to obtain a total holding amount
Holdingit . Then across all the bonds i in each quarter, we compute the mean of Holdingit
as the total holding amount of an average bond (or average bond's holding amount). Across
all the bonds in each quarter, we also compute the mean of outstanding balance as the
outstanding balance of an average bond (or average bond's outstanding balance). In each
quarter, we compute the ratio of average holding amount to average outstanding balance
and obtain a quarter series of average holding/outstanding.
    Third, Table A.3 reports summary statistics of quarterly time series of option-adjusted
spreads of agency MBS, yield spreads of non-agency CMBS, and yield spreads of ABS all
in basis points, in panels A, B, and C, respectively. Panel D reports summary statistics of
monthly time series of (unannualized) one-month return of leverage-adjusted S&P 500 index
option portfolios in percentage.
    Fourth, panel A of of Table A.4 reports quarterly time series regressions of the base-
line residuals on the two intermediary factors, with Inventory A based on dollar value of
corporate bond transactions, as opposed to par value used in the baseline measure.
    Fifth, in the baseline analysis, Inventory A and Distress are both measured using
changes between two quarter ends. In contrast, the credit spread change cs may not be
exactly between two quarter ends, and the time duration of the change ranges from 45 to 120
days. Panel B of Table A.4 reports quarterly time series regressions of the baseline residu-
als on intermediary factors that are constructed by matching to the horizon of credit spread
                                                                                     match
changes. Specifically, for each observation csit , we compute measures Inventoryit         and


                                             58
Distressmatch
            it    as the changes of dealer inventory and intermediary distress measures over
                                                                     match
the same time horizon. We then take the average of Inventoryit             and Distressmatch
                                                                                           it
across all bonds in each quarter t as the aggregate time series measures of intermediary fac-
                               match
tors, denoted as Inventoryt          and Distressmatch
                                                     t   . That is, these alternative measures
take into account the distribution of time horizons of credit spread changes across bonds.
    Sixth, Table A.5 reports quarterly time series regressions of baseline residuals on baseline
intermediary factors, controlling for two other potential measures of intermediary distress,
the leverage measure of broker-dealers in Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014), here constructed
in the same nonlinear way as in our baseline HKM measure, i.e., NLevAEM      t    := (LevAEM
                                                                                         t    -
    AEM         AEM
Levt-1 ) × Levt-1 (in panel A) and TED spread computed as the difference between three-
month Libor and T-bill rates (in panel B). We find that the broker-dealer leverage does not
have incremental explanatory power relative to our two intermediary factors. TED spread
adds certain explanatory power, statistically significant for IG bonds with similar economic
significance for different cohorts, different from the monotonic increasing effect of our two
intermediary factors with decreasing ratings.
    Seventh, Table A.6 reports quarterly time series regressions of baseline residuals on in-
termediary factors, controlling for the P´  astor and Stambaugh (2003) stock liquidity factor
(in panel A), and monthly time series regressions controlling for the Bao, Pan, and Wang
(2011) corporate bond liquidity factor (in panel B). We find that neither of these two liq-
uidity factors contribute significant incremental explanatory power in explaining common
credit spread changes.
    Eighth, one may be concerned that the strong explanatory power documented is mainly
due to the inclusion of the 2008 financial crisis. Table A.7 reports results following the base-
line procedure but excluding the 2008 financial crisis period (defined as 2007:Q3 - 2009:Q1
similar to Bao, O'Hara, and Zhou (2018), Schultz (2017), and others). From Panel A of the
PC analysis, we observe a strong common variation with the PC1 accounting for 80% of the
total unexplained variation of credit spread changes. From Panel B of the quarterly bivariate
series regressions of on dealer inventory and intermediary distress, intermediary factors have
significant positive effects that monotonically increase with decreasing ratings, and similar
economic significance. The two factors together account for 48% of the unexplained total
variation of credit spread changes, slightly higher than that in the baseline Table 4 including
the crisis observations.
    Ninth, Table A.8 reports time series correlations of the three different inventory mea-
sures, Inventory A , Inventory HY , and Inventory IG . We consider both simple changes
and percentage changes. We observe that Inventory A is positively correlated with both
Inventory HY and Inventory IG at a 10% significance level. Importantly, the correlation
between Inventory HY and Inventory IG is slightly negative in raw changes and near zero
in percentage changes, statistically insignificant.
    Finally, Table A.9 reports summary statistics of corporate bond holdings of insurance
companies, mutual funds, and pension funds by rating groups. We find that insurance com-
panies have a lower fraction of holdings in HY bonds than mutual funds and pension funds,
consistent with strict regulatory constraints on insurance companies (Ellul, Jotikasthira, and
Lundblad (2011)).


                                              59
B     Model Extensions
B.1     More Traditional Margin Constraints
The form of our margin-like constraint,
                                         A
                                              I,a ma  w,                                    (18)
                                        a=1

is chosen for analytical tractability but differs from reality in two basic ways. First, margin
is typically required for both long and short positions. Such a constraint, similar to Garleanu
and Pedersen (2011), would be
                                        A
                                             |I,a |ma  w.                                   (19)
                                       a=1

Constraint (19) will deliver the additional prediction that the law of one price can fail. Two
assets with the same payoffs but different margin requirements can be priced differently,
which can be used to discuss empirical phenomena such as the bond-CDS basis or covered-
interest-parity deviations. Our empirics do not focus on such situations. Furthermore, since
our model focuses on hedgers' demand for insurance (through h > 0), intermediaries will
typically hold long positions (I > 0), making (19) equivalent to (18).
    Second, margin requirements m typically depend on current and future asset prices. For
example, if margin is calculated as a fraction of the expenditure on assets, then ma = m   ¯ a pa
in (18), i.e.,
                                        A
                                                 ¯ a pa  w.
                                             I,a m                                          (20)
                                       a=1

Constraints augmented with price, as in (20), will have an additional mitigating force to (18).
Indeed, a positive s-shock decreases asset prices and thus loosens constraint (20) through
lower margin requirements. Equilibrium prices fall by less than they would under (18). As
another example, exchanges often compute margin based on future prices, through return
volatility, in which case ma = m   ¯ a pa va . As prices and volatilities tend to be negatively
correlated, this formulation would tend to amplify our effects: a price decline accompanied
by a volatility spike would tighten the margin constraint. Since these forces are qualitatively
similar to our baseline model, just mitigated or amplified, we ignore them and focus on (18).

B.2     Asset-Class-Specific Constraints
Rather than a single margin constraint, suppose dealers face asset-class-specific margin con-
straints. For example, different trading desks within a bank may be given independent
portfolio limits. Alternatively, there may be some market segmentation ­ different inter-
mediaries, each having its own margin constraint, may participate in non-overlapping asset
markets. Mathematically, partition the assets a  {1, . . . , A} into two subsets A1 and A2 ,



                                                60
and impose different constraints on the subsets:

                                    I,a ma  w1      and           I,a ma  w2 .                           (21)
                              aA1                           aA2


If we interpret (21) as desk-specific constraints within a given intermediary, we would set
w1 = w2 = w. Otherwise, there are two types of intermediaries, with wealths w1 and w2 that
sum to aggregate intermediary wealth w. Under (21), there are two Lagrange multipliers,
µ1 and µ2 associated with each inequality. The pricing condition (8) is modified to be
p=   ¯ - 1A - diag(m)(µ1 1A + µ2 1A ). In this case, shocks affecting one of the Lagrange
                             1        2
multipliers disproportionately more than the other, such as asset-specific supply shocks, will
have an outsized effect on those assets.
    Fully solving the model, one can derive the results of the following Lemma.

Lemma 1. The Lagrange multipliers are given by

               [1A1 M -1 M 1A1 ]-1 x1 ,                                         if x1  0, x2 < 1 x1
       µ1 =                                                             +
               [1A1 M -1 M 1A1 ]-1 [1 - 1 2 ]-1 x1 - 2 (x2 )+               ,   otherwise
               [1A2 M -1 M 1A2 ]-1 x2 ,                                         if x2  0, x1 < 2 x2
       µ2 =                                                             +
               [1A2 M -1 M 1A2 ]-1 [1 - 1 2 ]-1 x2 - 1 (x1 )+               ,   otherwise

where M := diag(m), and where

                              1A1 M -1 M 1A2                       1A1 M -1 M 1A2
                       1 :=                         and    2 :=
                              1A1 M -1 M 1A1                       1A2 M -1 M 1A2
                          x1 := h M 1A1 - w1        and    x2 := h M 1A2 - w2 .

     With Lemma 1, we can study how prices respond to different shocks. Suppose A1 are
corporate bonds and A2 are other assets. Write h = s1 h       ¯ 1 + s2 h
                                                                       ¯ 2 for scalars s1 , s2 and vectors
¯ 1, h
h    ¯ 2 that are independent, i.e., h
                                     ¯1 · h
                                          ¯ 2 = 0. Then, it is easy to see that x1 = s1 h    ¯ M 1A - w 1
                                                                                              1     1
               ¯
and x2 = s2 h2 M 1A2 - w2 . A supply shock to s1 is a pure shock to x1 . When supply of bonds
is sufficiently high such that x1 > 0, then µ1 > 0, and µ1 is strictly increasing in s1 , whereas
µ2 is invariant to s1 .36 In words, pure bond supply shocks only affect prices of bonds and
other assets traded on the bond desk, i.e., assets in A1 .
     On the other hand, shocks affecting aggregate intermediary wealth w affect all assets in
a similar manner to the baseline model. Consider a shock to w1 + w2 = w such that w1 /w2
  36
    Lemma 1 also shows that it is possible to have µ1 increasing in s1 , while µ2 is decreasing in s1 . This
occurs when x1 , x2 < 0, x2 < 1 x1 , and x1 < 2 x2 . This case helps explain why non-bond assets may
be insensitive to bond inventory even if trading desks are sometimes integrated. Indeed, integrated trading
desks implies all prices are sensitive to bond inventory, as in Proposition 2. In contrast, segmented trading
desks implies there is a region in which non-bond assets are completely insensitive to bond inventory, and
a region in which non-bond assets are oppositely sensitive to bond inventory. The existence of these three
regions with differing sensitivities thus muddies the observed empirical relationships between non-bond assets
and bond inventory.


                                                     61
remains constant. Both x1 and x2 unambiguously rise, which one can show weakly increases
µ1 and µ2 . The result is a larger price discount, induced by tightening constraints on all
trading desks.

B.3     Risk-Averse Intermediaries
Here, we generalize the model by assuming intermediaries have mean-variance preferences
with risk aversion  (w), an exogenously decreasing function of w. The dependence of risk
aversion on wealth w captures the wealth-effect mechanism of Kyle and Xiong (2001) and
others. The benchmark results are obtained in the appropriate limit   0. Specifically,
suppose intermediaries solve

                                  (w)
                     max E[WI ] -     Var[WI ]                                        (22)
                       I           2
                     s.t. WI := w + I · ( - p - 1A ) and I · m  w.

Letting µ denote the Lagrange multiplier on the margin constraint, the optimal intermediary
portfolio is given by
                            I = ( (w))-1 [   ¯ - p - 1A - µm].

Clearing markets with (4), asset prices satisfy

                           ¯ - p - 1A = (w) h +  (w)-1 µm ,
                           

where (w) := (-1 +  (w)-1 )-1 . Combining these results with the margin constraint, we
have that
                                                       (w)     +
                           µ=            m  h - (1 +       ) w
                               m -1 m                   
which can be plugged into the expression for prices to solve completely for equilibrium.

Proposition 3. If the intermediary margin constraint is binding, i.e., w < w := {w
                                                                                 ~:w
                                                                                   ~=
(1 +  (w
       ~ ) -1
          ) m h}, then

                      p                          ¯
  ("Supply Shock")      = -(w)h  ¯ bond + (w) m hbond m
                      s                    (w) m -1 m
                      p   (w)2
("Demand Shock")        =        (w )h
                      w   w (w)
                                1  (w) - 1                       (w)          m
                          + 1-               (w)w - ((w) - 1)m h       (w )        .
                                w       (w)                       (w)       m -1 m




                                             62
where    (w )   := - w  (w)
                       (w)
                            > 0 is the risk-aversion-wealth elasticity. Otherwise, if w > w , then

                                                  p         ¯ bond
                              ("Supply Shock")      = -(w)h
                                                  s
                                                  p   (w)2
                           ("Demand Shock")         =        (w )h.
                                                  w   w (w)

   Proposition 3 can help explain why some asset classes may display trivial sensitivity to
bond supply s (and its empirical proxy, bond inventory  ) even when they display large
sensitivity to intermediary wealth w (and its empirical proxy, leverage ). These will be
assets with low margin requirements and low covariance to bonds. For example, consider
an asset a which has ma = 0 and zero fundamental correlation to any other asset, including
                                                  (w)2        2
bonds. In that case, pa /s = 0 whereas pa /w = w    (w) 
                                                         (w)a   ha > 0 (these formulas hold
independent of whether the margin constraint binds). Notice that the discrepancy between
pa /s and pa /w is increasing in the asset's own volatility a and hedger's liquidity
demand ha .




                                                 63
References
Acharya, V. V., Amihud, Y., and Bharath, S. T. 2013. Liquidity risk of corporate bond
  returns: conditional approach. Journal of Financial Economics 110: 358 ­ 386.

Adrian, T., Etula, E., and Muir, T. 2014. Financial Intermediaries and the Cross-Section of
 Asset Returns. The Journal of Finance 69: 2557­2596.

Ambrose, B. W., Cai, N. K., and Helwege, J. 2008. Forced Selling of Fallen Angels. The
 Journal of Fixed Income 18: 72­85.

Amihud, Y. 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. Journal
 of Financial Markets 5: 31­56.

Anand, A., Jotikasthira, C., and Venkataraman, K. 2018. Do Buy-Side Institutions Supply
 Liquidity in Bond Markets? Evidence from Mutual Funds. Working Paper.

Anderson, T. W., and Rubin, H. 1949. Estimation of the Parameters of a Single Equation
 in a Complete System of Stochastic Equations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 20:
 46­63.

Andrews, D. 1991. Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix
 Estimation. Econometrica 59: 817­858.

Bai, J., Bali, T. G., and Wen, Q. 2019. Common risk factors in the cross-section of corporate
  bond returns. Journal of Financial Economics 131: 619 ­ 642.

Bank for International Settlements 2016. Electronic trading in fixed income markets. Report
  submitted by a Study Group established by the Markets Committee and chaired by Joachim
  Nagel (Deutsche Bundesbank).

Bao, J., and Hou, K. 2017. De Facto Seniority, Credit Risk, and Corporate Bond Prices. The
  Review of Financial Studies 30 (08): 4038­4080.

Bao, J., O'Hara, M., and Zhou, X. A. 2018. The Volcker Rule and corporate bond market
  making in times of stress. Journal of Financial Economics 130: 95 ­ 113.

Bao, J., and Pan, J. 2013. Bond Illiquidity and Excess Volatility. The Review of Financial
  Studies 26 (07): 3068­3103.

Bao, J., Pan, J., and Wang, J. 2011. The Illiquidity of Corporate Bonds. The Journal of
  Finance 66: 911­946.

Bessembinder, H., Jacobsen, S., Maxwell, W., and Venkataraman, K. 2018. Capital Com-
  mitment and Illiquidity in Corporate Bonds. The Journal of Finance 73: 1615­1661.

Biais, B., Hombert, J., and Weill, P.-O. 2017. Incentive constrained risk sharing, segmenta-
  tion, and asset pricing. Working paper. National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                             64
Bo, B., and Victoria, I. 2015. Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market. The Journal of Finance
  70: 1863­1902.

Boyarchenko, N., Eisenbach, T. M., Gupta, P., Shachar, O., and Van Tassel, P. 2018. Bank-
  intermediated arbitrage. .

Brunnermeier, M. K., and Pedersen, L. H. 2008. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. The
  Review of Financial Studies 22: 2201­2238.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and Sannikov, Y. 2014. A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
  Sector. American Economic Review 104 (February): 379­421.

Cai, F., Han, S., Li, D., and Li, Y. 2019. Institutional herding and its price impact: Evidence
  from the corporate bond market. Journal of Financial Economics 131: 139 ­ 167.

Carole, C.-F., Hendershott, T., Charles, J., Pam, M., and Mark, S. 2010. Time Variation in
  Liquidity: The Role of Market-Maker Inventories and Revenues. The Journal of Finance
  65: 295­331.

Chen, H., Chen, Z., He, Z., Liu, J., and Xie, R. 2019. Pledgeability and asset prices: Evidence
 from the Chinese corporate bond markets. Working paper. University of Chicago, Booth
 School of Business.

Chen, H., Joslin, S., and Ni, S. X. 2018. Demand for Crash Insurance, Intermediary Con-
 straints, and Risk Premia in Financial Markets. The Review of Financial Studies 32 (05):
 228­265.

Chen, L., Lesmond, D., and Wei, J. 2007. Corporate Yield Spreads and Bond Liquidity. The
 Journal of Finance 62: 119­149.

Choi, J., Shachar, O., and Shin, S. S. 2019. Dealer Liquidity Provision and the Breakdown
 of the Law of One Price: Evidence from the CDS­Bond Basis. Management Science 65:
 4100­4122.

Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R., and Martin, S. 2001. The determinants of credit spread
  changes. Journal of Finance 56: 2177­2207.

Constantinides, G. M., Jackwerth, J. C., and Savov, A. 2013. The Puzzle of Index Option
  Returns. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 3 (05): 229­257.

Cragg, J. G., and Donald, S. G. 1993. Testing Identifiability and Specification in Instrumental
  Variable Models. Econometric Theory 9: 222­240.

Cui, R., Chen, H., He, Z., and Milbradt, K. 2017. Quantifying liquidity and default risks of
 corporate bonds over the business cycle. The Review of Financial Studies 31: 852­897.

de Jong, F., and Driessen, J. 2012. Liquidity Risk Premia in Corporate Bond Markets.
  Quarterly Journal of Finance 02: 1250006.

                                              65
Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., and Song, Z. 2017. The value of trading relations in turbulent
  times. Journal of Financial Economics 124(2): 266­284.

Dick-Nielsen, J., Feldh¨utter, P., and Lando, D. 2012. Corporate bond liquidity before and
  after the onset of the subprime crisi. Journal of Financial Economic 103: 471 ­ 492.

Dick-Nielsen, J., and Rossi, M. 2018. The cost of immediacy for corporate bonds. The Review
  of Financial Studies 32: 1­41.

Du, W., Tepper, A., and Verdelhan, A. 2017. Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity.
 Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Duffie, D. 2010. Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital. The
 Journal of finance 65: 1237­1267.

Duffie, D., G^
             arleanu, N., and Pedersen, L. 2005. Over-the-Counter Markets. Econometrica
 73: 1815­1847.

Ellul, A., Jotikasthira, C., and Lundblad, C. T. 2011. Regulatory pressure and fire sales in
  the corporate bond market. Journal of Financial Economics 101: 596 ­ 620.

Feldh¨
     utter, P. 2012. The Same Bond at Different Prices: Identifying Search Frictions and
  Selling Pressures. The Review of Financial Studies 25 (04): 1155­1206.

Fleckenstein, M., and Longstaff, F. 2019. Renting Balance Sheet Space: Intermediary Bal-
  ance Sheet Rental Costs and the Valuation of Derivatives. working paper.

Friewald, N., and Nagler, F. 2019. Over-the-Counter Market Frictions and Yield Spread
  Changes. The Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Gabaix, X., Krishnamurthy, A., and Vigneron, O. 2007. Limits of Arbitrage: Theory and
 Evidence from the Mortgage-Backed Securities Market. Journal of Finance 2: 557­595.

Gao, P., Schultz, P., and Song, Z. 2017. Liquidity in a Market for Unique Assets: Specified
 Pool and TBA Trading in the Mortgage Backed Securities Market. Journal of Finance
 72-3: 1119­1170.

Garleanu, N., and Pedersen, L. H. 2011. Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the
 law of one price. The Review of Financial Studies 24: 1980­2022.

Goldstein, M. A., and Hotchkiss, E. S. 2019. Providing liquidity in an illiquid market: Dealer
 behavior in US corporate bonds. Journal of Financial Economics.

Gromb, D., and Vayanos, D. 2002. Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
  constrained arbitrageurs. Journal of Financial Economics 66: 361­407.

Gurkaynak, R., Sack, B., and Wright, J. 2007. The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve: 1961 to the
 Present. Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8): 2291­2304.


                                             66
He, Z., Kelly, B., and Manela, A. 2017. Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many
  asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 126: 1­35.

He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. 2012. A Model of Capital and Crises. The Review of Economic
  Studies 79 (09): 735­777.

He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. 2013. Intermediary Asset Pricing. American Economic Review
  103 (April): 732­70.

He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. 2018. Intermediary Asset Pricing and the Financial Crisis.
  Annual Review of Financial Economics 10: 173­197.

He, Z., and Milbradt, K. 2014. Endogenous Liquidity and Defaultable Bonds. Econometrica
  82: 1443­1508.

He, Z., and Xiong, W. 2012. Rollover risk and credit risk. The Journal of Finance 67: 391­
  430.

Hendershott, T., and Menkveld, A. J. 2014. Price pressures. Journal of Financial Economics
  114: 405 ­ 423.

Ho, T., and Stoll, H. R. 1981. Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncer-
  tainty. Journal of Financial Economics 9: 47 ­ 73.

Hu, X., Pan, J., and Wang, J. 2013. Noise as Information for Illiquidity. Journal of Finance
 68: 2223­2772.

Huang, J., and Shi, Z. 2014. A Resolution to the Equity-Credit Market Integration Puzzle.
 working paper.

Huang, J.-Z., and Huang, M. 2012. How Much of the Corporate-Treasury Yield Spread Is
 Due to Credit Risk?. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2 (11): 153­202.

Kondor, P., and Vayanos, D. 2019. Liquidity risk and the dynamics of arbitrage capital. The
 Journal of Finance 74: 1139­1173.

Kyle, A. S., and Xiong, W. 2001. Contagion as a wealth effect. The Journal of Finance 56:
 1401­1440.

Leland, H. E. 1994. Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure.
  The Journal of Finance 49: 1213­1252.

Leland, H. E., and Toft, K. B. 1996. Optimal capital structure, endogenous bankruptcy, and
  the term structure of credit spreads. The Journal of Finance 51: 987­1019.

Lin, H., Wang, J., and Wu, C. 2011. Liquidity risk and expected corporate bond returns.
  Journal of Financial Economics 99: 628 ­ 650.



                                            67
Longstaff, F. A., Mithal, S., and Neis, E. 2005. Corporate yield spreads: Default risk or
  liquidity? New evidence from the credit default swap market. The Journal of Finance 60:
  2213­2253.

Manconi, A., Massa, M., and Yasuda, A. 2012. The role of institutional investors in prop-
 agating the crisis of 2007-2008. Journal of Financial Economics 104: 491 ­ 518 Market
 Institutions, Financial Market Risks and Financial Crisis.

Manzi, J., Berezina, D., and Adelson, M. 2016. Synthetic CMBS Primer. Nomura Fixed
 Income Research.

Merton, R. 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest rates.
 Journal of Finance 29: 449­470.

Mitchell, M., Pedersen, L. H., and Pulvino, T. 2007. Slow moving capital. American Eco-
 nomic Review 97: 215­220.

Montiel-Olea, J. L., and Pflueger, C. 2013. A Robust Test for Weak Instruments. Journal of
 Business & Economic Statistics 31: 358­369.

Nelson, C. R., and Siegel, A. F. 1987. Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves. Journal of
  Business 60: 473­490.

Newey, W., and West, K. 1987. A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and
  Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix. Econometrica 55: 703­708.

P´       and Stambaugh, R. F. 2003. Liquidity Risk And Expected Stock Returns. Journal
 astor, L.,
  of Political Economy 111: 642­685.

Pflueger, C., and Wang, S. 2015. A robust test for weak instruments in Stata. Stata Journal
   15: 216­225(10).

Schaefer, S. M., and Strebulaev, I. A. 2008. Structural models of credit risk are useful:
  Evidence from hedge ratios on corporate bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 90: 1 ­
  19.

Schultz, P. 2017. Inventory management by corporate bond dealers. Working Paper Univer-
  sity of Notre Dame.

Shan, S. C., Tang, D. Y., and Yan, H. 2016. Credit Default Swaps and Bank Regulatory
  Capital. Working Paper.

Siriwardane, E. N. 2019. Limited Investment Capital and Credit Spreads. The Journal of
  Finance 0.

Song, Z., and Zhu, H. 2018. Quantitative easing auctions of Treasury bonds. Journal of
  Financial Economics 128: 103 ­ 124.



                                            68
Stock, J. H., and Wright, J. H. 2000. GMM with Weak Identification. Econometrica 68:
  1055­1096.

Stock, J. H., and Yogo, M. 2005. Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regres-
  sion Cambridge University Press pp. 80­108.

Svensson, L. 1994. Estimating and Interpreting Forward Rates: Sweden 1992-1994. National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 4871.

U.S. SEC 1992. The corporate bond markets: Structure, pricing and trading. U.S. Securities
  and Exchange Commission: Division of Market Regulation Washington, D.C.




                                           69
                                             Figure A.1: Summary of Institutional Holdings

                                  Number of Institutional Investors                                                             Number of Bonds Held (thoustand)
   3000 4000 5000 6000 7000




                                                                                                      8 10 12 14 16
                                                                                                              2005q1             2007q3                 2010q1         2012q3        2015q1
                   2005q1        2007q3         2010q1            2012q3             2015q1
                                                                                                                                          All                    Pension Fund
                              Pension Fund       Mutual Fund          Insurance Company                                                   Mutual Fund            Insurance Company




                                                                                                                                                 800
                                                     .45
                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                 700
                                                     .35
                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                                 600
                                                     .25
                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                 500
                                                     .15
                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                     .05




                                                                                                                                                 300
                                                     0




                                                         2005q1        2007q3              2010q1                      2012q3         2015q1

                                                                                Holding/Outstanding                     Outstaning




Note: This figure plots quarterly time series, based on eMAXX data of institutional holdings, of the
number of institutional investors (top left panel) and the number of bonds in thousands (top right
panel), by insurance companies, mutual funds, pension funds, and all institutions separately, as well
as an average bond's outstanding balance (in $millions) and ratio of total holding amount by all
institutions to outstanding balance (bottom panel). The number of bonds held by all institutions
is lower than the sum of the number of bonds held by insurance companies, mutual funds, and
pension funds because different institutions can hold the same bond. The average bond's total
holding amount is calculated by first summing the holding amounts by all institutions for each
bond in each quarter and then taking an average across all the bonds in each quarter. The average
bonds' outstanding balance is computed by taking the average of outstanding balance across all
the bonds in each quarter. The average bond's ratio of holding to outstanding is computed by
dividing its total holding amount by outstanding balance in each quarter. The sample period is
from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.




                                                                                              70
                                         Table A.1: Bond Sample Cleaning and Construction

           A: Trade Sample                                                                                      # CUSIPs             # Trades
           A1: All CUSIPs with TRACE trade data (canceled/corrected/duplicated trades are excluded)               116,176          111,465,088
           A2: Exclude CUSIPs that do not match to FISD                                                            92,322          106,796,924
           A3: Exclude primary market transactions and transactions with trade size larger than issue size         82,694          103,309,166
           A4: Exclude transactions of bonds with time-to-maturity less than one year                              75,242           96,113,326
           A5: Exclude bonds with variable coupon, issue size less than $10 million,
                          bonds issued by financial and utility firms,
                          bonds quoted in a foreign currency,
                          and bonds with embedded options except for make-whole calls.                             18,628         45,115,727
           A6: Exclude bonds with no rating information                                                            17,369         43,072,299
           A7: Keep the last trade of a month for each CUSIP                                                       17,369             631,559
           A8: Restrict to September 2004 - June 2015                                                              14,842             524,890
           B: Quarterly Sample (based on the sample after A.8)                                                  # CUSIPs     # Quarter×Bond
           B1: Keep the last trade of a quarter for each CUSIP and
                 compute quarterly changes of yield spreads (2005Q1 - 2015Q2)                                      14,330            180,888




71
           B2: Match with firm leverage ratio based on CRSP/Compustat                                               6,520             80,769
           B3: Keep observations with the actual number of days between the trade dates in 45 - 120 days            6,113             72,678
           B4: Exclude a bond if there is less than 4 years of consecutive quarterly observations                   2,584             55,398
           C: Monthly Sample (based on the sample after A.8)                                                    # CUSIPs      # Month×Bond
           C1: Compute monthly changes of yield spreads (January 2005 - June 2015)                                 14,348            494,570
           C2: Match with firm leverage ratio based on CRSP/Compustat                                               6,541            226,958
           C3: Keep observations with the actual number of days between the trade dates in 10 - 60 days             6,377            216,523
           C4: Exclude a bond if there is less than 25 consecutive monthly observations                             3,324            185,072

     Notes: This table reports step-by-step cleaning of the TRACE corporate bond transactions data. The original data sample is from July 2002 to
     June 2015 with canceled/corrected/duplicated trades excluded. Panel A reports the cleaning at the trade level. The resulting sample is used to
     produce the baseline quarterly sample in Panel B, and to produce the monthly sample in Panel C. The procedure in each cleaning step is described
     in the first column, and the resulting number of unique CUSIPs and total number of observations are reported in the second and third columns,
     respectively. The bond characteristics are from the Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD) database. Equity price information and
     accounting information used to compute firm leverage ratio are from the merged CRSP/Compustat database. Bonds with embedded options
     excluded in step A.5 are those that are convertible, puttable, asset backed, exchangeable, privately placed, perpetual, preferred securities, and
     secured lease obligations.
                    Table A.2: Summary of Institutional Holdings


                                     mean     sd     min       p25   p50     p75                max
                            A: Number of Institutional Investors
 Insurance Company                   2797     74     2653     2756   2801    2826               2965
 Mutual Fund                          2345   436     1593     1912   2504    2672               3099
 Pension Fund                         529     92      392      453    515     582                696
 All                                  5670   392     4886     5340   5842    5971               6327
                                    B: Number of Bonds
 Insurance Company                   12873   525    12049 12477 12748 13249                     14125
 Mutual Fund                         10652   843     9072     9925  10523 11561                 11943
 Pension Fund                         8629   945     7189     7826   8254    9590               10150
 All                                 14910   673    14109 14465 14579 15392                     16424
                          C: Aggregate Holding Amount ($trillion)
 Insurance Company                    1.02   0.16    0.74      0.91  0.96    1.16               1.30
 Mutual Fund                          0.67   0.27    0.28      0.39  0.70    0.91               1.13
 Pension Fund                         0.11   0.02    0.07      0.10  0.11    0.12               0.15
 All                                  1.80   0.41    1.28      1.40  1.68    2.18               2.54
             D: Average Bond Holding Amount and Outstanding Balance ($million)
 Average Bond Holding Amount        116.54 27.18 80.94        87.99 114.74 143.35              162.04
 Average Bond Outstanding Balance 480.32 59.80 365.62 439.65 486.27 519.65                     578.31
 Average Bond Holding/Outstanding     0.32   0.02    0.26     0.31   0.33    0.33               0.35

Notes: This table reports summary statistics of quarterly time series, based on eMAXX data of
institutional holdings, of the number of institutional investors (in panel A), the number of bonds (in
panel B), and aggregate holding amount in $trillions of principal value (in panel C), by insurance
companies, mutual funds, pension funds, and all institutions separately, as well as an average bond's
holding amount (in $millions), outstanding balance (in $millions) and ratio of holding amount by
all institutions to outstanding balance (in panel D). The number of bonds held by all institutions
is lower than the sum of the number of bonds held by insurance companies, mutual funds, and
pension funds because different institutions can hold the same bond. The average bond's total
holding amount is calculated by first summing the holding amounts by all institutions for each
bond in each quarter and then taking an average across all the bonds in each quarter. The average
bonds' outstanding balance is computed by taking the average of outstanding balance across all
the bonds in each quarter. The average bond's ratio of holding to outstanding is computed by
dividing its total holding amount by outstanding balance in each quarter. The sample period is
from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.




                                                 72
Table A.3: Summary of Yield Spreads and Returns of Non-Corporate-Credit
Assets

                                          N     mean          sd       p25      p50      p75
                                         A: Agency MBS (in BPs)
                  FN30y                   42    15.76        21.17    -4.48    14.96    34.40
                  FN15y                   42    16.07        23.75    -3.65    10.04    31.73
                  FG30y                   42    18.79        22.73    -2.84    17.63    35.30
                  FG15y                   42    22.31        22.92     4.41    17.48    35.59
                                      B: Non-agency CMBS (in BPs)
                  Duper                   39    153.62       168.56   73.00    99.00    185.00
                  AM                      39    296.38       402.65   63.00    133.00   341.00
                  AJ                      39    439.03       608.24   121.00   210.00   450.00
                                               C: ABS (in BPs)
                  Credit Card Loan 5y     40    79.08        67.93    47.00    54.00    63.50
                  Auto Loan 3y: AAA       37     50.57        67.21    19.00    27.00    36.00
                  Auto Loan 3y: A         36    121.36       136.64    56.50    74.00   122.50
                  Auto Loan: 3y BBB       34    154.74       136.71   100.00   121.00   175.00
                                 D: S&P 500 index options (in percentage)
                  Call: 0.90              85     0.09         4.41    -2.04     0.51     2.28
                  Call: 0.95              85     0.02         4.30    -1.84     0.30     2.05
                  Call: ATM               85    -0.12         4.14    -1.75     0.04     1.65
                  Call: 1.05              85    -0.26         3.94    -1.77    -0.14     1.71
                  Call: 1.10              85    -0.49         3.64    -1.78    -0.35     0.81
                  Put: 0.90               85    -0.89         7.79    -4.56    -1.95     1.63
                  Put: 0.95               85    -0.74         6.95    -3.96    -1.58     1.37
                  Put: ATM                85    -0.54         6.28    -3.34    -1.12     1.78
                  Put: 1.05               85    -0.38         5.71    -3.00    -0.86     1.68
                  Put: 1.10               85    -0.32         5.37    -2.82    -0.94     1.70

Note: This table reports summary statistics of quarterly time series of option-adjusted spreads of agency
MBS, yield spreads of non-agency CMBS, and yield spreads of ABS, all in basis points, in panels A, B,
and C, respectively, as well as summary statistics of monthly series of (unannualized) one-month return
in percent of leverage-adjusted S&P 500 index option portfolios. The series of yield spreads are provided
by major Wall Street dealers, whereas the option returns are those used in Constantinides, Jackwerth, and
Savov (2013). The sample period of yield spreads is 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2 overall, with variation across different
series depending on data availability. The sample period is January 2005 - January 2012 for options.




                                                        73
                             Table A.4: Measuring Inventory by Dollar Value and Matching Horizons
                       Groups              A: Measuring Inventory by Dollar Value                              B: Matching Horizons
                                                                                                           M atch
                 Maturity Rating         Inventory Dollar Distress      R2adj   FVE            Inventory           DistressM atch      R2adj    FVE
                 Short      AA                0.029         0.044***   0.176 0.300                0.039**              0.044***        0.212    0.256
                                            (1.381)          (2.609)                              (2.200)               (2.769)
                 Short      A                0.038*         0.065***   0.237                        0.030              0.061***        0.191
                                            (1.865)          (3.637)                              (1.576)               (3.247)
                 Short      BBB              0.052*         0.114***   0.321                       0.047*              0.112***        0.318
                                            (1.893)          (4.196)                              (1.953)               (4.328)
                 Short      BB                0.119         0.180***   0.233                        0.092              0.170***        0.141
                                            (1.631)          (3.633)                              (1.312)               (3.371)
                 Short      B              0.282***         0.344***   0.317                     0.258***              0.329***        0.294
                                            (3.196)          (2.888)                              (2.892)               (2.707)
                 Medium     AA               0.027          0.051***   0.172                       0.029*              0.049***        0.176    0.546
                                            (1.404)          (4.512)            0.553             (1.750)               (4.896)
                 Medium     A               0.059**         0.096***   0.382                      0.056**              0.095***        0.364
                                            (2.523)          (3.712)                              (2.458)               (3.905)
                 Medium     BBB            0.086***         0.151***   0.438                     0.096***              0.149***        0.463
                                            (2.891)          (3.886)                              (3.869)               (4.047)
                 Medium     BB             0.162***         0.262***   0.469                     0.186***              0.255***        0.492




74
                                            (2.858)          (5.592)                              (3.741)               (6.150)
                 Medium     B              0.275***         0.509***   0.623                     0.247***              0.494***        0.601
                                            (5.216)          (5.206)                              (3.747)               (5.051)
                 Long       AA               0.020           0.043**   0.187 0.484               0.029***               0.043**        0.219    0.477
                                            (1.641)          (2.250)                              (2.654)               (2.435)
                 Long       A                0.034*         0.070***   0.292                      0.036**              0.068***        0.295
                                            (1.800)          (2.716)                              (2.169)               (2.719)
                 Long       BBB              -0.066         0.146***   0.160                       -0.006              0.145***        0.136
                                            (-1.024)         (5.443)                              (-0.630)              (6.066)
                 Long       BB             0.140***         0.249***   0.415                     0.140***              0.238***        0.405
                                            (2.640)          (5.370)                              (2.861)               (5.566)
                 Long       B              0.341***         0.731***   0.559                     0.320***              0.716***        0.557
                                            (3.217)          (3.677)                              (3.060)               (3.667)
                 Total                                                          0.452                                                           0.432
     Notes: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit spread changes (in percentage), for cohorts based
     on time-to-maturity and credit rating, on Inventory Dollar measured using dollar value of transactions (in panel A) and Inventory M atch matching the
     horizons of inventory change and credit spread change (in panel B), together with Distress. Robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard
     errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and
     *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last column of both panels reports the fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for, denoted as
     FVE and computed as in (3), for short, medium, and long term cohorts, as well as all cohorts. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.
                                            Table A.5: AEM Leverage Measure and TED Spread
                Groups                             A: AEM Leverage Measure                                               B: TED spread
          Maturity Rating          Inventory A      Distress NLevAEM             R2adj   FVE         Inventory A      Distress     T ED        R2adj   FVE
          Short      AA                0.028         0.044***      0.008         0.175   0.301          0.029         0.047***    0.037***     0.273   0.306
                                     (1.490)          (3.441)    (0.450)                               (1.634)         (5.678)     (5.925)
          Short        A             0.036**         0.063***     -0.003         0.241                 0.036**        0.066***     0.025**     0.272
                                     (2.160)          (3.675)    (-0.159)                              (2.330)         (5.388)     (2.572)
          Short        BBB          0.047**          0.109***     -0.016         0.321                 0.047**        0.115***      0.030*     0.338
                                     (2.134)          (3.550)    (-0.653)                              (2.372)         (5.556)     (1.947)
          Short        BB            0.109**         0.171***     -0.022         0.224                 0.109**        0.178***      0.034      0.228
                                     (2.282)          (3.651)    (-0.719)                              (2.386)         (3.950)     (1.078)
          Short        B            0.290***         0.332***     -0.004         0.322                0.290***        0.335***      0.025      0.323
                                     (3.834)          (3.171)    (-0.062)                              (3.854)         (3.381)     (0.385)
          Medium       AA              0.010         0.050***     0.013          0.150   0.551          0.011         0.052***    0.033***     0.207   0.558
                                     (0.565)          (4.073)    (1.149)                               (0.613)         (3.837)     (3.302)
          Medium       A             0.048**         0.093***      0.003         0.343                 0.048**        0.098***    0.043***     0.408
                                     (2.129)          (3.674)    (0.137)                               (2.349)         (5.655)     (4.192)
          Medium       BBB          0.074**          0.147***     0.005          0.411                0.075***        0.150***     0.034*      0.429
                                     (2.554)          (3.950)    (0.159)                               (2.705)         (4.939)     (1.722)
          Medium       BB           0.130***         0.247***     -0.029         0.419                0.129***        0.255***      0.038      0.422




75
                                     (3.000)          (5.289)    (-0.618)                              (3.152)         (5.556)     (1.326)
          Medium       B            0.278***         0.498***     -0.010         0.647                0.278***        0.502***      0.025      0.649
                                     (5.408)          (5.775)    (-0.135)                              (5.606)         (6.571)     (0.571)
          Long         AA              0.016         0.044***     0.018          0.213   0.507          0.017         0.047***    0.044***     0.368   0.524
                                     (1.280)          (3.412)    (1.261)                               (1.492)         (5.485)     (5.595)
          Long         A              0.033*         0.069***      0.004         0.296                 0.034**        0.074***    0.046***     0.412
                                     (1.939)          (2.959)    (0.174)                               (2.281)         (5.003)     (5.784)
          Long         BBB            -0.044         0.150***     -0.018         0.151                  -0.044        0.159***     0.054*      0.165
                                    (-0.885)          (5.197)    (-0.542)                             (-0.888)         (4.894)     (1.909)
          Long         BB           0.126***         0.231***     -0.069         0.421                0.124***        0.240***      -0.000     0.394
                                     (2.725)          (4.757)    (-1.538)                              (2.900)         (5.709)    (-0.014)
          Long         B            0.361***         0.726***      0.034         0.592                0.364***        0.739***      0.150      0.613
                                     (3.850)          (4.398)    (0.257)                               (4.143)         (5.421)     (1.620)
          Total                                                                          0.483                                                         0.494
     Note: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit spread changes (in percentage), for cohorts based on
     time-to-maturity and credit rating, on our nonlinear version of the Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) measure of broker-dealer leverage NLevAEM (panel A)
     and the TED spread T ED (panel B), together with Inventory A and Distress. Robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors
     using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p
     < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last column of both panels reports the fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for, denoted as FVE and
     computed as in (3), for short, medium, and long term cohorts, as well as all cohorts. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.
                                                  Table A.6: Stock and Bond Liquidity Factors
                   Groups                                A: PS Liquidity                                            B: BPW Liquidity
             Maturity Rating          Inventory A      Distress      P S       R2adj    FVE        Inventory A      Distress BP W            R2adj   FVE
             Short      AA                0.027        0.044***      0.010     0.179    0.315        0.022*           -0.005  0.041**        0.115   0.315
                                        (1.456)         (2.960)    (0.912)                           (1.657)        (-0.358)  (2.286)
             Short       A               0.034*        0.066***      0.020     0.259                   0.016           0.019   0.041*        0.219
                                        (1.949)         (4.459)    (1.363)                           (1.175)         (1.090)  (1.938)
             Short       BBB           0.044**         0.115***      0.025     0.331                   0.013           0.044    0.025        0.166
                                        (2.008)         (4.822)    (1.235)                           (0.750)         (1.192)  (0.678)
             Short       BB             0.104**        0.180***      0.046     0.234                  0.061*         0.153**   -0.074        0.244
                                        (2.186)         (4.293)    (1.574)                           (1.660)         (2.341)  (-0.950)
             Short       B             0.283***        0.345***      0.095     0.338                 0.092**        0.173***    0.022        0.280
                                        (3.626)         (3.645)    (1.265)                           (2.039)         (2.674)  (0.228)
             Medium      AA               0.010        0.049***     0.007      0.143    0.562         0.013           0.005   0.034**        0.143   0.159
                                        (0.569)         (4.349)    (0.526)                           (1.168)         (0.392)  (2.052)
             Medium      A              0.046**        0.096***      0.024     0.362                  0.022*          -0.000    0.039        0.102
                                        (2.108)         (3.981)    (1.218)                           (1.712)        (-0.019)  (1.453)
             Medium      BBB           0.073**         0.149***     0.020      0.417                  0.030*           0.034    0.031        0.142
                                        (2.485)         (4.259)    (0.803)                           (1.756)         (0.906)  (0.690)
             Medium      BB            0.127***        0.253***      0.020     0.416                 0.070**         0.134*    -0.033        0.274
                                        (2.965)         (6.262)    (0.619)                           (2.071)         (1.819)  (-0.462)




76
             Medium      B             0.270***        0.511***      0.088     0.664                   0.045           0.094    0.037        0.105
                                        (5.599)         (7.163)    (1.336)                           (0.926)         (1.015)  (0.393)
             Long        AA               0.017         0.042**     0.002      0.184    0.512       0.021***          -0.007   0.035*        0.149   0.338
                                        (1.292)         (2.323)    (0.186)                           (2.639)        (-0.414)  (1.755)
             Long        A               0.032*        0.072***      0.023     0.323                  0.019*           0.010    0.036        0.187
                                        (1.802)         (3.210)    (1.569)                           (1.836)         (0.519)  (1.620)
             Long        BBB             -0.046        0.155***      0.018     0.151                   0.015           0.020    0.031        0.133
                                       (-0.895)         (5.552)    (0.672)                           (1.073)         (0.921)  (1.038)
             Long        BB            0.124***        0.240***     -0.000     0.394                  0.058*           0.054    0.023        0.142
                                        (2.903)         (5.978)    (-0.005)                          (1.695)         (1.193)  (0.432)
             Long        B             0.353***        0.737***      0.113     0.604                 0.142**        0.336***  -0.141*        0.375
                                        (3.777)         (4.486)    (1.295)                           (2.143)         (4.758)  (-1.772)
             Total                                                                      0.482                                                        0.263
     Note: This table reports quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit spread changes (in percentage), for cohorts based on
     time-to-maturity and credit rating, on the P´
                                                 astor and Stambaugh (2003) (PS) stock liquidity factor (in panel A) and monthly time series regressions of monthly
     credit spread changes (in percentage) on the Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) (BPW) corporate bond liquidity factor (in panel B), together with Inventory A
     and Distress. Robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) are reported in
     parentheses. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last column of both panels reports the
     fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for, denoted as FVE and computed as in (3), for short, medium, and long term cohorts, as well as
     all cohorts. The sample period is 2005:Q1 - 2015:Q2 in panel A, but January 2005 - June 2009 due to the unavailability of the BPW measure.
                             Table A.7: Excluding the 2008 Crisis
               Groups                 A: PC                     B: Regression of Residuals
         Maturity Rating          First Second          Inventory A Distress R2        adj     FVE
         Short      AA            0.062 -0.019              0.020        0.042***    0.173     0.268
                                                          (0.918)         (3.399)
         Short        A           0.079    -0.026           0.030        0.051***    0.208
                                                          (1.560)         (3.641)
         Short        BBB         0.125    -0.022          0.042*         0.92***    0.266
                                                          (1.744)         (3.573)
         Short        BB          0.154    -0.136        0.092**           0.065     0.142
                                                          (2.283)         (1.283)
         Short        B           0.459    -0.394        0.264***         0.273**    0.277
                                                          (3.097)         (2.243)
         Medium       AA           0.05    -0.061          -0.008        0.041***    0.132     0.583
                                                         (-0.476)         (3.234)
         Medium       A             0.1     -0.02          0.035         0.098***    0.396
                                                          (1.475)         (5.975)
         Medium       BBB         0.159    -0.023         0.059*         0.146***    0.421
                                                          (1.829)         (5.086)
         Medium       BB          0.172     0.099         0.087**        0.170***    0.463
                                                          (2.492)         (5.737)
         Medium       B           0.443     0.041        0.249***        0.461***    0.651
                                                          (4.355)         (6.453)
         Long         AA          0.055     0.006          0.008         0.055***    0.330     0.542
                                                          (0.671)         (6.002)
         Long         A           0.077    -0.009         0.030*          0.73***    0.395
                                                          (1.792)         (5.351)
         Long         BBB         0.069     0.88           -0.072        0.156***    0.140
                                                         (-1.343)         (5.183)
         Long         BB          0.181     0.102         0.085**        0.164***    0.366
                                                          (2.086)         (5.032)
         Long         B           0.656     0.156        0.309***        0.699***    0.650
                                                          (3.503)         (6.294)
         Pct Explained            0.798     0.082                                              0.477

Note: This table reports results using 15 cohorts based on time-to-maturity and credit rating excluding
the 2008 crisis period, defined as 2007:Q3 - 2009:Q1. Panel A reports the loadings of the first two PCs on
the 15 regression residuals and the fraction of total variation these two PCs account for. Panel B reports
quarterly time series regressions of each of the 15 residuals of quarterly credit spread changes (in percentage)
on Inventory A and Distress, with robust t-statistics based on Newey and West (1987) standard errors
using the optimal bandwidth choice in Andrews (1991) reported in parentheses. Significance levels are
represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 with p as the p-value. The last column of panel B
reports the fraction of the total variation of residuals that is accounted for by the two intermediary factors,
denoted as FVE and computed as in (3) for short, medium, and long term bonds, as well as all bonds.


                                                      77
        Table A.8: Correlations of Dealer Inventories of HY and IG Bonds

                                               A: Raw Change
                                       Inventory A      Inventory HY       Inventory IG
                    Inventory A            1.0000
                    Inventory HY          0.6854*            1.0000
                    Inventory IG          0.5718*            -0.2054            1.0000
                                            B: Percentage Change
                                       Inventory A      Inventory HY       Inventory IG
                    Inventory A            1.0000
                    Inventory HY          0.7135*            1.0000
                    Inventory IG          0.7148*            0.0200             1.0000

Note: This table reports quarterly time series correlations of three different measures related to dealer inven-
tory, Inventory A , Inventory HY , and Inventory IG . Both simple changes (in panel A) and percentage
changes (in panel B) are included. Significance levels are represented by * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p
< 0.01 with p as the p-value. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.




                                                      78
         Table A.9: Summary of Institutional Holdings by Rating Categories

               Insurance Companies                  Mutual Funds                      Pension Funds
           Amount ($billion) Fraction (%)   Amount ($billion) Fraction (%)    Amount ($billion) Fraction (%)
 AAA            17.18            1.69             16.72           2.71              3.75            3.24
 AA             76.45            7.37             37.74           6.05              6.24            5.79
 A              368.03           35.45           128.05           18.27            23.57            21.23
 BBB            435.67           41.91           193.01           26.76            34.99            31.39
 BB             79.40            7.73            103.45           14.77            14.95            13.54
 B              33.92            3.30            121.19           17.68            15.76            14.24
 CCC            24.84            2.54             90.19           13.76            11.49            10.56
 Total         1035.48                           690.34                            110.75

Note: This table reports the average (over time) amount in $billions and fraction in percent of the eMAXX
quarterly corporate bond holdings of insurance companies, mutual funds, and pension funds, respectively,
broken down into seven rating groups. The sample period is from 2005:Q1 through 2015:Q2.




                                                   79
