                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE EFFECTS OF FOREIGN-BORN PEERS IN US HIGH SCHOOLS AND MIDDLE
                               SCHOOLS

                                          Jason Fletcher
                                            Jinho Kim
                                           Jenna Nobles
                                           Stephen Ross
                                        Irina Shaorshadze

                                       Working Paper 26491
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26491


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019

This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris
and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding
from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R.
Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain
the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/
addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. The
authors thank Eric Grodsky, Christine Schwartz, and the William T. Grant Foundation for
research support for this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26491.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jason Fletcher, Jinho Kim, Jenna Nobles, Stephen Ross, and Irina Shaorshadze. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Foreign-Born Peers in US High Schools and Middle Schools
Jason Fletcher, Jinho Kim, Jenna Nobles, Stephen Ross, and Irina Shaorshadze
NBER Working Paper No. 26491
November 2019
JEL No. I1,I12,I14,I24,J1,J15,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

The multi-decade growth and spatial dispersion of immigrant families in the United States has
shifted the composition of US schools, reshaping the group of peers with whom students age
through adolescence. US-born students are more likely to have foreign-born peers and foreign-
born students are more likely to be educated outside of enclaves. This study examines the short-
term and long-term impact of being educated with immigrant peers, for both US-born and
foreign-born students. We leverage a quasi-experimental research design that uses across-grade,
within-school variation in cohort composition for students in the Add Health study. We describe
effects on a broad set of education, social, and health outcomes. For US-born students, we find
little evidence that having immigrant peers affects a wide array of outcomes, either in
adolescence or in adulthood. For foreign-born students, attending school with other immigrant
students is protective against risky health behaviors and social isolation, relative to native born
students. However, foreign-born students' language skills measured with Picture-Vocabulary Test
scores are negatively affected by attending school with a larger share of other immigrant students.
The negative effect on vocabulary scores persists through young adulthood but does not translate
into reductions in most longer-run socioeconomic outcomes, including earnings or the economic
status of their residential neighborhoods.

Jason Fletcher                                           Stephen Ross
University of Wisconsin-Madison                          University of Connecticut
La Follette School of Public Affairs                     Department of Economics
1225 Observatory Drive                                   341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Madison, WI 53706                                        Storrs, CT 06269-1063
and NBER                                                 stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
jfletcher@lafollette.wisc.edu
                                                         Irina Shaorshadze
Jinho Kim                                                University of Wisconsin
Department of Sociology                                  shaorshadze@wisc.edu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, NT
Hong Kong
jinho.kim@cuhk.edu.hk

Jenna Nobles
University of Wisconsin, Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
jnobles@ssc.wisc.edu
INTRODUCTION
Many domains of adolescent life are shaped by the behaviors and attributes of school-aged peers.
Peers influence academic performance, health-related behaviors, socioemotional development,
and even criminal activity (Billings, Deming, and Ross forthcoming; Burke and Sass 2013;
Duncan et al. 2005; Eren 2017; Gavira and Raphael 2001; Kao 2001; Ream and Rumberger
2008; Wodtke and Parbst 2017). As a result, the composition of adolescents' schools--and the
attendant formation of students' peer relationships--is an important pathway through which
education experiences influence socioeconomic and socioemotional development. Studies of
classroom and grade-level composition highlight a number of potentially relevant traits among
students' peers, including familial social capital, racial composition, and language skills (Bifulco
et al. 2011; Gamoran, Collares, and Barfels 2016; Fletcher 2010; Levy and Schlosser).
       In recent years, the multi-decade growth and spatial dispersion of immigrant families in
the U.S. has brought questions of school composition into public debate. In 1980, eight U.S.
states had public school systems in which at least one-tenth of students came from immigrant
households. By 2000, this was true of twenty U.S. states, and by 2015, thirty-two U.S. states
(Camarota et al. 2017). By 2000, 20% of U.S. counties had immigrant population shares that
exceeded 5% (Census Bureau 2017). The composition of school districts has changed over the
last thirty years--shifting toward a growing share of primary and secondary schools in which
foreign-born and US-born students attend school together.
       For US-born students, the effects of attending school with a growing share of immigrant
students are a priori ambiguous. Though sometimes portrayed otherwise, foreign-born
adolescents exhibit fewer risk behaviors, better health behaviors, and fewer behavioral problems
than their US-born peers (Harris 1999; Chin and Bleakley 2004), with some variation across
group and across place. To the extent that peer effects operate through behavioral modeling,
attending school with a larger share of foreign-born students may have positive externalities on
other students' welfare. At the same time, concerns have been raised about possible academic
detriments of attending schools with a larger share of foreign-born students, largely because of
English language learning needs. Evidence on academic assessments is mixed, though most
studies have focused on short-run testing outcomes (Conger 2015; Crosnoe and Lopez-Gonzalez
2005; Diette and Oyelere 2014).
       For immigrant students, attending schools with large shares of US-born students may
similarly influence multiple domains of well-being. Schools are sites of socialization and
network formation. Adopting the health or risk behaviors of US-born peers may worsen long-run
outcomes for the foreign-born (Harris 1999; Antecol and Bedard 2006). At the same time, social
ties to US-born students and their families could generate forms of upward socioeconomic
mobility for immigrant students from less wealthy families (Gandara et al 2009; Ream 2010).
Schools can also be sites of harassment and discrimination (Salerno and Reynolds 2016; Silver
2015); larger shares of US-born students may create environments that worsens the mental health
and academic performance of students from immigrant families. This may be exacerbated if the
share of foreign-born students in a school is mirrored in the background of the teaching staff--or
more broadly, the institution's preparedness to work with immigrant families (Gandara 2010).
The schooling environments of immigrant youth in "new destination" regions, i.e., areas with a
relatively recent history of foreign-born residents, has appropriately received attention
(Potochnick 2014; Spees, Pereira, and Fuglini 2016).
       A key challenge in estimating the effects of peer traits--on both US-born and foreign-
born students--is that causal attribution is difficult. The composition of students' peers is a
complicated function of multiple factors that sort students into schools, like neighborhood home
prices, proximity to employment sources, and parental ability to invest in schooling quality.
Taking advantage of an approach developed by Hoxby (2000), and elaborated by others (Bifulco
et al. 2011; Hanushek et al. 2003; Vigdor and Nechyba 2007), several studies have used
comparisons across grades within schools to characterize the effects of attending schooling with
foreign-born peers on measures captured in administrative data: matriculation, grades, and test
scores (Conger 2015; Hardoy et al. 2018; Hermansen and Birkelund 2015). These measures
provide an important assessment of intermediate education outcomes. Qualitative evidence
suggests, however, that school peer effects may shape many other aspects of adolescent
development that are relevant for long-run wellbeing.
       In this study, we investigate a comprehensive set of schooling and developmental
outcomes for a large cohort of foreign-born and US-born adolescents in schools spread across the
United States. We measure multiple domains while students are in school. In addition to
identifying peer composition effects on standardized language vocabulary tests, we study effects
on measures of social acceptance, social participation, mental health, risk behaviors, and
academic effort. We then follow the students forward as they age, to assess how enduring the
implications of these adolescent peer effects are for long-run welfare. Our study provides a
comprehensive assessment of the peer implications of migration-driven changes to school
composition. In so doing, the findings contribute to recent discussions about the presence of
migrant families in communities across the U.S.
       We observe little evidence that the share of foreign-born students in adolescents' grades
negatively affects the adolescent measures of wellbeing among their US-born classmates. By
contrast, the effects of school composition on foreign-born students relative to native born
students are meaningful in size and vary across domains. Compared to native students,
immigrant students express more social acceptance, better mental health,
increased academic effort and reduced participation in risk behavior when their peers are composed
of more foreign-born students.
       Their scores on standardized assessments in the Picture-Vocabulary Test (PVT) are
worse, however. These effects tend to be smaller when the school immigrant population is more
similar to the focal student in terms of racial and ethnic composition, consistent with peer effects
requiring some threshold number of similar individuals with which to form friendships.
However, for mental health and academic effort, we are unable to distinguish between situations
where there are positive peer effects for foreign-born students or where there are negative (but
noisily estimated) peer effects for native-born students and negligible effects for foreign-born
students. All of these effects operate net of the confounding variation that sorts students into
schools.
       When we follow a sub-set of the students into adulthood, we find little evidence among
U.S. born students of detrimental effects of attending school with foreign-born students on
completed schooling, health risk behaviors, mental health, or residential environment in
adulthood. Among foreign-born students, we find no evidence that the protective effects of
enclaves in adolescence persist into adulthood. Instead, only the negative effects of attending
school with a larger share of foreign-born students on the PVT scores and an additional reduction
in years of schooling remains as the students enter adulthood.
       In sum, we find no statistically significant evidence that the late-twentieth century
expansion of migrant families into school districts across the U.S. had a deleterious impact on a
wide array of outcomes measured among US-born students, either in adolescence or in
adulthood. If anything, the only meaningfully sized harmful effect we detect is for foreign-born
students, whose language skills develop more favorably in adolescence and into adulthood in
schools with larger shares of US-born students. That protective enclave effects observed in
adolescence do not translate into better measures of adult welfare underscores the value of
studying movement into adulthood as an important transition period shaping outcomes among
the foreign-born in the U.S. (Gonzales 2015).


SCHOOL COMPOSITION AND WELLBEING IN ADOLESCENCE AND ADULTHOOD
Social science provides a long history of research on the effects of the school environment, both
on student development generally (Wang and Holcombe 2010; Reyes et al. 2012) and on the
development of immigrant students in particular (Stanton-Salazar 1995; Ream 2010). Models of
immigrant incorporation in adolescence emphasize the importance of the local "context of
reception," in which the school environment is a key site of socialization (Portes and Zhou 1993;
Zhou 1997).
       For some outcomes of adolescent and adult welfare, peer composition may be a
particularly important aspect of the school environment; peers shape many features of students'
experiences both within and beyond the classroom (Suárez-Orozco et al. 2008; Wang and Eccles
2012). In the present study, we focus on a broad set of outcomes--standardized test scores,
academic effort, risk behaviors, social acceptance, and mental health in adolescence. In
adulthood, we measure outcomes that plausibly extend from these--earnings, education, health
behavior, criminal activity, mental health, and even features of individuals' residential context.
       Multiple mechanisms suggest a plausible link between the composition of students' peers
and their socioeconomic and socioemotional development: behavioral modeling; effects on
classroom content and pacing of learning; student experiences of inclusion or exclusion; and
formation of network ties that may develop or hinder socioeconomic mobility.
       Peer effects that operate through the adoption of academic, risk-taking, and health-related
behaviors may advantage students attending school with a larger share of immigrants. Foreign-
born adolescents, on average, engage in less risky behaviors--including alcohol and drug use--
and better health-promoting behaviors--including diet and exercise--relative to their US-born
peers (Harris 1999; Chin and Bleakley 2004). In addition, immigrant students report higher
levels of academic effort than do US-born students (Peguero et al. 2016). Scholars have
attributed this difference in part to the academic orientation of immigrant parents whose
motivation for migration is often to support schooling opportunities for children (Hagelskamp et
al. 2010; Suárez-Orozco, Suárez-Orozco, and Todorova 2008). Goldsmith (2003) demonstrates
that the positive correlation between Latino students' test scores and share of Latino students in
schools is partially attributable to the share of students with immigrant parents.
       Stronger academic effort may have spillover effects that operate through pathways other
than behavioral modeling too; effort among immigrant students may also contribute to the
acceleration of class pacing and may raise teachers' expectations. At the same time, some have
raised concerns that English language learners require a larger share of teacher attention and
school resources. To date, studies have found limited evidence that attending school with
foreign-born students who are English language learners has negative effects on academic
performance (Conger 2015; Crosnoe and Lopez-Gonzalez 2005; Diette and Oyelere 2014). For
immigrant students, the classroom spillover effects of attending school with a larger share of
other foreign-born students may be positive for learning--particularly if teaching resources are
tailored to the language, culture, and acclimation needs of students.
       A third mechanism that links peer composition to student welfare operates by shaping
how students are treated by classmates--and accordingly, how comfortable the student is inside
and outside the classroom setting (Ackert 2018; Ispa-Landa 2012). A priori the effects of the
relative share of foreign-born students on the receptive climate is ambiguous. Immigrant students
with primarily US-born peers may feel isolated linguistically and socially. They may have fewer
peers who understand the challenges of navigating cultural gaps between their home and school
environments (Portes and Rumbaut 2001). They may be more regularly exposed to overt or
subtle forms of racism and xenophobia by US-born peers (Salerno and Reynolds 2017); a larger
share of foreign-born students may provide a protective enclave that minimizes exposure to these
forms of hostility. In contrast, some scholarship indicates that anti-immigrant sentiment grows
when group size is perceived as threatening (Hainmuller and Hopkins 2014). If so, school
climate for immigrants may worsen with a larger share of foreign-born students.
       Finally, peer effects also arise if the formation of social networks provides access to
forms of education-specific or employment-specific capital. If US-born students have, on
average, parents with more experience navigating the US higher education system and ties to
better local employment opportunities, attending school with a larger share of US-born students
may improve schooling and work outcomes for immigrant adolescents (Stanton-Salazar 2000).
       The links between peer composition and student outcomes are undoubtedly conditioned
by the extent of intra- and intergroup contact. In many high schools, the foreign-born population
is a heterogeneous group, and attending school in the same grade does not necessarily imply
sufficient contact to generate behavior changes or network ties. Most research on intergroup
interaction in U.S. schools suggests that ethnic and racial identification shapes friendship
formation (Moody 2001; Currarini, Jackson, and Pin 2010). For immigrant students who are in
classes with a larger share of students from the same origin country or who, more broadly,
identify as sharing a common ethnic identity, these effects may be more salient. Alternatively, it
is possible that the presence of additional foreign-born students matters less for students in
schools with many opportunities for finding similar peers, e.g. schools with a large share of the
same-origin group or encompassing a network of second-generation native-born students. For
example, if peer effects arise due to the formation of friendships, additional foreign-born peers
may matter most when there are very few similar students available from which foreign-born
students might form friendships. In this case, marginal peer effects would be zero where students
have a large number of similar peers because the peer effects arising from the tendency towards
homophilous friendships has reached it maximum. In fact, Weinberg (2013) demonstrates that
with strong homophily in friendships students are likely to experience the influence of their most
similar peers once the population crosses a modest size threshold because students can
strategically seek out similar students within a school.
       Given the long-term implications of better health in adolescence (Haas and Fosse 2008;
Jackson 2010), we would expect these effects to persist into adulthood. That is, the conditions
that improve students' mental health and health risk behaviors in adolescence might improve
their health and economic outcomes in adulthood. Conditions that affect students' schooling
attitudes and test scores should influence their likelihood of staying in school, their attendant
employment outcomes, and the economic context of their neighborhoods--i.e., where they are
able to live--as adults.
IDENTIFYING EFFECTS OF PEER COMPOSITION
Estimating peer effects is complicated by several potential sources of bias (Manski 1993, Hoxby
2000). Peer composition is affected by the sorting of families across neighborhoods and into
schools. If foreign-born students, on average, attend schools in less wealthy communities the
unmeasured correlates of these residential patterns will be misinterpreted as the effects of peer
composition. Bias may also occur when data is generated from students' reports of peer
characteristics. Correlated measurement error--the tendency to report similarly positive or
negative outcomes for oneself and one's peers, for example--will upwardly bias peer effects.
       To address these issues, we leverage a within-school across-cohort identification strategy
with data collected from a census of students within a representative sample of U.S. high schools
and middle schools. We estimate specifications that model student outcomes as a function of the
composition of their cohort peers, conditional on school fixed effects. The design is motivated by
an assumption: while families purposely select schools for their children, they are unlikely to
select the specific cohort of students that their child will join, conditional on the school (Bifulco
et al. 2011, Conger 2015). Variation in the share of foreign-born students across cohorts in a
given school can be assumed to be quasi-random. We provide evidence for the validity of across-
cohort identification by presenting balancing tests. After conditioning on school fixed effects,
student foreign-born status and race/ethnicity, we find at most modest and statistically
insignificant correlations between peer composition and pre-determined observable
characteristics of families (like maternal education). And because we use data from school
censuses--students' report about themselves--we reduce potential measurement error from
sampling error or reporting bias (e.g., when individual and peer schooling outcomes are reported
by the same respondent).
       The causal effects of attending school with smaller and larger shares of foreign-born
peers have been primarily documented in settings outside the United States. This research
describes intermediate education outcomes--grade/level completion and standardized test
scores. Several of these studies suggest that the presence of foreign-born peers lowers student
performance on exams and rates of matriculation. Gould et al. (2009) find negative effects of
immigrant students in classrooms on high school matriculation in Israel. Using PISA data in
Denmark, Jensen and Rasmussen (2011) find negative effects of immigrant peers on both
reading and math scores. Exploiting the rules of class formation in Italy, Ballatore et al. (2013)
find negative effects from immigrant classroom peers on native students for the language and
math scores. Tonello (2015) finds small negative effect on the Italian students' language test
scores. Schneeweis (2011) uses an across-cohort within-school strategy in Austria to show
adverse effects on grade repetition and track attainment for migrant students in cohorts with a
large share of migrant peers. Hardoy and Schone (2013) find negative peer effects from
immigrant students in the classroom in Norway. By contrast, a handful of studies on native-born
students in the Netherlands (Ohinata and Van Ours 2013, 2016), England (Geay et al. 2013), and
Israel (Chachashvili-Bolotin 2016) do not detect negative effects on education outcomes of
attendance with immigrant peers.
       Despite the large, rich literature on immigrant schooling in the US, few studies examine
peer effects with strategies that address issues of confounding and measurement bias described
above. Two exceptions provide arguably quasi-experimental evidence on the effects of having
immigrant peers in the U.S.; both describe effects on schooling and testing outcomes. Schwartz
and Stiefel (2011) use administrative data in NYC and find that the share of immigrant students
at the grade level has small, negative effects on foreign-born students' math scores but no
association with native-born students' math scores. Conger (2015) uses administrative data in
Florida and does not find evidence that foreign born peers--including English language
learners--affect their high-school classmates' academic performance.
       We build on these studies by applying a similarly rigorous strategy to the study of a much
broader set of socioemotional and socioeconomic outcomes among a cohort of students from a
nationally-representative sample of schools across the U.S. Unlike previous work, we follow
these students into adulthood and consider the longer-run implications of cohort composition in
school. In so doing, we also consider how the diversity of the foreign-born population in a given
cohort shapes student wellbeing. Before turning to the data, we describe the across-cohort,
within-school design in more detail.
METHOD
Approach
We estimate a series of specifications that include the share of students with each school-specific
cohort 1 that is foreign-born (Eq. 1,  ) and the interaction of this share with whether the student
is foreign-born (Fi ):


                    = 0 + 1 X +2 W + 3 F + 4 F Fi +  +  +                                             (1)


           The outcome  of student i in cohort c in school s is a function of individual covariates
 including the individual student's foreign-born status, school-cohort composition over the
percentage of foreign-born students  , additional school-cohort level covariates  , as well as

cohort and school fixed effects  and  , and an error term  .
           We then explore heterogeneity in the peer effects captured by 3 and 4 . Specifically, we
examine whether peer effects are more or less salient when the cohort composition of foreign-
born students shares ethnic background with the focal student. We do so by introducing an
interaction term between the peer effect variable and a measure of how similar the school
immigrant population is on racial and ethnic composition to the student's own race and ethnicity.
Using a detailed measure of students' reports of race and ethnicity (described below), we
measure the fraction of immigrants in each school who identify as members of group g ( ).
For each student, we measure Lis, the fraction of the school's immigrant students whose ethnic
identification matches that of the focal student:


            =                                                                                     (2)


where  is 1 if the individual, whether immigrant or US-born, belongs to racial or ethnic group
g and zero otherwise. We interact this variable with the indicators that the student is foreign-born
(  ), the share foreign-born in the cohort (  ) and with the product of the cohort share
foreign-born and whether the student is foreign-born--creating a triple interaction (   ).


1
    We use the term cohort to reference a student's grade or year in school.
        = 0 + 1  +2 + 3  + 4   + 5   + 6    + 
                                                                                                 (3)
                      +   +  +  + 


 The specification tests whether attending school with a larger share of foreign-born
 students has larger or smaller effects for foreign-born students if the schools' foreign-born
 population shares ethnic identification with the focal student.
       Finally, in a supplemental analysis, we ask whether peer effects differ by key school
 level attributes. First, we allow the effect of foreign-born peers to be non-linear by
 interacting peer effects with whether the school has a share of foreign-born students that is
 above the median for our sample. Second, we allow peer effects to differ by whether the
 fraction of students whose families do not speak English at home is above the median, and
 whether the fraction of students whose parents are foreign-born is above median. These
 tests provide additional evidence about the role of language and the relevance of immigrant
 parents for first- and second-generation students in the studies' findings.

Data
The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) is a school-based
longitudinal study of health and education-related behaviors of adolescents. The survey follows
individuals through young adulthood by collecting information on health, behavioral and labor
market outcomes. The data are nationally representative and were collected through stratified
clustered sampling of schools and students. A sample of 80 high schools and 54 feeder schools
was drawn across the United States through a sample frame that was stratified by region,
urbanicity, school type, ethnic mix and size. Wave I of the survey was conducted between 1994
and 1995 and consisted of an In-School and an In-Home survey. The In-School survey was
administered between September 1994 and April 1995 to all students present at school on the
given day and so represent a virtual census of the school population, with a sample size of over
90,000 students. Subsequently, an In-Home sample of students was selected from the population
of all students to be administered a more detailed survey and then to be followed longitudinally.
From each school, the In-Home sample included 17 male and 17 female students from each
grade, and this sample was enhanced through oversampling based on characteristics such as race,
twin status, and disability.
        We use data from the In-School Survey as well as waves I, III and IV of the In-Home
surveys. The Wave I In-Home survey was conducted soon after the In-School survey between
April and December 1995 and was completed by 20,745 students. The Wave III In-Home survey
was conducted in 2001 and 2002 about 7 years after the original In-School survey (participants
were 18 to 26 years old) and was completed by 15,197 individuals. The Wave IV survey was
conducted in 2008, 14 years after the original survey (participants were 24 to 32 years old). The
wave IV In-Home survey was completed by 15,701 individuals. The survey questionnaire
administered in Wave IV included modules on labor market activities, health and crime behavior
and characteristics of the neighborhood where the individual resides.
        By definition, a study of the long-term implications of school composition must examine
school composition in an earlier period than the present. School composition in the U.S. has
undergone further change since the recruitment of the Add Health cohort. We discuss this and
the potential implications of this study's findings for today's adolescents in the final section of
the study.


Measures
The aim of the study is to provide a multidimensional characterization of peer composition
effects by examining a broad set of social and educational outcomes first when students are in
school (short-term effects) and then fourteen years later in adulthood (long-term effects). The
independent variable of interest for the analysis, school cohort composition, is measured from
the In-School survey of over 90,000. We calculate the percent of students in each grade of each
school who report being foreign-born. Because the data come from a near-census of schools
(versus a sample), measurement error is minimized.
        Measures of short-term outcomes also come from the In-School survey, which collected
information on student's socio-demographic characteristics, family background, health status,
risk behaviors, academic achievement, mental health, and school factors. To achieve a
multidimensional characterization while also reducing the number of statistical tests and
improving measurement, we follow Kling et al. (2007) (among others) by grouping a large
number of outcome measures into a set of four domains: academic effort, social acceptance,
health risk behaviors, and mental health. 2 For each domain, we conduct principal component
analysis (PCA) on the contributing survey measures and extract the first component to be used as
the outcome measure. The PCA combines both dichotomous and continuous measures and
allows individual measures to be negatively weighted to address reverse coding. Higher values
on the resulting components indicate, respectively, greater academic effort, greater social
acceptance, more engagement in health risk behaviors, and better mental health. PCA weights for
the underlying measures are provided in supplementary materials. We complement analysis of
these domains with a measure of language skills, captured with the PVT score taken from wave I
of the In-Home survey.
         The analysis of adult outcomes draws from the Wave IV In-Home survey. Akin to the
analysis of adolescent outcomes, we group a rich array of individual measures into four domains
that theoretically follow from the constructs measured in adolescence: health risk behavior,
mental health, and residential economic status. 3 We construct the residential economic status
measure with information about poverty, employment, and average labor income values in the
census track in which respondents live in Wave IV. To do this, we use geocodes with the
restricted Add Health data to merge on track-level information from the American Community
Survey. We also examine effects of peers on a PVT test score administered in Wave III and on




2 The composite dependent variables for the adolescent analysis were constructed through extracting the first principal
component of survey variables from Wave I In-School survey grouped as follows: academic effort: Try to do
homework well, Time spent watching TV on school day, Skipped school during last 12 months, Trouble getting
homework done, Trouble getting along with teacher; social acceptance: Student responses to questions indicating that
they: Feel close to peers, Feel part of school, Feel that students at school are prejudiced, Are happy to be at this school,
Feel socially accepted; health risk behavior: Smoked cigarettes last 12 months, Drank alcohol last 12 months, Got
drunk last month, Raced on bike or car last 12 months, In danger due to a dare last 12 month; mental health: Felt
depressed last month, Trouble relaxing last month, Moody last month, Cried a lot last month. Descriptive statistics
and component weights are provided in the Supplementary Online material, Appendix Tables A2 and A3.
3 The composite dependent variables for the long-term analysis were constructed through extracting the first principal
component of the underlying variables from the Wave IV In-Home survey grouped as follows: health risk behavior:
Days smoked last month, Days drunk last year, Days smoked marijuana last month, Has used hard drugs; mental
health: How often feel isolated, Not in control of life, Confident to handle problems, Things go respondent's way,
Overwhelmed with difficulties, Bothered by things last week, Blues last week, Feel as good as others last week,
Trouble concentrating last week, Depressed last week, Tired last week, Happy last week, Enjoyed life last week, Sad
last week, Feel disliked last week, Feel not respected last week; residential economic status: Unemployment rate, Male
labor force participation rate, Log income per capita, Proportion persons in poverty, Proportion of housing vacant,
Log median house value, Total adult arrests, Total juvenile arrests. Descriptive statistics and component weights are
provided in the Supplementary Online material, Appendix Tables A2 and A3.
Wave IV years of education and earnings where the logarithm of one plus earnings is used to
address skewness in the earnings data and avoid dropping observations with zero earnings.


Samples
Analysis of most of the short-term outcomes uses an analytical sample of 84,671 students from
141 schools, in grades 7 through 12. Of the 90,118 students originally surveyed, 6.6 percent are
missing data on sex, age, or foreign-born status information and must be excluded. The PVT
score was collected for the subset of students sampled for the In-Home survey, and as a result is
estimated on a sample of approximately 13,800 students.
           Analysis of long-term outcomes uses the In-Home sample followed through Wave IV.
approximately 20% of 13,800 sampled individuals attrite from the Add Health data by Wave IV,
resulting in an empirical sample of between 9,000 and 11,000 observations, depending on the
outcome. Attrition across survey waves risks selection bias in the estimates, particularly if
attrition is correlated with the predictor of interest, the percent foreign-born by grade. We tested
whether % foreign-born by grade predicted missingness in the measures and attrition by Wave 4
(see Table A4, Supplementary Online Materials). We find little evidence that missing data or
sample attrition is selective on grade composition. Our results show a small positive and not
statistically significant relationship between peer exposure and remaining the sample for foreign
born students (a 3 percentage point increase in exposure is associated with a 0.6 percentage point
increase in the likelihood of being retained in the sample) and no association for native born
students.


Descriptive Statistics
Roughly 10% of the sample reports being foreign-born. These students are distributed unevenly
across schools and grades, creating wide variation in the share of foreign-born students by grade;
this variable ranges from zero to 100%. The clustering of immigrant students results in a large
difference in average cohort composition for foreign-born students (25% of grade-mates are
foreign-born) versus US-born students (8% of grade-mates are foreign-born). 4




4
    Distributions shown in Figure A1 of the Online Supplement.
       Table 1 presents the mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum of outcome and
control variables. The table illustrates several differences between the US-born and foreign-born
students in background characteristics, as well as academic, behavioral and health outcomes.
Foreign-born students are advantaged in some domains, but disadvantaged in others compared to
their US-born counterparts. Foreign-born students express social acceptance that is about 5% of
a standard deviation lower and mental health that is 11.5% of a standard deviation better than
US-born students, as captured by the principal component scales. However, foreign-born
students are also 16% of a standard deviation lower in pursuing risky health behaviors and 6% of
a standard deviation lower in their academic effort. In terms of the family background variables,
foreign-born students have parents that are less likely to be in professional occupations, but have
a similar likelihood of attending college relative to parents of their US-born peers.


Balancing Tests
The study's identification assumes that though families might systematically select into schools,
they do not sort into schools based on their child's cohort in school, which is primarily a function
of the school and the child's birth date. We conduct a battery of balancing tests that examine the
extent to which the deviations from the school average of cohort composition are correlated with
student demographic and background characteristics. If the school fixed effects capture
systematic selection on observed family and student characteristics, then we expect to find little
or no correlation between student attributes and cohort deviations. In the peer effects literature, it
is common to validate this assumption by testing whether families sort into schools based on
their child's cohort using observable attributes like student demographics or family background.
The logic behind these tests is that if students have not systematically sorted based on key
observables like race or parental income then they are unlikely to have sorted based on the
factors that were not recorded in the survey, which presumably were not recorded often because
they were less central than the observables (Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2005).
       Table 2 presents the results of these balancing tests, in which the dependent variables are
the family and student characteristics. These variables are regressed on the grade share foreign-
born using the same specification as shown in equation (2). Only two of the 28 balancing test
estimates are significant at the 5% level, which represents a set of results that could easily have
arisen due to type 1 error. However, both of these failures are on variables related to race and
ethnicity and some of the estimates on race and ethnicity variables are sizable in magnitude
whether statistically significant or not. Given the nature of immigration within the U.S., it is
unsurprising that we cannot easily separate foreign-born status from race and ethnicity, and so
we repeat the balancing conditional on the race and ethnicity variables. Those tests are
supportive of our identification strategy as long as the models condition on both whether the
individual is foreign born and their racial and ethnic background. 5


RESULTS
Effects on Outcomes in Adolescence
The results of Eq. 1 estimates are shown in Table 3. Panel 1 presents the estimates with no
additional controls, panel 2 includes controls for race and ethnicity, and panel 3 includes controls
for all balancing test variables. With one exception, the estimates are qualitatively similar across
the panels. The effects of the share of foreign-born students on the outcomes of US-born
students can be approximately detected from the zero-order term (% peers foreign-born). We
only find evidence of peer effects of foreign-born students on their US-born counterparts for
mental health, and those effects erode substantially as we add controls. We do not find any
statistically significant effects for the other domains considered: academic effort, social
acceptance, or risk-taking behavior. We note, however, that the estimates on mental health and
academic effort are both negative but imprecisely estimated. We then turn to the effect on
Picture-Vocabulary Test (PVT) scores, collected in the In-Home survey. The PVT tests
vocabulary of Standard American English and is meant as an estimate of verbal and scholastic
ability. We similarly find little evidence that attending school with a larger share of foreign-born
students reduces the test scores of US-born students. We confirm these findings with identical
analysis limited to the US-born sample (not reported).
        When we consider the effects of grade composition on foreign-born students relative to
natives, we observe a different pattern. We find evidence for differences in peer effects for
foreign-born students for all of the in-school outcomes tested. Compared to the native-born
students, we see that as the share of foreign-born peers increases in the cohort, the foreign-born


5
  Identification also requires that sufficient across-cohort variation in the share foreign-born remains after
controlling for school fixed effects. Appendix Table A5 shows that approximately 3.5 percent of the variation
in share foreign-born survives conditioning on school.
students feel more socially accepted, have better mental health engage in less risky behavior and
exhibit greater academic effort, relative to the native born. 6 The point estimate for peer effects of
foreign-born students are the sum of the zero-order estimate and the interaction. For three
outcomes in panel 3, these sums are sizable and in the direction described above. Foreign-born
students report feelings of social acceptance that are almost 40 percent of a standard deviation
larger ((0.266 + 0.077)/0.86) with a 100 percentage point increase in the share of the grade that is
also foreign-born. A 19.9-percentage point increase in the share of foreign-born peers, i.e. one
standard deviation in foreign-born share for the foreign born population, is associated with an
8% of a standard deviation increase in the social acceptance scale. Immigrant students'
engagement in risky behavior is reduced by 7% of a standard deviation (19.9*(0.212 -
0.545)/0.92). For mental health and academic effort, we are unable to distinguish between
situations where there are positive peer effects for foreign-born students or where there are
negative (but noisily estimated) peer effects for native-born students and those effects do not
exist for foreign-born students. All of the zero order estimates for foreign-born students are
shown in Appendix Table A6. The estimates are noisier than the interacted effects; specifically,
group-specific effects are less precisely estimated than is the difference between effects on
foreign-born relative to native-born students.
         When we turn to the effect on vocabulary scores, we see that the PVT score of foreign-
born students suffer with increased exposure to foreign-born peers, relative to their native-born
counterparts. This result is precisely estimated, and the magnitude of this effect is striking. The
standard deviation of the standardized PVT score is 1.24; therefore a 19.9-percentage point
increase of the share of foreign-born induces 15% of a standard deviation decrease in the PVT
score.
         As discussed above, Table 3 presents results first without controls, then with controls for
race and ethnicity and finally with all balancing test controls. If the assumption of the study
design holds, we would not expect the control measures to play much of a role in the analysis. If
the school and grade fixed effects have absorbed the processes that sort families into different

6 Of course, these measures can be constructed in alternate ways. To consider the robustness of the findings,
we tested regression specifications predicting individual component variables one-by-one. Out of twenty-three
outcome variables considered, we find statistically meaningful peer effects on the interaction term with
foreign-born students in all but seven cases. These effects operate in the direction signaled in Table 3 ­ they
increase social inclusion and decrease harmful behavior.
schools, we would not expect the coefficients estimated on cohort composition to change much
with the inclusion of additional controls. As discussed alongside the balancing test results, it is
difficult to separate foreign-born status from race and ethnicity, and the coefficients exhibit some
parameter instability between panels 1 and 2 when we introduce measures of race. Focusing on
the interaction between foreign-born and the share foreign born: the parameters are quite stable
as the additional controls are added, i.e. between panels 2 and 3. We further test the study's
identifying assumption with an analysis of effect size changes to covariate inclusion, drawing
from Oster (2015) who compares parameter changes to changes in R-squared as the controls are
added. These tests indicate that the study results are robust to all but extreme forms of selection
on unobserved measures. 7
        We then investigate whether these effects endure as the adolescents age into adulthood.
For this purpose, we take advantage of the panel nature of the Add Health and examine outcomes
found in waves III and IV of the In-Home survey. Standardized PVT scores were collected in
Wave III, when the respondents were 18 to 24 years old. We use information on labor market,
health, social and behavioral outcomes found in Wave IV, completed when the respondents were
between 24 and 30 years old. Importantly, the Wave III and IV surveys follow (by design) a
sub-set of the In-School Survey respondents--approximately 15,000 of the original 90,000--this
survey feature has implications for our power to detect long-term effects in relation to the short-
term effects we have outlined above.
        The results of this analysis are found in Table 4. We find effects for health behavior and
PVT score in early adulthood that operate in the same direction as the effects in adolescence but
are attenuated in magnitude. However, we find no effects on either earnings or residential
environment. We find small, negative effects of the share of immigrant students on years of
education attained for immigrant relative to native-born students. Turning to the zero-order
effects explicitly: for the PVT score, a one standard deviation difference in exposure to foreign-
born peers lowers foreign-born student scores by about 6.5 percent of a standard deviation




7These tests are described in detail in the Supplementary Online Material. The results are shown in Appendix
Table A7.
(19.9*(0.074-0.444)/1.14), and the same change reduces years of education by 0.05 years. 8, 9
Note that the estimates in Table 4 exhibit more parameter stability, likely due to the small sample
size. These estimates still pass the Oster tests for outcomes with statistically significant peer
effect estimates, again for all but extreme forms of selection.


Heterogeneous Peer Effects in Adolescence
        To this point, the study does not distinguish among foreign-born adolescents in terms of
ethnic origin or race. The U.S. foreign-born population is heterogeneous in many dimensions,
including ethnicity and associated country of origin. Research on peer networks in adolescence
point to the importance of race and ethnicity in the process of friendship formation (Moody
2001; Currarini, Jackson, and Pin 2010). As a result, we might expect that the effects of
attending school with foreign-born peers matters more if these peers share ethnic origin or race.
Alternatively, they may matter less if small variation in peers is more important when there are
few foreign-born peers available.
        For this purpose, we construct a variable that indicates the proportion of the foreign-born
peers at the school level that share the same racial/ethnic group as a given student, whether or not
the student is foreign born. We first construct this variable based on broad, pan-ethnic indicators
for race and ethnicity. For students identifying as Asian and Hispanic in Add Health, it is
possible to then create a second variable indicating the proportion of foreign-born peers that
share the same country of origin. The means of these variables are shown in Table 5 panel 1
(race and ethnicity) and panel 2 (country of origin) separately by student foreign-born status and
by whether the school has an above- or below-median share of foreign-born students. We then
interact each of these variables with the share of foreign-born peers, the foreign-born indicator



8
  We re-estimate these models without school fixed effects in order to identify the conditional correlation
between peer attributes and student outcomes. Failure to control for school fixed effects leads to evidence that
might suggest larger effects on native born students, such as less health risk behavior and higher earnings, and
more long-term effects on foreign-born students, such as better mental health and worse residential economic
status. See Appendix Table A8.
9
  We can repeat these analyses using students who are either first or second-generation immigrants and
measures of the share of first or second generation immigrants in the student's cohort, i.e. either foreign-born
or have at least one foreign-born parent. The results in Appendix Tables A9 and A10 are similar, but the effect
sizes are smaller, than the results in Tables 3 and 4.
and their interaction. In light of the previous findings and the sample needed to support this
analysis, we focus the tests on the short-run outcomes.
        The results for the interaction between foreign-born peers and foreign-born status are
presented in Table 6. The first panel repeats the short-run results from the final panel in Table 3
for reference. The second panel presents the results based on share same race or ethnicity, and
the third panel presents the results based on shared country of origin. The results are similar for
both share same race or ethnicity and for share same country of origin. Specifically, in the third
row (% peers foreign born interacted with student foreign born) in both panels 2 and 3, the peer
effects are larger and in the same direction as before, while the interaction of this variable with
percent-shared is in the opposite direction and sizable. Most of the effects of more foreign-born
students on foreign-born students are concentrated among foreign-born students who attend a
school with more diverse foreign-born populations--or, where fewer of their foreign-born
classmates share their race, ethnicity or country of origin.
        This finding suggests that having additional foreign-born classmates is more meaningful
when foreign-born students have fewer peers of similar origin from which to select friends or
acquaintances. 10 As discussed above, one should not interpret these results as implying that there
are no peer effects among the foreign-born when foreign-born peers are similar on race, ethnicity
or country of origin. Rather, at a sufficiently high level of similarity, schools may present
sufficient homophilous friendship opportunities such that students who are disposed to form
these friendships will experience the same peer effects even if the number of foreign-born peers
increases.
        If the role of similarity is driven by homophily in friendships, one might also expect that
peer effects for foreign-born share would be non-linear where the importance of increasing the
share of additional foreign-born students is smaller at schools with higher shares of foreign-born
students. Similarly, both the presence of second-generation immigrant students and students who
do not speak English at home may increase the opportunities for friendships that are isolated
from the broad population of non-immigrant students in the school. We create dummy variables
for whether each school has an above median share of foreign-born students, second-generation



10
 Estimates are noisy and effects on long-term outcomes are difficult to detect given the smaller samples. See
Appendix Table A11.
immigrant students and students who do not speak English at home, and we estimate models that
interact the foreign-born peer variables with these school attributes comparing the estimates on
the interaction of student foreign-born and share foreign born to a triple interaction of those two
variables with the school dummy variable, as shown in Eq. 4. For all three school attributes and
all outcomes, the triple interaction coefficient is opposite in sign and approximately the same
magnitude as the estimate on the interaction of student foreign-born and share foreign born. The
effect of additional foreign-born students on foreign-born students in the same cohort is near zero
when schools have above median share foreign-born, share second generation immigrants and
share not speaking English at home, a very similar pattern to the results in Table 6 based on the
racial, ethnic or country of origin similarity. These results are shown in Appendix Table A12.


DISCUSSION
Changes in regional mobility have reshaped the residential settlement patterns of immigrant
families. An important, widely-recognized implication of this trend is the accompanying
compositional shift in peers with whom children and adolescents encounter at home and at
school. Being educated with a larger (or smaller) share of foreign-born students has potential
implications for a number of developmental markers, for both foreign-born and US-born
students.
       We estimate the effect of presence of immigrant students in schools. We build on
previous work--that almost exclusively leverages point-in-time administrative data--to study
peer composition effects on a broad array of outcomes, including human capital, mental health,
social acceptance, and health behavior. The data also allows us to follow individuals
longitudinally and investigate the long-term consequences of peer composition in adolescence.
We consider whether these effects differ for students who share ethnic identification with a
larger share of the foreign-born students in their schools.
       We find that the presence of immigrant peers has significant positive effects on other
immigrants in the short term. Schooling with a larger share of foreign-born students increases
academic effort and feelings of social inclusion, improves mental health and decreases risky
behavior. We also find significant negative effects on the standardized PVT score of the foreign-
born students, providing a more complicated picture of the impact of more and less segregated
schooling experiences for foreign-born students. These effects are smaller when a foreign-born
student shares the race, ethnicity or country of origin with the other foreign-born students in the
school. These findings appear consistent with threshold effects where the effects of additional
foreign-born students are most important when foreign-born students have smaller numbers of
similar peers available. We find little evidence that presence of foreign-born peers negatively
affects their US-born classmates.
       When we follow individuals longitudinally, we find that the negative effects on the PVT
score persist. This effect is accompanied by small, negative effects on completed schooling by
early adulthood. By contrast, we find no evidence of an enduring effect of peer composition on
adult earnings. Although education and earnings are correlated, the effects on language and
schooling appear to be small enough that they are not translating into a decline labor market
returns. Alternatively, these effects may be off-set by advantages arising from having a better
foreign-born job network.
       We also observe that the short-term positive results on health behavior fade by the time
the respondents are 24 to 30 years old. The diminishment of these effects warrants attention in
future research. The loss of these health benefits by adulthood is consistent with research that
demonstrates an association between time spent in the U.S. and worsening health (Antecol and
Bedard 2006; Lopez-Gonzalez et al. 2005; Hamilton, Palermo, and Green 2015). It is also
consistent with research finding that networks in high school may be less protective when first-
generation students leave home and navigate new institutions--college, service, employment,
and so forth (e.g., Gonzales 2016).
       The results shown here differ in significant ways fro other research using quasi-
experimental design to peer effects. Most studies in European populations have examined testing
outcomes. Our results demonstrate that an exclusive focus on testing in the European research
may be missing other domains in which immigrant peer effects are beneficial. Further, while we
find small negative effects of attending school with a larger share of foreign-born students on
vocabulary testing, these effects are limited to foreign-born students. The absence of effects on
native-born students for testing outcomes is consistent with Conger's (2015) study of Florida
students and Schwartz and Stiefel's (2011) research on NYC students.
       The Add Health data allows us to examine a rich array of outcomes. However, the study
does not support analysis of English-language learning (ELL) status among students. ELL status
is a theoretically important source of heterogeneity in peer effects research, though one that has
not borne out as empirically significant to peer outcomes in the U.S. (e.g., Conger 2015). The
Add Health In-School survey does not ask about gradations of language skill. The survey meta
data record the language in which the survey is taken, but an indicator of responding in a
language other than English represents a tiny share of respondents (<1%). Tests using this data in
triple-interactions were uninformative. 11
        Interpreting the results of this study requires attention to a few points. To improve
measurement and to reduce the number of statistical tests--and the attendant risk of showing
only a subset of findings--we use a data reduction exercise that incorporates a large set of
indicators from the rich Add Health data. We chose these items based on theoretical grounds
(versus data exploration) and generate outcome measures using the first principal component of
each of these variable sets (see for example, Kling et al. 2007).
        It is also important to stress that the identification strategy used in the present study
focuses on the causal effect of attending school in a cohort with a larger or smaller share of
immigrant peers. It is of course possible that shifts in immigrant peers generate change that is not
grade specific, but school-specific. Consider for example, a school that hires a new principal or
additional teaching aids, or tailors the curriculum in response to a rising share of immigrant
families in a community. If this type of response has a positive effect on all of the foreign-born
students in a school, the cross-cohort, within-school identification will sweep out this variation
and underestimate the salutary effects on immigrant students of having the share of immigrants
in the school increase (i.e., increases beyond that reflected in the grade alone). Similarly, there is
some evidence that parents respond to the overall school immigrant composition by moving to
other school districts or by moving children to private schools (Cascio and Lewis 2012). The
differential selection of students into the school in response to the cohort composition might
affect the overall learning environment, but this study cannot speak to the effect of this selection
mechanism. Finally, immigration in the local labor market might affect student's outcomes
through demand for particular skills in the labor market, or through competition for college
admissions (e.g., Burstein et al. 2017). Such overall impacts of the immigrants in a given labor or



11 The survey does collect information in the In-Home survey about languages spoken at home, and we find no
effects of higher foreign-born share in schools with above median share of students not speaking English at
home. Whether this represents ELL status for students is ambiguous. It may also represent multilingualism.
college market operate above and beyond the impacts that we uncover in this paper and deserve a
dedicated study of its own.
       The identification used here is useful in considering a broad class of policies that likely
have consequences for changes in peer interactions between US-born and foreign-born students.
For example, many policies around school choice measures and charter schools may create
modest changes in the composition of students (Bifulco, Ladd and Ross 2009). Our results
suggest that these policies could indeed differentially affect foreign-born and native-born
students in the domains described above. Busing policies are another example that might change
the average level of contact between foreign-born and native-born students. Policies that shift the
likelihood of contact with foreign-born students could have similar impacts to those described
here. It is worth noting that qualitative research on busing policies suggest that lower-income
students are highly racialized and that the effects of intergroup interaction are heavily shaped by
students' gender (Ispa-Landa 2012). Future work using the type of the design explored here
would benefit from explicit attention to how peer effects differ by gender.
       More broadly, the results suggest opportunities to leverage the positive effects of school-
based ethnic enclaves in terms of social cohesion and health risk behaviors and at the same time
deploy additional resources to further enhance English proficiency in first generation students.
And for immigrant students who are educated in places with larger shares of US-born peers,
ongoing research on mechanisms of support--particularly in "New Destination" regions--is
warranted (e.g., Perreira et al. 2015; Silver 2015). By definition, our research on the longer-term
effects of school composition are focused on the outcomes of schools in the 1990s. Since then,
immigration patterns and internal migration patterns have continued to change. Movement into
new destination regions increased substantially in the 1990s--the number of immigrants
increased at 14 percent per year between 1990-2000 (Terrazas 2011). The Add Health cohort
was recruited in 1997 and migration has continued to change the composition of southern and
eastern regions of the country since then. We use data from the 1990 and 2000 Census and the
2015-2017 ACS to shed some light on this (Online Appendix A15). The evidence indicates that
foreign-born adolescents are less likely to drop out of school and less likely to be employed now
than in the 1990s; they also live in smaller, better educated families. Alongside these changes,
the results here provide little evidence that a rising share of foreign-born students in adolescents'
classrooms in new destination regions will negatively affect US-born students' wellbeing,
undermining the evidentiary support for political rhetoric to this effect.
REFERENCES
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. "Selection on observed and
    unobserved variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools." Journal of Political
    Economy 113.1 (2005): 151-184.
Ackert, E. (2018). Segregation paradox? School racial/ethnic and socioeconomic composition
    and racial/ethnic differences in engagement. Social Science Research, 70, 144-162.
Angrist, Joshua and Kevin Lang. Does school integration generate peer effects? Evidence from
    Boston's Metco program. American Economic Review, 94 (5) (2004), pp. 1613­1634.
Antecol, Heather, and Kelly Bedard. (2006). Unhealthy Assimilation: Why Do Immigrants
    Converge to American Health Status Levels? Demography 43(2):337­60.
Ballatore, Rosario , Margherita Fort, Andrea Ichino. The Tower of Babel in the Classroom?
    Immigrants and Natives in Italian Schools (2013) (Mimeo)
Bifulco, Robert, Jason M. Fletcher, and Stephen L. Ross. "The effect of classmate characteristics
    on post-secondary outcomes: Evidence from the Add Health." American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy 3, no. 1 (2011): 25-53.
Bifulco, Robert, Helen Ladd, and Stephen L. Ross. (2009). "Public school choice and
    integration: Evidence from Durham, NC." Social Science Research, 38, 78-85.
Billings, Stephen B., David J. Deming, and Stephen L. Ross. In Press. Partners in crime:
    Schools, neighborhoods and the formation of criminal networks. American Economic
    Journal: Applied Economics.
Bleakley, H., & Chin, A. (2004). Language skills and earnings: Evidence from childhood
    immigrants. Review of Economics and statistics, 86(2), 481-496.
Burke, Mary A., and Tim R. Sass. (2013) Classroom peer effects and student achievement.
    Journal of Labor Economics 31, no. 1 (2013): 51-82.
Burstein, A., Hanson, G., Tian, L., & Vogel, J. (2017). Tradability and the Labor-Market Impact
    of Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the US (No. w23330). National Bureau of
    Economic Research.
Camarota, S., Griffith, B., & Zeigler, K. (2017). Mapping the Impact of Immigration on Public
    Schools. Center for Immigration Studies.
Cascio, Elizabeth U., and Ethan G. Lewis. 2012. "Cracks in the Melting Pot: Immigration,
    School Choice, and Segregation." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(3): 91-
    117.
Chachashvili-Bolotin, S., Lissitsa, S., Shavit, Y. and Ayalon, H. (2016), The Short Term Effects
    of Immigrant Students on the Educational Achievements of Native-Born Students.
    International Migration, 54: 150­161.
Conger, D. (2015), Foreign-born Peers and Academic Performance. Demography (2015) 52: 569
Crosnoe, R., & Lopez-Gonzalez, L. (2005). Immigration from Mexico, school composition, and
    adolescent functioning. Sociological Perspectives, 48(1), 1-24.
Currarini, S., Jackson, M. O., & Pin, P. (2010). Identifying the roles of race-based choice and
    chance in high school friendship network formation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences, 107(11), 4857-4861.
Diette, Timothy M., and Ruth Uwaifo Oyelere. "Gender and Race Heterogeneity: The Impact of
    Students with Limited English on Native Students' Performance." The American Economic
    Review 104, no. 5 (2014): 412-417.
Duncan, G. J., Boisjoly, J., Kremer, M., Levy, D. M., & Eccles, J. (2005). Peer effects in drug
    use and sex among college students. Journal of abnormal child psychology, 33(3), 375-385.
Eren, Ozkan. "Differential Peer Effects, Student Achievement, and Student Absenteeism:
    Evidence From a Large-Scale Randomized Experiment." Demography 54, no. 2 (2017): 745-
    773.
Figlio, D. N., & Özek, U. (2017). Unwelcome Guests? The Effects of Refugees on the
    Educational Outcomes of Incumbent Students (No. w23661). National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
Fletcher, J. M. (2010). Social interactions and smoking: Evidence using multiple student cohorts,
    instrumental variables, and school fixed effects. Health Economics, 19(4), 466-484.
Fletcher, J. M. (2014). The effects of childhood ADHD on adult labor market outcomes." Health
    Economics 23(2): 159-181.
Gamoran, A., Collares, A. C., & Barfels, S. (2016). Does racial isolation in school lead to long-
    term disadvantages? labor market consequences of high school racial composition. American
    Journal of Sociology, 121(4), 1116-1167.
Gándara, P., & Hopkins, M. (2010). English learners and restrictive language policies. New
    York, Columbia University, Teachers College.
Gándara, P., & Rumberger, R. W. (2009). Immigration, language, and education: How does
    language policy structure opportunity. Teachers College Record, 111(3), 750-782.
Gaviria, A., & Raphael, S. (2001). School-based peer effects and juvenile behavior. Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 83(2), 257-268.
Geay, Charlotte, Sandra McNally, and Shqiponja Telhaj. "Nonnative Speakers of English in the
    Classroom: What Are the Effects on Pupil Performance?." The Economic Journal 123, no.
    570 (2013): F281-F307.
Goldsmith, P. A. (2003). All segregation is not equal: The impact of Latino and Black school
    composition. Sociological Perspectives, 46(1), 83-105.
Gonzales, R. G. (2016). Lives in limbo: Undocumented and coming of age in America.
    University of California Press.
Gould, Eric D., Victor Lavy, M. Daniele Paserman. Does immigration affect the long-term
    educational outcomes of natives? Quasi-experimental evidence. The Economic Journal, 119
    (540) (2009), pp. 1243­1269
Haas, S. A., & Fosse, N. E. (2008). Health and the educational attainment of adolescents:
    Evidence from the NLSY97. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 49(2), 178-192.
Hagelskamp, C., SuárezOrozco, C., & Hughes, D. (2010). Migrating to opportunities: How
    family migration motivations shape academic trajectories among newcomer immigrant
    youth. Journal of Social Issues, 66(4), 717-739.
Hainmueller, J., & Hopkins, D. J. (2014). Public attitudes toward immigration. Annual Review of
    Political Science, 17.
Hamilton, Tod, Tia Palermo, Tiffany L. Green. (2015). Health Assimilation among Hispanic
    Immigrants in the United States: The Impact of Ignoring Arrival-cohort Effects. Journal of
    Health and Social Behavior 56(4):460-477.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman, and Steven G. Rivkin. "Does peer ability
    affect student achievement?." Journal of applied econometrics 18, no. 5 (2003): 527-544.
Hardoy, I., Mastekaasa, A., & Schøne, P. (2018). Immigrant concentration and student outcomes
    in upper secondary schools: Norwegian evidence. European Societies, 20(2), 301-321.
Hardoy, I., & Schøne, P. (2013). Does the Clustering of Immigrant Peers Affect the School
    Performance of Natives? Journal of Human Capital, 7(1), 1-25.
Harris, K. M. (1999). The health status and risk behaviors of adolescents in immigrant families.
    Children of immigrants: Health, adjustment, and public assistance, 286-347.
Hermansen, A. S., & Birkelund, G. E. (2015). The impact of immigrant classmates on
    educational outcomes. Social Forces, 94(2), 615-646.
Hoxby, Caroline M. (2000). Peer effects in the classroom: learning from gender and race
    variation. Working Paper No. 7867, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
Ispa-Landa, S. (2013). Gender, race, and justifications for group exclusion: Urban Black students
    bussed to affluent suburban schools. Sociology of Education, 86(3), 218-233.
Jensen, Peter, and Astrid Würtz Rasmussen. (2011). The effect of immigrant concentration in
    schools on native and immigrant children's reading and math skills." Economics of Education
    Review 30, no. 6: 1503-1515.
Kao, G. (2001). Race and ethnic differences in peer influences on educational achievement.
    Problem of the century: Racial stratification in the United States. p. 437-460.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. "Experimental analysis of
    neighborhood effects." Econometrica 75, no. 1 (2007): 83-119.
Kremer, M., & Levy, D. (2008). Peer effects and alcohol use among college students. Journal of
    Economic perspectives, 22(3), 189-206.
Lavy, Victor, and Analia Schlosser. (2011). Mechanisms and impacts of gender peer effects at
    school. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, no. 2: 1-33.
Lopez-Gonzalez, Lorena, Veronica C. Aravena, and Robert A. Hummer. (2005). Immigrant
    Acculturation, Gender and Health Behavior: A Research Note. Social Forces 84(1):577­89.
Manski, C. Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem. Review of
    Economic Studies 1993; 60 (3): 531-542.
Terrazas, A. (2011). Immigrants in new destination regions. Migration Policy Institute.
Moody, J. (2001). Race, school integration, and friendship segregation in America. American
    journal of Sociology, 107(3), 679-716.
Ohinata, Asako, and Jan C. Van Ours. "How immigrant children affect the academic
    achievement of native Dutch children." The Economic Journal 123, no. 570 (2013): F308-
    F331
Ohinata, Asako, and Jan C. Van Ours. "Quantile Peer Effects of Immigrant Children at Primary
    Schools." Labour 30, no. 2 (2016): 135-157.
Oster, Emily. (2014). "Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence."
    University of Chicago Booth School of Business Working Paper.
Peguero, A. A., Ovink, S. M., & Li, Y. L. (2016). Social bonding to school and educational
    inequality: Race/ethnicity, dropping out, and the significance of place. Sociological
    Perspectives, 59(2), 317-344.
Portes, A., & Rumbaut, R. G. (2001). Legacies: the story of the immigrant second generation.
    Univ of California Press.
Portes, A., & Zhou, M. (1993). Segmented assimilation and its variants. Annals of the American
    Academy of Political and Social Science, 530, 74-96.
Potochnick, S. (2014). The academic adaptation of children of immigrants in new and
    established settlement states: The role of family, schools, and neighborhoods. Population
    Research and Policy Review, 33(3), 335-364.
Ream, R. K. (2005). Toward understanding how social capital mediates the impact of mobility
    on Mexican American achievement. Social forces, 84(1), 201-224.
Ream, R. K., & Rumberger, R. W. (2008). Student engagement, peer social capital, and school
    dropout among Mexican American and non-Latino white students. Sociology of Education,
    81(2), 109-139.
Reyes, M. R., Brackett, M. A., Rivers, S. E., White, M., & Salovey, P. (2012). Classroom
    emotional climate, student engagement, and academic achievement. Journal of Educational
    Psychology, 104(3), 700.
Salerno, S., & Reynolds, J. R. (2017). Latina/o Students in Majority White Schools: How School
    Ethnic Enclaves Link Ethnicity with Success. Sociology of Race and Ethnicity, 3(1), 113-
    125.
Schneeweis, Nicole. Educational institutions and the integration of migrants. J. Popul. Econ., 24
    (4) (2011), pp. 1281­1308.
Schwartz, A. E., & Stiefel, L. (2011). Immigrants and inequality in public schools. Whither
    Opportunity (Duncan, Ed), Pp. 419-442.
Silver, A. M. (2015). Clubs of culture and capital: Immigrant and second-generation
    incorporation in a new destination school. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 38(5), 824-840.
Spees, L., Perreira, K. M., & Fuligni, A. (2017). Family Matters: Promoting the Academic
    Adaptation of Latino Youth in New and Established Destination. Journal of family issues,
    38(4), 457-479.
Stanton-Salazar, R. D. (2000). The development of coping strategies among urban Latino youth.
    Making invisible Latino adolescents visible: A critical approach to Latino diversity, 203-238.
Stanton-Salazar, R. D., & Dornbusch, S. M. (1995). Social capital and the reproduction of
   inequality: Information networks among Mexican-origin high school students. Sociology of
   Education, 116-135.
Suárez-Orozco, C., Suárez-Orozco, M., & Todorova, I. (2008). Learning a new land: Immigrants
   students in American society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tonello, Marco. "Peer effects of non-native students on natives' educational outcomes:
   mechanisms and evidence." Empirical Economics (2015): 1-32
Vigdor, J., & Nechyba, T. (2007). Peer effects in North Carolina public schools. Schools and the
   equal opportunity problem, 73-101.
Wang, M. T., & Holcombe, R. (2010). Adolescents' perceptions of school environment,
   engagement, and academic achievement in middle school. American educational research
   journal, 47(3), 633-662.
Weinberg, B. (2013). Group design with endogenous associations. Regional Science and Urban
   Economics 43, 411-21.
Winship C. & Korenman S.D. (1999). Economic Success and the Evolution of Schooling and
   Mental Ability. In: Mayer SE, Petersen PE. Earning and Learning: How School Matters. The
   Brookings Institution Press.
Wodtke, G.T. and Parbst, M., 2017. Neighborhoods, schools, and academic achievement: a
   formal mediation analysis of contextual effects on reading and mathematics
   abilities. Demography, 54(5), pp.1653-1676.
Zhou, M. (1997). Segmented assimilation: Issues, controversies, and recent research on the new
   second generation. International Migration Review, 31(4), 975-1008.
Table 1. Sample Means by Students' Foreign-Born Status
                                                                                     US-       Foreign-
                                                             Min         Max         Born       Born      t-stat
                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)    of (3)-(4)
Outcomes in Adolescence (wave 1)
Social Acceptance                                           -2.522      1.413        0.004      -0.044        4.099
Mental Health                                               -2.769      1.046       -0.012       0.103       10.400
Health Risk Behavior                                        -0.749      3.773        0.015      -0.151       14.356
Academic Effort                                             -2.646      1.204        0.008      -0.055        6.827
PVT Scores                                                  -5.648      2.594        0.130      -0.521       24.359

Outcomes in Young Adulthood (waves 3 & 4)
Family Income                                                0.000     13.732        9.500       9.672        1.852
Mental Health                                               -4.370      1.387       -0.003       0.038        1.236
Health Risk Behavior                                        -0.585      2.805        0.016      -0.206        8.901
PVT Scores                                                  -5.353      1.376        0.080      -0.254       10.146
Years of Schooling                                           8.000     19.000       13.507      13.599        1.407
Residential Economic Status                                 -5.171      2.521       -0.013       0.170        5.781

Individual and Family Measures
Student's Age                                                 10          19        14.935      15.550       31.186
Student is Female                                              0           1         0.501       0.494        1.197
Student Race/Ethnicity:
White                                                          0           1        0.650        0.256       71.908
Black                                                          0           1        0.201        0.083       26.195
Asian                                                          0           1        0.045        0.292       88.257
American-Indian                                                0           1        0.057        0.028       11.223
Hispanic                                                       0           1        0.134        0.503       89.177
Mother College Graduate or Higher                              0           1        0.295        0.287        1.331
Father College Graduate or Higher                              0           1        0.343        0.353        1.529
Either Parent Works for Pay                                    0           1        0.958        0.924       13.040
Either Parent in Professional Occupation                       0           1        0.410        0.293       18.996
Live with Both Parents                                         0           1        0.731        0.712        3.762
Household Size                                                 1           6        4.267        4.609       25.133

Peer measure
% Peers Foreign-Born                                         0.000      1.000       0.079        0.252       132.332
Source: Add Health.
Note. Minimum and maximum values presented in columns 1 and 2. Unweighted mean values presented in columns 3 and 4.
Sample size varies for estimates that include the full school sample (wave 1 outcomes) and estimates that draw from the in-
home sample followed into waves 3 & 4. Sample sizes shown in Tables 3 and 4.
Table 2. Balancing Tests
                                                  % Peers Foreign-Born                     × Foreign-Born

Conditional on                                      (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                                                 + Race and                            + Race and
                                              Foreign-Born                         Foreign-Born
                                                                  Ethnicity                             Ethnicity
Age                                               0.122             0.111               0.219             0.247
                                                 (0.227)           (0.226)             (0.164)           (0.169)
Female                                            0.121             0.125               0.027             0.014
                                                 (0.101)           (0.099)             (0.026)           (0.026)
White                                             -0.094                                0.475*
                                                 (0.096)                               (0.230)
Black                                             0.054                                 -0.154
                                                 (0.051)                               (0.081)
Asian                                             0.137*                                -0.313
                                                 (0.058)                               (0.178)
American Indian                                   0.014                                 0.019
                                                 (0.044)                               (0.032)
Others                                            -0.130                                -0.035
                                                 (0.075)                               (0.044)
Hispanic                                          -0.047                                -0.137
                                                 (0.078)                               (0.115)
Mother College Graduate or Higher                 0.134              0.132              0.056              0.051
                                                 (0.094)            (0.090)            (0.046)            (0.043)
Father College Graduate or Higher                 -0.064             -0.068             0.042              0.028
                                                 (0.115)            (0.111)            (0.068)            (0.072)
Either Parent Works for Pay                       -0.051             -0.047             0.020              0.009
                                                 (0.037)            (0.037)            (0.023)            (0.022)
Either Parent in A Professional                   0.028              0.033              -0.041             -0.078
Occupation                                       (0.067)            (0.065)            (0.050)            (0.049)
Live with Both Parents                            -0.023             -0.012             0.112*             0.077
                                                 (0.080)            (0.076)            (0.048)            (0.040)
Household Size                                    0.190              0.171              -0.318             -0.211
                                                 (0.208)            (0.193)            (0.167)            (0.158)
Note. Each cell contains coefficients from separate regressions that include an indicator that the student is foreign-born,
school fixed effects, and grade fixed effects. Columns 1 and 2 show estimates on percent foreign-born, and columns 3 and 4
show estimates on the interaction of percent foreign-born with the foreign-born dummy. All regression specifications in
Columns 2 and 4 control for race/ethnicity dummies. Robust standard errors are clustered at the school level. All estimates
based on wave 1 in-school sample.
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Table 3. Peer Effects on Student's Short-Term Outcomes
                                                                           Health
                                       Social             Mental            Risk           Academic           PVT
                                     Acceptance           Health          Behavior          Effort           Scores
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)                      (4)              (5)
                                           Conditional on Foreign-Born
% Peers Foreign-Born                      0.038        -0.379*       0.162                    -0.260           0.020
                                         (0.204)          (0.166)           (0.316)          (0.231)          (0.352)
                                               ***                *                 +                **
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                  0.309              0.219            -0.475           0.199           -0.788***
Student Foreign-Born                    (0.086)           (0.091)           (0.260)          (0.075)          (0.224)

R-squared                                 0.040            0.038             0.080            0.034            0.224

                                    Also Conditional on Race and Ethnicity
% Peers Foreign-Born                    0.070        -0.368*       0.175                      -0.215           0.226
                                       (0.199)       (0.164)      (0.310)                    (0.224)          (0.352)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                 0.264**       0.231**      -0.535*                     0.149*         -0.992***
Student Foreign-Born                   (0.087)       (0.080)      (0.209)                    (0.073)          (0.252)

R-squared                                 0.044            0.044             0.091            0.035            0.261

                                          Conditional on All Covariates
% Peers Foreign-Born                      0.077         -0.258        0.212                   -0.238           0.084
                                         (0.194)       (0.168)       (0.289)                 (0.209)          (0.364)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                   0.266**       0.236**       -0.545*                  0.156*         -1.030***
Student Foreign-Born                     (0.091)       (0.087)       (0.220)                 (0.076)          (0.214)

R-squared                                 0.058             0.144             0.120            0.065           0.322
N                                        73,482            78,239            78,546           78,065          14,082
Note. Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting five outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include grade and school fixed effects, as well as a control for foreign-born. The second panel presents
estimates after adding controls for the race and ethnicity variables, and the third panel estimates after adding all controls
listed in Table 2 above. The first four columns based on the wave 1 in-school sample. The final column results for PVT
scores based on the wave 1 in-home sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Table 4. Peer Effects on Student's Long-Term Outcomes
                                                    Health                                              Residential
                               Log      Mental       Risk      PVT                        Years of      Economic
                            Earnings    Health     Behavior Scores                       Schooling        Status
                               (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)                         (5)             (6)
                                     Conditional on Foreign-Born
% Peers Foreign-Born          1.266      0.235      0.028     -0.081                        0.821          -0.321
                                  (1.764)        (0.317)        (0.288)      (0.357)       (0.875)        (0.396)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             0.265          0.116          -0.152      -0.352*      -0.658**         -0.007
  Student Foreign-Born            (0.389)        (0.126)        (0.105)      (0.171)       (0.228)        (0.145)

R-squared                          0.036          0.033          0.061        0.200         0.158          0.285

                                      Also Conditional on Race and Ethnicity
% Peers Foreign-Born               1.326      0.255        0.063     0.078                  1.046          -0.272
                                  (1.771)    (0.310)      (0.287)   (0.350)                (0.893)        (0.370)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             0.283      0.065       -0.216*   -0.389*                -0.676*         -0.028
  Student Foreign-Born            (0.404)    (0.129)      (0.105)   (0.154)                (0.284)        (0.136)

R-squared                          0.038          0.039          0.069        0.233         0.174          0.309

                                             Conditional on All Covariates
% Peers Foreign-Born               1.268         0.214       0.108      0.074               0.492          -0.339
                                  (1.696)       (0.321)     (0.276)    (0.306)             (0.820)        (0.346)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             0.282         0.073      -0.201* -0.444**              -0.724**         -0.033
  Student Foreign-Born            (0.390)       (0.127)     (0.101)    (0.144)             (0.250)        (0.138)

R-squared                           0.078         0.057          0.108        0.269         0.860           0.321
N                                  11,058        11,271         11,193       10,549        11,292          11,214
Note. Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting six outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include grade and school fixed effects, as well as a control for foreign-born. The second panel
presents estimates after adding controls for the race and ethnicity variables, and the third panel estimates after
adding all controls listed in Table 2 above. All columns based on the wave 4 sample, except for the fourth column
results for PVT score that are based on the wave 3 sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Table 5. Mean of Percent School Shared Subgroup
                                     Shared Race and Ethnicity

Student's Race/Ethnicity                         % FB Below Median                    % FB Above Median
                                               Native-Born   Foreign-               Native-Born  Foreign-
                                                              Born                                Born
White                                             0.406       0.474                    0.264      0.313
Black                                             0.299       0.330                    0.130      0.177
Hispanic                                          0.095       0.170                    0.249      0.349
Asian                                             0.045       0.146                    0.148      0.225
American Indian                                   0.012       0.095                    0.004      0.020
Others                                            0.049       0.131                    0.053      0.059

                       Shared Country of Origin for Hispanic and Asian Students

Student's Country of Origin                      % FB Below Median                    % FB Above Median
                                               Native-Born   Foreign-               Native-Born  Foreign-
                                                              Born                                Born
Hispanic-Mexican                                  0.187       0.271                    0.425      0.467
Hispanic-Chicano                                  0.018       0.097                    0.010      0.024
Hispanic-Cuban                                    0.027       0.105                    0.253      0.297
Hispanic-Puerto Rican                             0.058       0.106                    0.063      0.066
Hispanic-Central / South American                 0.063       0.174                    0.222      0.392
Hispanic-Others                                   0.053       0.115                    0.079      0.113
Hispanic-Multiple/Missing                         0.000       0.000                    0.000      0.000
Asian-Chinese                                     0.053       0.093                    0.168      0.159
Asian-Filipino                                    0.039       0.122                    0.331      0.369
Asian-Japanese                                    0.014       0.068                    0.039      0.085
Asian-Asian Indian                                0.035       0.145                    0.040      0.046
Asian-Korean                                      0.057       0.125                    0.189      0.336
Asian-Vietnamese                                  0.118       0.236                    0.087      0.138
Asian-Others                                      0.056       0.167                    0.039      0.078
Asian-Multiple/Missing                            0.000       0.000                    0.000      0.000
Note. This table presents the mean value of the school level fraction of foreign-born students who share the same
race or ethnicity or in the case of Panel Two the same country of origin as the current student. Columns 1 and 3
present the means for native-born students, and columns 2 and 4 present the means for foreign-born students. The
first two columns present means for schools that have a percent of students who are foreign born below the median,
and the last two columns present the means for the school that have an above median percent foreign-born.
Table 6. Role of Percent Foreign Born Same Subgroup on Student's Short-Term Outcomes
                                                           Health
                                  Social      Mental        Risk       Academic     PVT
                               Acceptance     Health      Behavior       Effort    Scores
                                            (1)           (2)                   (3)              (4)             (5)
                                              Baseline Peer Effects
% Peers Foreign-Born                       0.077        -0.258                 0.212           -0.238           0.084
                                          (0.194)           (0.168)           (0.289)          (0.209)         (0.364)
                                                 **                **                 *                *
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                    0.266             0.236             -0.545            0.156         -1.030***
  % School Shared Ethnicity               (0.091)           (0.087)           (0.220)          (0.076)         (0.214)

                      Peer Effects by Percent Shared Race and Ethnicity
% Peers Foreign-Born              0.126        -0.211        0.194                              -0.245          0.148
                                (0.212)       (0.175)       (0.308)                            (0.211)         (0.359)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×           -0.096        -0.083        -0.034                             0.044           -0.139
  % School Shared Ethnicity     (0.169)       (0.106)       (0.141)                            (0.106)         (0.168)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×           0.469*        0.335+      -1.145**                             0.137         -1.960***
  Student Foreign-Born          (0.207)       (0.178)       (0.402)                            (0.216)         (0.422)
                                       +
% Peers Foreign-Born ×          -0.458         -0.254       1.206**                             -0.025          1.279*
  Student Foreign-Born ×        (0.244)       (0.191)       (0.402)                            (0.263)         (0.591)
  % School Shared Ethnicity

           Peer Effects by Percent Shared Country of Origin for Hispanics and Asians
% Peers Foreign-Born               0.023      -0.320+          0.213        -0.304     0.071
                                 (0.195)      (0.170)         (0.307)      (0.212)    (0.375)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×           0.720**       0.601+          -0.734       0.665*     -0.364
  % School Shared Ethnicity      (0.248)      (0.359)         (0.482)      (0.290)    (0.798)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×           0.401***     0.328**        -0.775**      0.237+    -1.220***
  Student Foreign-Born           (0.117)      (0.119)         (0.274)      (0.138)    (0.243)
                                        **           *              **            +
% Peers foreign-born ×           -1.270       -0.986          2.485        -0.807     1.731+
  Student Foreign-Born ×         (0.422)      (0.427)         (0.801)      (0.416)    (1.016)
  % School Shared Ethnicity
N                                 73,482      78,239          78,546       78,065     14,082
Note. Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting five outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include all balancing test controls including race and ethnicity controls, grade and school fixed effects, as well
as a control for foreign-born. The first panel presents the baseline peer effect estimates from Table 3. The second panel
presents estimates that interact the peer effect variables with a measure of the school level fraction of foreign-born students
who share the same race or ethnicity as the current student. Third panel presents similar estimates except that the school
fraction foreign born is based on the fraction sharing the same country of origin for Asians and Hispanics and is set to zero
otherwise. The models estimated for the third panel also include dummies for each country of origin for the Asian and the
Hispanic students. The first four columns based on the wave 1 in-school sample. The final column results for PVT scores
based on the wave 1 in-home sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Appendix. Supplementary Online Material

Figure A1. Proportion of Adolescents' Same-Cohort Peers that Are Foreign-Born, by Foreign-Born and
US-Born Adolescents
Table A2. Mean Values on Individual Measures Used to Construct Study Outcomes
                                                                   US-    Foreign-    t-stat
                                                                  Born      Born
Social Acceptance    Feels close to people at school*             3.547    3.483      -4.565
                     Feels part of school*                        3.537    3.438      -6.497
                     Students at school are prejudiced            2.757    2.865       7.441
                     Happy to be at this school*                  3.539    3.624       5.475
                     Feels socially accepted*                     3.767    3.706      -4.889
Mental Health        Depressed-last month*                        3.794    3.904       7.432
                     Trouble relaxing-last month*                 4.033    4.125       6.629
                     Moody-last month*                            3.536    3.831      19.839
                     Cried a lot-last month*                      4.253    4.235      -1.414
Health Risk Behavior Smoked cigarettes-last 12 months             1.231    0.828     -16.225
                     Drank beer wine liquor-last 12 months        1.242    1.010     -12.488
                     Got drunk-last 12 months                     0.722    0.547     -10.819
                     Raced on bike or car-last 12 months          1.617    1.443      -7.201
                     In danger due to dare-last 12 months         0.861    0.656     -11.433
Academic Effort      Tries to do school work well*                3.235    3.286       6.181
                     Time spent watching tv on school day*        2.694    2.759       4.910
                     Skipped school-last 12 months*               6.375    6.268      -6.982
                     Trouble getting homework done*               3.225    3.049     -10.629
                     Trouble getting along with teacher*          3.797    3.770      -1.718
Mental Health (W4) How often feel isolated*                       2.039    2.126       2.782
                     How often not in control of life*            1.255    1.159      -2.608
                     How often confident to handle prob*          2.745    2.841       2.608
                     How often things go your way*                2.809    2.831       0.631
                     How often overwhelmed w. difficulties*       1.191    1.169      -0.631
                     Bothered by things last week*                2.487    2.472      -0.667
                     Blues last week*                             2.687    2.655      -1.499
                     Fell as good as others last week*            2.230    2.126      -3.492
                     Trouble concentrating last week*             2.197    2.279       3.084
                     Depressed last week*                         2.629    2.650       0.925
                     Tired last week*                             2.130    2.164       1.301
                     Happy last week*                             2.171    2.156      -0.568
                     Enjoyed life last week*                      2.332    2.324      -0.288
                     Sad last week*                               2.439    2.463       1.088
                     Feel disliked last week*                     2.711    2.695      -0.804
                     Feel not respected last week*                2.030    2.158       4.561
Health Risk Behavior Num days smoke last month                    7.857    4.123      -8.824
(W4)
                     Drunk last year                              1.115    0.821     -5.765
                     Days smoked marijuana last month             0.747    0.392     -6.290
                     Has used hard drugs                          0.178    0.125     -4.076
Residential Economic Unemployment rate W4                         0.920    0.927      4.556
Status (W4)
                     Male labor force participation rate W4*      0.718    0.724     1.241
                             Log income per capita W4*                                10.064         10.079          1.122
                             Prop persons in poverty W4*                               0.852          0.863          3.037
                             Prop housing vacant W4*                                   0.890          0.911          7.655
                             Log median house value W4*                               12.054         12.508         19.039
                             Total adult arrests W4*                                 -543.409       -476.815         6.931
                             Total juvenile arrests W4*                              -157.947       -136.187         7.312
Source: Add Health.
Note. * indicates a reverse-coded item. Mean values stratified by students' country of birth. T-statistic on test of difference
between group means shown in right column.
Table A3. Individual Item Loadings from Principle Components
Social Acceptance                   Feels close to people at school*          0.696
                                    Feels part of school*                     0.785
                                    Students at school are prejudiced         0.121
                                    Happy to be at this school*               0.703
                                    Feels socially accepted*                  0.609
Mental Health                       Depressed-last month*                     0.776
                                    Trouble relaxing-last month*              0.669
                                    Moody-last month*                         0.685
                                    Cried a lot-last month*                   0.637
Health Risk Behavior                Smoked cigarettes-last 12 months          0.613
                                    Drank beer wine liquor-last 12 months     0.870
                                    Got drunk-last 12 months                  0.860
                                    Raced on bike or car-last 12 months       0.255
                                    In danger due to dare-last 12 months      0.496
Academic Effort                     Tries to do school work well*             0.263
                                    Time spent watching tv on school day*     0.125
                                    Skipped school-last 12 months*            0.286
                                    Trouble getting homework done*            0.606
                                    Trouble getting along with teacher*       0.585
Mental Health (W4)                  How often feel isolated*                  0.526
                                    How often not in control of life*         -0.777
                                    How often confident to handle prob*       0.777
                                    How often things go your way*             0.769
                                    How often overwhelmed w. difficulties*    -0.769
                                    Bothered by things last week*             0.509
                                    Blues last week*                          0.638
                                    Fell as good as others last week*         0.449
                                    Trouble concentrating last week*          0.458
                                    Depressed last week*                      0.698
                                    Tired last week*                          0.388
                                    Happy last week*                          0.665
                                    Enjoyed life last week*                   0.646
                                    Sad last week*                            0.668
                                    Feel disliked last week*                  0.393
                                    Feel not respected last week*             0.378
Health Risk Behavior (W4)           Num days smoke last month                 0.442
                                    Drunk last year                           0.435
                                    Days smoked marijuana last month          0.525
                                    Has used hard drugs                       0.549
Residential Economic Status (W4) Unemployment rate W4                         0.676
                                    Male labor force participation rate W4*   0.563
                                    Log income per capita W4*                 0.833
                                    Prop persons in poverty W4*               0.816
                                    Prop housing vacant W4*                   0.469
                                    Log median house value W4*                0.628
                                          Total adult arrests W4*      0.003
                                          Total juvenile arrests W4*   -0.091

Note. * indicates a reverse-coded item.
Table A4. Prediction of Retention in Wave 4 of Add Health, Among Respondents
Who Complete the PVT In-Home Tests in Wave 1.

                                                                       Observed in Wave 4
  % Peers Foreign-Born                                                        0.138
                                                                             (0.226)
  % Peers Foreign-Born × Student Foreign-Born                                 0.184
                                                                             (0.105)
  N                                                                          13,940
  R-squared                                                                   0.046
Note: Unstandardized coefficients estimated from Eq. 1, in which the composition of student cohorts in the In-
Home Wave 1 sample of Add Health are used to predict retention in the study by Wave 4. Grade and school
fixed effects, individual and family controls included.
Table A5. Standard Deviation of Percent Peers Foreign-Born
Standard Deviation                        Student Native-Born   Student Foreign-Born
Unconditional                                     0.099                 0.199
Within School                                     0.021                 0.035
N                                                78,164                 8,262
Table A6. Level Estimates of Peer Effects on Student's Outcomes
                             Social      Mental Health Risk Academic                                PVT
                          Acceptance Health        Behavior     Effort                             Scores
                                      (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×               0.077          -0.258           0.212          -0.238         0.084
  Student Native-Born               (0.194)        (0.168)         (0.289)         (0.209)        (0.364)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×               0.343          -0.021          -0.333          -0.082        -0.946*
  Student Foreign-Born              (0.212)        (0.192)         (0.325)         (0.217)        (0.447)

N                                   73,482          78,239         78,546          78,065          14,082

                                                                                                                 Residential
                                      Log          Mental       Health Risk          PVT          Years of       Economic
                                   Earnings        Health        Behavior          Scores        Schooling         Status
                                      (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×               1.268          0.214           0.108           0.074           0.492          -0.339
  Student Native-Born               (1.696)        (0.321)        (0.276)          (0.306)        (0.820)         (0.346)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×               1.550          0.288          -0.092           -0.370         -0.232          -0.372
  Student Foreign-Born              (1.676)        (0.339)        (0.275)          (0.349)        (0.810)         (0.351)

N                                   11,058          11,271         11,193          10,549          11,292          11,214
Notes: Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting six outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include all balancing test controls including race and ethnicity controls, grade and school fixed effects, as well
as a control for foreign-born. The first row presents estimates of the interaction of percent foreign born with whether the
student is a native. The second row presents estimates of the interaction of percent foreign born with whether the student is
foreign-born, capturing the level peer estimate for foreign-born students rather than the difference between foreign and
native-born students.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Balancing Tests Drawing on Oster (2015)

We conduct a more formal analysis of deviations from balance using techniques developed by
Oster (2015). This method represents an extension of the work by Altonji, Elber and Taber
(2005) and is motivated by the idea that there are two key pieces of information necessary to
assess the importance of selection: 1. The sensitivity of the parameter estimates of interest to the
inclusion of additional individual level controls, and 2. The explanatory power of those controls
as captured by changes in the model R-squared when those controls are added. Oster (2014)
develops a test statistic from comparing the model estimates conditional on just the controls
required for identification to an expanded model that adds additional individual controls, in our
case the same controls that we include in our balancing tests. A test statistic above 1 in
magnitude indicates that the selection on unobserved variables has to be stronger than the
selection on observables in order to produce an estimated effect of zero. If the controls move the
coefficient away from zero, then the test statistic will be negative, and in that case concerns
about bias of estimates away from zero only arise if selection on unobserved variables is in the
opposite direction to the selection on observed variables. However, a test statistic greater than -1
can be interpreted in the same manner that the selection on unobserved variables has to be
stronger than the selection on observables and in the opposite direction in order to produce an
estimated effect of zero
       The Oster (2015) test is designed to assess one coefficient at a time. Therefore, we begin
by examining the stability of the coefficient estimates on the cohort composition variable
(percent of foreign-born students in the cohort). We first assess these effects for the full sample,
and then for the subsample of US-born students, which is comparable to the US-born student
estimates later in the study when we also include an interaction of the composition variable with
whether the foreign-born status of individuals. In the second analysis, we estimate a model with
both the control for percent foreign-born in cohort and the interaction of percent foreign-born
with whether student foreign born using the full sample, and then apply the Oster test to the
interaction term.
       The results of this investigation are presented in Table A7. The columns present the
estimates for the full sample using an uncontrolled model presented in the column labelled `UC'
that includes share foreign born in cohort, school fixed effects, grade indicators, the foreign-born
indicator, and the interaction between share foreign born and foreign-born status. The estimates
presented are the coefficient on the interaction using the full sample, and the test statistics are
based on the movements of the interaction coefficient and using a controlled model presented in
column `C' that adds the controls from the balancing tests. Each panel represents a different
student outcome variable. The first row shows the R-squared, the second row shows the
parameter estimate on share foreign born, and the third row shows the test statistic.
       With a few exceptions, the test statistics are above 2.0 and often well above 2.0 implying
that the magnitude of selection on unobserved variables would need to be double or more the
magnitude of selection on observables in order to imply that our estimates are zero. In columns
1 through 4 on the direct effect of share foreign-born, the exceptions are risky behavior and
percent foreign born in wave 4 neighborhood, academic effort and health behavior for the full
sample only, and linguistic isolation and percent foreign-born in wave 4 neighborhood and wave
3 test score for the US-born subsample. In the last two columns that examine the interaction with
foreign born status, the test statistics near or below 2.0 in magnitude are for human capital
investment and the three wave 4 neighborhood variables. However, in every case where the
Oster test statistic is near or below 2.0, the magnitudes of the parameter estimates are quite small
relative to the other parameter estimates presented in the table. Therefore, the only time that the
addition of controls moves the parameter by a substantial share of its value is when that value is
small in magnitude. In practice, the Oster statistics for the central results in the paper range
between 8.51 and 61.22, suggesting that the study results are robust to all but extremely high
levels of selection on unobserved variables.
Table A7. Oster (2015) Test of Interaction Term of % Foreign-Born × Student Foreign-Born
                                                                    C                 UC
Social Acceptance                                  R2             0.058             0.044
                                                                  0.265             0.263
                                                                -124.555
Mental Health                                      R2             0.144             0.044
                                                                  0.236             0.230
                                                                 -98.768
Health Risk Behavior                               R2             0.120             0.091
                                                                  -0.545            -0.534
                                                                 -41.330
Academic Effort                                    R2             0.065             0.035
                                                                  0.156             0.148
                                                                 -31.626
PVT Scores                                         R2             0.322             0.261
                                                                  -1.029            -0.991
                                                                 -17.025
                                                    2
Log Earnings (W4)                                  R              0.078             0.038
                                                                  0.281             0.282
                                                                348.774
Mental Health (W4)                                 R2             0.057             0.039
                                                                  0.073             0.064
                                                                  -8.987
Health Risk Behavior (W4)                          R2             0.108             0.069
                                                                  -0.200            -0.215
                                                                 15.642
                                                    2
PVT Scores (W3)                                    R              0.269             0.233
                                                                  -0.443            -0.389
                                                                  -3.609
Years of Schooling (W4)                            R2             0.286             0.174
                                                                  -0.724            -0.675
                                                                 -19.670
Residential Economic Status (W4)                   R2             0.321             0.309
                                                                  -0.033            -0.028
                                                                  -0.831
Note. Testing robustness of the coefficient on the foreign-born indicator interacted with % foreign-born students in the cohort
under the null of zero effect. All specifications include school fixed effects, indicator for the grade attended, indicator for the
foreign-born status and % foreign-born in the cohort. In addition, C models control for gender, age, mother's college
attainment, father's college attainment, the indicator that either parent works for pay, that either parent is in professional
occupation, and that student lives with both parents, and household size; when this information is missing, the value is
imputed with zero and the indicator variable was included to indicate that the imputation was used. Maximum R2 is set as 1.3
times R2 of the C model. See Oster (2015) for details. W1, W3 and W4 indicate surveys waves I, III and IV respectively.
Table A8. Conditional Correlations between Peer Attributes and Student's Outcomes
                            Social      Mental Health Risk Academic           PVT
                         Acceptance Health         Behavior       Effort     Scores
                                      (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
% Peers Foreign-Born                0.004           0.130*        -0.358*         -0.250+          -0.258
                                   (0.097)         (0.065)        (0.163)         (0.134)         (0.196)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             0.430***        0.283**        -0.638**        0.419***       -0.916***
  Student Foreign-Born             (0.110)         (0.090)        (0.192)         (0.120)         (0.250)

N                                   73,482         78,239          78,546          78,065         14,082

                                                                                                                Residential
                                      Log          Mental      Health Risk          PVT          Years of       Economic
                                   Earnings        Health       Behavior          Scores        Schooling         Status
                                      (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)           (5)              (6)
% Peers Foreign-Born                0.802**         0.035        -0.206+           -0.637         0.327           0.835+
                                    (0.262)        (0.156)       (0.109)          (0.532)        (0.418)         (0.501)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×               0.256         0.450**       -0.346*           -0.106        -0.658+         -0.942*
  Student Foreign-Born              (0.409)        (0.153)       (0.138)          (0.428)        (0.347)         (0.377)

N                                   11,058         11,271          11,193          10,549         11,292           11,214
Notes: Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting six outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include grade fixed effects, as well as a control for foreign-born. School fixed effects are omitted so that the
estimates contain comparisons across schools. The second panel presents estimates after adding controls for the race and
ethnicity variables, and the third panel estimates based on adding all controls listed in Table 2 above. All columns based on
the wave 4 sample, except for the fourth column results for PVT score that are based on the wave 3 sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Table A9. First and Second-Generation Peer Effects on Student's Short-Term Outcomes
                                                          Health
                                 Social       Mental       Risk       Academic      PVT
                              Acceptance      Health     Behavior       Effort    Scores
                                            (1)          (2)        (3)                      (4)              (5)
                                         Conditional on Foreign-born
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen                     -0.093      -0.314*     0.493+                   -0.031           0.224
                                         (0.207)      (0.124)     (0.270)                 (0.209)          (0.437)
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen ×                  0.172**       0.156*    -0.318**                 0.171**          -0.255+
  Student FB or 2nd-Gen                  (0.061)      (0.063)     (0.119)                 (0.051)          (0.142)

                        Also Conditional on Race and Ethnicity
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen          -0.093     -0.289*     0.492+                               -0.027           0.266
                              (0.201)     (0.118)     (0.258)                             (0.193)          (0.362)
                                    **          ***
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen ×       0.138       0.178      -0.393***                            0.166**         -0.388***
  Student FB or 2nd-Gen       (0.050)     (0.051)     (0.084)                             (0.054)          (0.106)

                                         Conditional on all Covariates
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen                      -0.080     -0.224+       0.511*                 -0.042           0.196
                                          (0.195)     (0.117)      (0.251)                (0.179)          (0.370)
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen ×                   0.145**     0.196***    -0.379***               0.169**         -0.440***
  Student FB or 2nd-Gen                   (0.049)     (0.053)      (0.082)                (0.054)          (0.088)

School fixed effects                       Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Grade fixed effects                        Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
N                                         73,482          78,239          78,546           78,065          14,082
Note. Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting five outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include grade and school fixed effects, as well as a control for whether student or at least one parent foreign-
born. The second panel presents estimates after adding controls for the race and ethnicity variables, and the third panel
estimates based on adding all controls listed in Table 2 above. The first four columns based on the wave 1 in-school sample.
The final column results for PVT scores based on the wave 1 in-home sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                          49
Table A10. First and Second-Generation Peer Effects on Student's Long-Term Outcomes
                                                        Health                                                     Residential
                                 Log      Mental         Risk        PVT     Years of                              Economic
                              Earnings    Health      Behavior     Scores   Schooling                                Status
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)                                    (6)
                                     Conditional on Foreign-born
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen           0.204      0.039        0.391+      -0.014    -0.176                                  -0.115
                               (0.978)    (0.244)      (0.222)     (0.366)   (0.631)                                 (0.360)
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen ×         0.280      -0.007      -0.137+       0.401     0.092                                  0.166
  Student FB or 2nd-Gen        (0.332)    (0.096)      (0.079)     (0.360)   (0.198)                                 (0.116)

                                         Also Conditional on Race and Ethnicity
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen                    0.193     0.048        0.382+      -0.032                  -0.141            -0.131
                                        (0.992)   (0.246)       (0.217)    (0.281)                 (0.620)           (0.300)
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen ×                  0.294     -0.080      -0.191**      0.216                   0.098            -0.009
  Student FB or 2nd-Gen                 (0.341)   (0.094)       (0.072)    (0.271)                 (0.202)           (0.116)

                                              Conditional on all Covariates
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen                    0.050      0.006        0.388+               -0.061        -0.517            -0.186
                                        (0.932)   (0.240)        (0.216)             (0.255)       (0.528)           (0.285)
% Peers FB or 2nd-Gen ×                  0.275     -0.071        -0.197*               0.180         0.136            -0.009
  Student FB or 2nd-Gen                 (0.304)   (0.090)        (0.090)             (0.277)       (0.193)           (0.108)

N                                       11,058        11,271          11,193         10,549         11,292           11,214
Note. Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting five outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include grade and school fixed effects, as well as a control for whether student or at least one parent foreign-
born. The second panel presents estimates after adding controls for the race and ethnicity variables, and the third panel
estimates based on adding all controls listed in Table 2 above. All columns based on the wave 4 sample, except for the fourth
column results for PVT scores that are based on the wave 3 sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                         50
Table A11. Role of Percent Foreign Born Same Subgroup on Student's Long-Term Outcomes
                                                       Health                         Residential
                                 Log      Mental        Risk      PVT      Years of   Economic
                               Earnings   Health      Behavior   Scores Schooling       Status
                                                                             (5)
                                 (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)                    (6)
                                        Baseline Peer Effects
% Peers Foreign-Born            1.268      0.214       0.108      0.074     0.492       -0.339
                                        (1.696)        (0.321)         (0.276)        (0.306)        (0.820)           (0.346)
                                                                               *              **             **
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                   0.282          0.073          -0.201         -0.444         -0.724             -0.033
  % School Shared Ethnicity             (0.390)        (0.127)         (0.101)        (0.144)         (0.250)          (0.138)

                            Peer Effects by % Shared Race and Ethnicity
% Peers Foreign-Born            0.346       0.111     0.157       -0.129                              -0.409            0.910
                              (0.331)     (0.322)    (0.291)     (0.299)                             (0.392)           (0.872)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×         -0.163       0.254     -0.130       0.492                              0.107             -0.968
  % School Shared Ethnicity (0.219)       (0.263)    (0.194)     (0.301)                             (0.362)           (0.656)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×          0.087       0.091     -0.243      -0.584                              0.043             -1.174
  Student Foreign-Born        (0.233)     (0.397)    (0.241)     (0.615)                             (0.487)           (0.824)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×         -0.091      -0.023     0.099        0.190                              0.082             0.688
  Student Foreign-Born ×      (0.322)     (0.507)    (0.338)     (0.829)                             (0.562)           (1.012)
  % School Shared Ethnicity

                  Peer Effects by Shared Country of Origin for Hispanics and Asians
% Peers Foreign-Born             1.126     0.122        0.140       -0.102     0.426                                    -0.359
                               (1.547)    (0.333)     (0.286)      (0.281)    (0.751)                                  (0.372)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×          4.080*    1.314**      -0.455        2.400     1.602                                    0.678
  % School Shared Ethnicity (2.024)       (0.500)     (0.445)      (1.519)    (1.127)                                  (0.800)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×          -0.125     0.447      -0.447*       -0.183     0.011                                    0.338
  Student Foreign-Born         (0.974)    (0.282)     (0.203)      (0.290)    (0.552)                                  (0.283)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×           0.209    -1.646*      1.352+       -1.239     -2.510                                   -1.590
  Student Foreign-Born ×       (3.399)    (0.819)     (0.722)      (1.289)    (1.690)                                  (1.145)
  % School Shared Ethnicity
N                              11,058     11,271       11,193      10,549     11,292                                   11,214
Note. Coefficient estimates from regressions predicting six outcome measures. Standard errors in parentheses. All
specifications include all balancing test controls including race and ethnicity controls, grade and school fixed effects, as well
as a control for foreign-born. The first panel presents the baseline peer effect estimates from Table 3. The second panel
presents estimates that interact the peer effect variables with a measure of the school level fraction of foreign-born students
who share the same race or ethnicity as the current student. Third panel presents similar estimates except that the school
fraction foreign born is based on the fraction sharing the same country of origin for Asians and Hispanics and is set to zero
otherwise. The models estimated for the third panel also include dummies for each country of origin for the Asian and the
Hispanic students. The first four columns based on the wave 1 in-school sample. The final column results for PVT scores
based on the wave 1 in-home sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                          51
Table A12. Peer Effects on Foreign-Born Student's Short-Term Outcomes by School Attributes
                                                            Health
                                   Social       Mental       Risk    Academic       PVT
                                 Acceptance     Health     Behavior    Effort      Scores
                                     (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
                         School Percent Foreign-Born Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             -1.591       2.464+       -2.704       0.988      -7.313
  Student Foreign-Born            (1.701)       (1.328)     (2.824)     (2.071)     (5.012)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             1.746        -2.337+       2.441      -0.939       6.430
  Student Foreign-Born ×          (1.706)       (1.330)     (2.827)     (2.071)     (5.021)
  School Level Dummy
                School Percent Non-English Speaking at Home Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born ×            0.975+       1.359***    -2.557***    1.215***    -8.724*
  Student Foreign-Born            (0.519)       (0.311)     (0.479)     (0.268)     (3.774)
                                                       ***         ***         ***
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             -0.823      -1.265       2.294      -1.190        7.867*
  Student Foreign-Born ×          (0.525)       (0.318)     (0.506)     (0.274)     (3.785)
  School Level Dummy
                      School Percent Second Generation Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             -0.230       2.636**      -1.626     1.899**      -2.659
  Student Foreign-Born            (0.939)       (0.903)     (1.425)     (0.581)     (2.704)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             0.354       -2.481**       1.317     -1.808**      1.897
  Student Foreign-Born ×          (0.944)       (0.909)     (1.440)     (0.589)     (2.715)
  School Level Dummy
         At Least One Student Who Completed Survey in Language Other than English
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             0.092         0.366      -1.149*       0.221    -2.469***
  Student Foreign-Born            (0.657)       (0.572)     (0.499)     (0.372)     (0.707)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×             0.087         -0.125       0.767      -0.056      1.728*
  Student Foreign-Born ×          (0.661)       (0.582)     (0.552)     (0.384)     (0.735)
  School Level Dummy
N                                 73,482        78,239       78,546      78,065     14,082
Note. Coefficient estimates for the foreign-born student interactions from regressions predicting five outcome measures.
Standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include balancing test controls, grade and school fixed effects, as well as a
control for foreign-born. The first three panels test whether the foreign-born interaction varies based on whether the school
has a fraction of students above the median who are foreign born, who do not speak English at home or who are second
generation immigrants based on one or more parent not being born in the U.S, respectively. The final panel divides schools
between those where all students completed in the in-home survey in English and schools where at least one student did not
complete the in-home survey in English. The first four columns based on the wave 1 in-school sample. The final column
results for PVT scores based on the wave 1 in-home sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                          52
Table A13. Peer Effects on Native Student's Short-Term Outcomes by School Attributes
                                                           Health
                                   Social      Mental       Risk      Academic       PVT
                                 Acceptance     Health    Behavior     Effort       Scores
                                  (1)           (2)        (3)                               (4)            (5)
                       School Percent Foreign-Born Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born             0.012        -0.151    0.964+                             -0.269        -1.059+
                                (0.381)      (0.355)    (0.503)                           (0.320)        (0.553)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×           0.114        -0.137     -1.028                             0.054         1.704*
  School Level Dummy            (0.482)      (0.398)    (0.627)                           (0.396)        (0.692)

               School Percent Non-English Speaking at Home Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born             -0.210      -0.527*       0.744    -0.416                               -0.913+
                                (0.325)      (0.251)     (0.504)   (0.308)                               (0.542)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×            0.412       0.409       -0.710     0.212                                1.553*
  School Level Dummy            (0.422)      (0.338)     (0.642)   (0.401)                               (0.693)

                     School Percent Second Generation Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born               0.189     -0.179        0.566     0.103                                -0.674
                                 (0.310)    (0.289)      (0.402)   (0.309)                               (0.553)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×            -0.121     -0.141       -0.531    -0.506                               1.213+
  School Level Dummy             (0.397)    (0.347)      (0.556)   (0.394)                               (0.709)

        At Least One Student Who Completed Survey in Language Other than English
% Peers Foreign-Born             -0.016      -0.380       0.671       -0.369      -0.342
                                (0.237)     (0.286)     (0.493)      (0.317)     (0.537)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×            0.217       0.247      -0.771        0.178      0.864
  School Level Dummy            (0.360)     (0.322)     (0.591)      (0.408)     (0.760)

N                                          73,482         78,239          78,546          78,065         14,082
Note. Coefficient estimates for the native-born students from regressions predicting five outcome measures. Standard errors
in parentheses. All specifications include balancing test controls, grade and school fixed effects, as well as a control for
foreign-born. The first three panels test whether the native-born effect varies based on whether the school has a fraction of
students above the median who are foreign born, who do not speak English at home or who are second generation immigrants
based on one or more parent not being born in the U.S, respectively. The final panel divides schools between those where all
students completed in the in-home survey in English and schools where at least one student did not complete the in-home
survey in English. The first four columns based on the wave 1 in-school sample. The final column results for PVT scores
based on the wave 1 in-home sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                        53
Table A14. Peer Effects on Foreign-Born Student's Long-Term Outcomes by School Attributes
                                                        Health                         Residential
                                  Log        Mental      Risk     PVT       Years of    Economic
                                Earnings     Health    Behavior  Scores    Schooling      Status
                                          (1)           (2)       (3)      (4)                           (5)             (6)
                                     School Percent Foreign-Born Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                  -2.152        -0.474     4.009   -2.292                      -11.090+          2.485
  Student Foreign-Born                 (11.679)      (3.417)   (3.560)  (3.746)                       (5.918)         (4.172)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                   2.716         0.629    -4.144    1.958                       10.507+          -2.596
  Student Foreign-Born ×               (11.687)      (3.420)   (3.565)  (3.747)                       (5.927)         (4.177)
  School Level Dummy

                   School Percent Non-English Speaking at Home Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born ×         12.303      -3.143      0.158    -5.161    -5.366                                       0.655
  Student Foreign-Born        (9.826)     (6.135)    (2.802)   (3.121)   (5.898)                                      (3.517)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×        -11.747       3.220     -0.334     4.835     4.596                                       -0.817
  Student Foreign-Born ×      (9.830)     (6.137)    (2.804)   (3.121)   (5.897)                                      (3.519)
  School Level Dummy

                                  School Percent Second Generation Above Median
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                 11.237+       -0.741    2.308       0.728                       -1.440          1.048
  Student Foreign-Born                 (6.736)      (1.482)   (1.436)    (1.193)                      (2.593)         (2.418)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×                 -10.573        0.917   -2.528+     -0.945                        0.854          -1.182
  Student Foreign-Born ×               (6.756)      (1.486)   (1.443)    (1.197)                      (2.602)         (2.423)
  School Level Dummy

            At Least One Student Who Completed Survey in Language Other than English
% Peers Foreign-Born ×         -5.090+    -0.060     -0.081     -1.049      -2.291                                     -0.178
  Student Foreign-Born         (2.792)   (1.442)    (0.827)    (0.638)     (1.653)                                    (0.838)
% Peers Foreign-Born ×         5.355+      0.287     -0.039      0.835       1.439                                     -0.005
  Student Foreign-Born ×       (2.824)   (1.450)    (0.832)    (0.660)     (1.680)                                    (0.860)
  School Level Dummy
N                              11,058    11,271     11,193     10,549      11,292                                     11,214
Note. Coefficient estimates for the foreign-born student interactions from regressions predicting five outcome measures.
Standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include balancing test controls, grade and school fixed effects, as well as a
control for foreign-born. The first three panels test whether the foreign-born interaction varies based on whether the school
has a fraction of students above the median who are foreign born, who do not speak English at home or who are second
generation immigrants based on one or more parent not being born in the U.S, respectively. The final panel divides schools
between those where all students completed in the in-home survey in English and schools where at least one student did not
complete the in-home survey in English. All columns based on the wave 4 sample, except for the fourth column results for
PVT scores that are based on the wave 3 sample.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                          54
Table A15. Characteristics of the US Foreign-born Adolescent Population in 1990, 2000, 2012-2017

                                                           1990                2000              2012-2017
                                                        5% Census           5% Census          5% ACS 5-year
 % adolescents age 12-18 who are foreign-born           7.54% (.26)        8.64% (.28)          7.26% (.26)
  in CA, TX, IL, NY, FL                                14.43% (.35)        14.1% (.35)           10.0% (.3)
  in all other states                                   3.85% (.19)        5.54% (.23)          5.65% (.23)

 Among foreign-born adolescents (age 12-18)
 Mean Age (in years)                                   15.32 (2.01)          15.28 (2)           15.4 (1.99)
 % male                                                52.28% ( .5)         52.91% (.5)          50.5% (.5)
 % Enrolled in school                                  86.63% (.34)        86.89% (.34)         92.74% (.26)
 % Employed                                            30.61% (.46)        30.61% (.46)          19.3% (.39)
 Mean number of family members in household             5.05 (2.28)         4.99 (2.25)          4.49 (1.94)
 Mean education of head of household (years)            10.6 (5.3)         10.69 (5.28)         12.26 (4.61)

            Top 10 countries of origin:
                                                  1       Mexico              Mexico               Mexico
                                                  2      Vietnam             Germany                China
                                                  3     Puerto Rico         Puerto Rico          Puerto Rico
                                                  4     Philippines         Philippines          Philippines
                                                  5        Korea               Korea                 DR
                                                  6     El Salvador          Vietnam                India
                                                  7      Germany                DR               El Salvador
                                                  8       Canada            El Salvador          Guatemala
                                                  9        Laos                India                Korea
                                                 10      Jamaica              Canada              Germany
Source: PUMS USA.
Note: Mean values with standard deviations in parentheses. Mean education in years calculated by assigning midpoint values
of years of schooling to education ranges for less than high school. Higher education programs reported in degrees
completed; years assigned as associate degree=14 years, bachelor degree=16, master degree=18, professional degree=19
years, PhD=20 years.




                                                       55
