                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     USING NETWORK METHOD TO MEASURE FINANCIAL INTERCONNECTION

                                           Ying Xu
                                        Jennifer Corbett

                                      Working Paper 26499
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26499


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




The authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable help of Brett Cuthbertson and Patrick
Drake-Brockman for helping us understand network methods. We also acknowledge financial
support from Centre for International Finance and Regulation (CIFR), Australia and College of
Asia and the Pacific (New Research Direction Grant), the Australian National University (ANU).
We are grateful to discussants and participants for their helpful comments at the 28th NBER-
TCER-CEPR Conference on Financial System, the 2nd CIFR symposium in Sydney, the 12th
Western Economic Association International Conference in Singapore, INFINITI Conference on
International Finance 2016 Asia-Pacific, the 27th Chinese Economics Society Australia
conference in Wollongong, economics seminar series at the ANU, University of Tasmania,
University of Wollongong, the Political Economy of Financial Markets Seminar at the Oxford
University and the Financial Inclusion and Development Conference at University South
Australia. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ying Xu and Jennifer Corbett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Using Network Method to Measure Financial Interconnection
Ying Xu and Jennifer Corbett
NBER Working Paper No. 26499
November 2019
JEL No. F21,F36,G01

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses a new approach to measuring financial openness, highlighting interconnectedness
in a network of financial flows. Applying an adapted version of eigenvector centrality, often used
in network analysis, the new measure captures multidimensional and high-degree financial
relations among countries. It provides a nuanced picture of financial integration and
interconnectedness in the global and regional financial networks. The United Kingdom and the
United States remain the `core' in the global banking network, with all other countries scattered
in the `periphery'. The application of the new measure of financial integration to the empirical
analysis reveals the nonlinear relationship between financial integration and output volatility.


Ying Xu
Crawford School of Public Policy
Australian National University
132 Lennox Crossing
ACT 0200
AUSTRALIA
ying.xu@alumni.anu.edu.au

Jennifer Corbett
Crawford School of Public Policy
Australian National University
132 Lennox Crossing
Canberra, ACT 0200
Australia
jenny.corbett@anu.edu.au
1. Introduction
The network approach has been employed in a number of disciplines, ranging from computer science,
social network, and infrastructure, to ecology and epidemiology, but only recently in economics and
finance. The literature on financial networks can be roughly divided into two strands. The first strand
was pioneered by a group of modellers who used simulation techniques to model shock transmission
in a financial network (Allen and Gale 2000; Gai, Haldane and Kapadia 2010; Francisco, Brauning
and van Lelyveld 2015; Elliott, Golub and Jackson 2014). These studies share a focus on identifying
particular network structures that are prone to shock transmission and amplification in the network.


A different approach to harnessing the richness of network methods is taken by studies exploring key
facts about networks that emerge from actual data. Two distinctive approaches are observed. The first
approach often uses graphs of financial networks to visualize the increased financial
interconnectedness and how an individual country is connected to other countries in the network.
Often a set of standard network statistics (e.g. in-degree, out-degree, closeness, and clustering;
further described below) are calculated to identify financial/banking centres (von Peter 2007),
financial clusters where countries form more of a closed system (IMF 2010 and 2011; Garratt et al.
2011), and the structure of financial networks (Bech and Atalay 2008; Kubelec and Sa 2012).


Financial interconnectedness is assumed to be related to financial stability, and systemic risks have
emerged to be a key stability concern after the 2007-8 global financial crisis (Haldane 2009; Yellen
2013). The second approach in this empirical strand of literature applies network methods to generate
measures of connectedness and systemic risks for financial institutions. Diebold and Yilmaz (2014)
identify a suite of network metrics that can be readily used to measure connectedness of financial
firms and show they are intimately related to systemic risk measures commonly used in the finance
literature. Following this line of research, Dungey, Luciani and Veredas (2014) measure system risks
via interconnectedness of the banking, insurance and real economy firms in the United States for 500
firms. Their systemic risk index, SIFIRank, is derived using a network algorithm, the PageRank
algorithm, from an undirected, weighted network of risk-interconnected financial and real firms where
the links in the network are stock volatilities and correlations of volatilities provide weights. Their
results show banking firms are consistently systemically risky in the economy and insurance firms
also display substantial systemic risks. Similarly, the DebtRank measure developed by Battiston, et al
(Battiston 2012b) is designed to measure systemic importance of individual financial institutions
employing data on US FED's external claims for a short period during the GFC (it has been applied to
other markets and data but always at the individual institutional level).


Our paper adapts the PageRank algorithm to the global banking network to create a measure of
"financial interconnectedness" among countries. There are three important differences in our

                                                     2
approach from the above studies. First, we modify the PageRank algorithm in a way that best
addresses our data structure as detailed in the methodology section. Second, our measure of
interconnectedness is at the country level, obtained from a network of financially-connected countries,
while Diebold and Yilmaz (2014), Battiston, et al. (2012b) and Dungey, Luciani and Veredas (2014)
use firm-level measures. Third, the directed network in our study is linked by aggregates of banks'
foreign claims from one country on another (i.e. banks loans to or from a country), rather than using
price data (stock price volatilities are used by Dungey et al) for the links as in these firm-level
network studies.


This study therefore shares some features with both the literature on country-level networks and that
on institution level ones. The aim of the paper is to establish a richer measure of country-level
financial interconnectedness and to bring the insights from studies of networks between financial
institutions to bear on the understanding of a network between countries. We then apply the index of
financial interconnection or, more precisely, the probability of being connected (taking a probabilistic
interpretation of the index), to an empirical analysis of the relationship between financial
interconnection and output volatility.


The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the recent trend of the network
approach used in analysing financial interconnectedness. Section 3 presents some standard network
statistics to establish the stylized facts for the global banking network based on our data and then
compares these with other studies and the emerging consensus on features of "the" global financial
system. Sections 4 and 5 detail our methodology and data, with selected empirical findings presented
in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.


2. The global banking network: stylised network facts


The concept of networks is helpful for characterising interdependent interactions, where the
interaction between components A and B influences the interaction between components B and C
(Rosvall and Axelsson 2009). This is a hallmark of the modern day global financial system, where
increased and complex cross-holding of debt and liabilities make financial institutions closely linked
to one another (Allen and Babus 2009).


We treat the global financial system as a network consisting of  countries that are linked together by
 financial links, with strength of links measured by the size of banks' foreign claims on each
country 2. Our data are described in more detail below in Section 6 but in outline, this global banking


2
    A simple network is graphed in Figure B1.

                                                     3
network is constructed by using banks' foreign claims as links connecting 217 countries in the world.
Foreign claims data are compiled from the BIS locational banking statistics in the period (1983-
2016) based on the data from "reporting" countries. There were 24 reporting countries at the
beginning of our period and 47 by the end.


Table A1a and A1b in Appendix A show the standard measures of network connection for BIS
reporting countries in the global banking network. Table A1a lists the 24 countries that report foreign
claims data through the whole period (1983-2016) and Table A1b lists the top 25 countries in terms of
total inflow of foreign claims in 2016. In each table, we report means of individual metrics over two
subperiods ­ the pre-2000 (1983-1999) and the post-2000 (2000-2016) periods.


In and out-degrees are the simplest measures of connections that one country has in a financial
network. The former measures the total number of links that point in to the country (i.e. bank claims
on that country by any other country) and the latter the total number of links departing from the
country (i.e. bank claims by that country on any other), and a directed link is established if nonzero
foreign claims are recorded between the country and other countries in either direction 3. By the end
of the period there are in total 47 countries that report their own foreign claims data to the BIS, so the
maximum number of in-bound links, or in-degree, for each country each year is 47. For the individual
24 countries that reported data for the whole period (Table A1a), all show roughly the same average
in-degree in each of the two periods and almost all nearly doubled in the second period, reflecting
increased financial connections across the board. Since we are limited by the number of reporting
countries, the in-degree measures underestimate the actual span of financial interconnections. The
out-degree values provide a more complete picture of outward links because we have data on all the
destinations of lending by the reporting countries. Out-degree values also increased over the two
periods but show a diverse range of values among countries. United Kingdom, France, Switzerland,
on the one end, extend bank credits to as many as 180 countries, while, on the other end, the majority
of countries extend no bank credit overseas. Together with other European countries, including
Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Denmark, Ireland and Sweden, they are lenders to more other
countries than any other member of the network. These countries extend bank credit to the largest
geographical coverage, seen by their high values of out-degree, on average, more than 100.

While in/out-degrees measure the span of financial interconnection, in/out-strength measure the
scale of the interconnection as they account for the volume of in and out flows. In addition, as the
key advantage of the BIS location banking statistics is its volume coverage (around 90 percent of
cross-border lending of all banks around the world since the early 1980s, the in/out-strength
measures are more reliable measures of financial connections compared to those of in/out degrees.

3
    See formal definitions in Table 3 in Appendix A.

                                                       4
Among the 24 countries, Table A1a shows that the volumes of inflows to the United Kingdom and the
United States top the list, indicating that a large part (1/4 of the total to 24 countries) of bank credit
flowed to these two economies in the pre- 2000 period and the share increased to 1/3 in the post-2000
period. While the United Kingdom is the largest exporter of bank credit to the rest of the world in
both periods, Japan comes second, ahead of the United States, in the first period whereas the United
States rises to second place in the second period. Other European countries are among the top lenders,
including German and France. As a group, the top 5 account for about 2/3 of the total outflows of the
24 BIS reporting countries.


Although Table A1b includes new reporting countries it does not seem to change the big picture that
the 24 countries depict, except for two noteworthy points: (1) three new reporting economies -
Taiwan, Korea (not listed in the Table as they are not in the top 25 by instrengh), and Australia - show
out-degree averages more than 100 in the recent period, reflecting their outreaching international
banking networks and (2) while these economies also record the highest level of out-strength among
the new reporting countries, China's in-strength increases nearly 20 times and tops the in strength
rank, reflecting the huge amount of capital inflows intermediated by banks post its WTO accession.


Closeness and betweenness are measures of distance between one country and all the other countries
in the network. Closeness captures the number of links one country has to traverse to connect to any
other country in the network, with higher closeness showing a smaller number of links needed to
reach any other node. Betweeness captures the number of shortest paths linking one country to all
other countries: higher betweenness indicates a greater number of shortest paths linking that country
to all other countries. 4 As these two measures are based on links and do not account for volumes, they
are limited by missing data/links. Given the data available, Tables A1a and A1b show that the United
Kingdom, France and Switzerland are ranked top on closeness and betweeness, highlighting their
intermediation roles in the global banking network due to their direct links to many countries in the
world. These findings bear a strong resemblance to those of Von Peter (2007) and Kubelec and Sa
(2012) 5.


In addition to measures for individual components in a network, summary statistics for the whole
network are often used to reveal the shape or pattern of network connectedness. For some types of
networks these differences may have important network-wide stability implications. Skewness and
kurtosis are two such statistics, both measuring the asymmetry of the distribution of links. A positive
skewness value and a large kurtosis value indicate that many nodes in the network are connected with

4
 Refer to formal definitions in Table 3 in Appendix A.
5
 In addition to BIS data, Kubelec and Sa (2012) also incorporate IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey
(CPIS) data.

                                                      5
a small number of links and few nodes with a large number of links 6, characteristics of so-called
`long-tailed' or `scale-free' networks (Albert, Jeong, and Barabasi 2000). Such networks are usually
regarded as more robust to random shocks but vulnerable to targeted attacks (Kubelec and Sa 2012).


Another informative measure is average path length which measures the shortest distance between all
pairs of nodes in the network. This can be used to calculate clustering coefficients that measure the
degree to which nodes in a network tend to cluster together. A homogenous network (i.e. each node
has approximately the same number of links, the antithesis to `scale-free networks 7) with a small
average path length and a large clustering coefficient are characteristics of `small world' networks
(Watts and Strogatz 1998). Kubelec and Sa (2012) contend that `small world' networks contain a high
risk of shock contagion due to a high-degree of interconnectivity among the nodes. The formal
definitions of the network measures are given in Table A2 in Appendix A.


                Figure 1 Summary statistics of the global banking network, 1983-2016

                                           Skewness and Kurtosis,
                             total in-and out-degrees as measure of connection
                4.5                                                                    18
                  4                                                                    16
                3.5                                                                    14
                  3                                                                    12
                2.5                                                                    10
                  2                                                                    8
                1.5                                                                    6
                  1                                                                    4
                0.5                                                                    2
                  0                                                                    0
                      1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013 2016
                                       Skewness (LHS)          Kurtosis (RHS)




6
 A normal distribution has skewness equal to 0 and kurtosis equal to 3.
7
 A scale-free network has nodes with high degrees of connection and nodes with lower degrees. Such
networks are marked by hubs of connections rather than an even distribution of connections.

                                                        6
                Figure 2 Summary statistics of the global banking network, 1983-2016




Figures 1 and 2 provide an overview of the summary statistics of our global banking network.
Although outward links of a large number of small countries are missing in the data, the major
countries' interconnections are available and complete in the global banking network over the period.
The data are skewed and skewness seems to have increased between the late 1980s and 2000 and
then declined substantially. The skewness is positive implying that in the early period there are
many countries with low connections and few with high connections. That pattern gets more
pronounced initially but then reverses so that more countries have higher connections. There is still
a tail of highly connected countries but the tail is shorter in the later data. The network seems to
become less long-tailed and more connected. The global banking network also shows high kurtosis,
with some countries having a large number of cross-border linkages, whereas the majority have only
a few connections, giving rise to `peakedness'. Both measures indicate that initially a small number
of countries dominate the lending network in terms of linkages, but later more countries are moving
towards the average. Both skewness and kurtosis indicators exhibit the shape of a long tail forming
up to 2000 but then the network becoming more evenly balanced quite quickly after that. In addition,
an overall fall of the average path length, and a steady increase of the clustering coefficient, suggest
that the global banking network is gradually resembling a `small world' network of closely connected
participants rather than a long tail structure. This is a somewhat surprising picture in view of the
common understanding that one effect of financial turmoil in the early 2000s, culminating in the
global financial crisis, was the withdrawal of bank credit and a reduction of global financial
engagement by some countries. We believe that the standard data, replicated here and frequently
used to describe the structure of the international banking network, is flawed in a way that gives a
misleading picture. As more countries are added to the BIS data the number of connections jumps,
creating the impression of an increase in the connectedness of the network when what has actually
happened is an expansion of the countries included in the network.




                                                    7
Several other studies have mapped networks in this way using in and out degrees to compute
skewness, kurtosis and clustering. Table A3 in Appendix A provides an overview of the major
studies. The emerging consensus view from analysis that mostly pre-dated the GFC was that the
financial network was becoming more interconnected, although it did have a tail of countries with
below average connections. For instance, Kubelec and Sa (2012) constructed a country-level dataset
on the stocks of bilateral external assets for 18 countries in the period from 1980 to 2005 and
combined this with a variety of other data. Their key finding was that the international financial
network over the period exhibited a `long-tail' structure but they were also concerned about the
growing appearance of the small world, more concentrated structure that is more vulnerable to shocks.
We argue below that a more realistic picture of the structure of the global network is provided by our
Financial Interconnectedness index which is not subject to the data spikes introduced by new
countries being included and shows a different pattern over time.


3. Methodology: construction of a new measure of financial interconnectedness
Going beyond the standard network metrics to bring out more deeply the interconnection among
countries, we establish a new measure of financial interconnectedness for countries. Our measure of
financial interconnectedness is an adjusted version of an eigenvector centrality measure used in
network analysis and essentially an adapted version of the PageRank algorithm 8. The PageRank
algorithm was first introduced by Brin and Page (1998) to enable Google Search to rank the
importance of websites and present the ranking in their search engine results. The underlying
assumption is that more important websites are likely to receive more links from other websites.
"Importance" is essentially a level of connectedness. In our context, we use the PageRank algorithm
to search for the most connected countries in the financial network, accounting for connectedness of
counterparties and therefore the indirect connections.


Our choice of the PageRank algorithm results from scrutinizing a set of related connection measures
available in network analysis (Table 1 below). Among them, in/out-degree measures the number of
(in and out) direct financial ties with other countries, whilst in/out-strength accounts for the weight
(value) of those direct connections. We aim to capture both direct and indirect connections so
eigenvector centrality, Katz-Bonacich centrality measures, and PageRank form a group of possible
options. They adopt a similar recursive methodology to integrate multi-layered connections into a
single measure. However, the eigenvector centrality measure fails to address the `dangling nodes'
issue that commonly features in financial and banking data. Both the Katz-Bonacich algorithm and the
PageRank algorithm tackle the issue but in different ways. The former involves inclusion of two


8
 Eigenvector centrality or prestige often applies to undirected networks. Page Rank is a variant of the
eigenvector centrality measure that handles well-directed networks.

                                                       8
parameters the selection of which is somewhat ad hoc9. The PageRank algorithm addresses the issue
by forcing links with equal weight to connect the dangling nodes. It is a simple and robust algorithm
adopted by other papers such as Diebold and Yilmaz (2014) and Dungey, Luciani and Veredas (2014)
to measure financial connectedness and systemic importance of financial firms.


Table 1 Comparison of centrality measures
                               Direct              Indirect         Weight on            Dangling
                            connections         connections         connections            nodes
    In/out-degree                Yes
    In/out-strength              Yes                                      Yes
    Eigenvectorcentrality        Yes                    Yes              Yes
    PageRank                     Yes                    Yes              Yes                 Yes


The financial interconnectedness index of any country  at year ,  , is calculated as the weighted
sum of the interconnectedness of all other countries  ( = 1. . ),  , that link to it through bank
claims  .
                                                
                                                  
                                           =          ,                                                (1)
                                                   
                                                  
                                               =1 =1



Equation 1 reflects two key principles associated with the index. First, the interconnectedness of a
country  depends on the interconnectedness of the ones ( = 1,2, ... ) that it links to. By adding
individual connectedness  of all countries that country  is connected to, this index goes beyond the
bilateral connections between  and  to include higher-degree (indirect) connections in the network
brought out by  . Second, each connection transfers portions of its connectedness to the one that it
connects to, with the size of portions depending on the strength of individual links. We define strength
as weight or share of bank claims from  to  ,  , in country 's total cross-border bank claims at year
. If there is stronger connection measured by greater weight of the claims to country  in country 's
total claims, then a higher portion of s connectedness is transferred to country  through the link .
Equation (1) generates a recursive system of interconnectedness indexes that can be written in matrix
form10,
                                                =   ,                                                  (2)




9
     =   +  ,  and  are exogenously given.
10
     is omitted to save space.

                                                    9
where  is a ( × 1) vector of interconnectedness indexes for all countries in the network at time . 
is a square matrix,
                                              11              1
                                            =                  ,
                                              1               
                                                           
and it consists of weights for individual links,  =   . By construction,  is a column stochastic
                                                           =1 

                  
matrix 11, =1 
               
                       = 1. For such a matrix, Perron-Frobenius theorem ensures the existence of a
                 =1 

steady-state vector   that satisfies Equation (2) 12.


3.1 Addressing incomplete data: The dangling nodes issue
The matrix  can be used to generate interconnectedness indexes for countries in strongly connected
networks 13. However, in our case the structure of the network fails to meet the strong connection
criteria and this creates a major difficulty:the problem of "dangling nodes" or nodes that have no
outgoing links and where data on outward links is missing for non-reporting countries 14. The dangling
node problem is a classical technical issue in the PageRank literature. For the dangling nodes, the
column sums are less than 1 and equal to zero because each entry in this column is zero, so the matrix
A is no longer a stochastic matrix and applying the algorithm to the matrix results in convergence to
zero (Figure B2 in Appendix B).


To overcome the difficulty, we follow the PageRank solution to normalize the all-zero columns by
replacing all entries in the columns with 1/( - 1), except itself being zero 15(Brin and Page 1998).
The new square matrix  has elements
                                             ,                  0
                                          =  1                                                            (3)
                                                 ,             = 0
                                             - 1


where  denotes the column sum of the column . Because a dangling node contains no outgoing
links, the column representing it has its column entries all equal to zero with a sum  = 0. The
matrix  replaces zeros with 1/( - 1) so that the column sums become 1. For columns that




11
   A column stochastic matrix is defined as a square matrix with the sum of elements in each column equals 1.
12
   The theorem is attributed to Oskar Perron (1907) and Georg Frobenius (1912).
13
   A network is strongly connected if starting at any node one can reach any other different node by walking on
its links. Mathematically, there is a positive integer  such that the matrix  =  +  + 2 +  +  > 0,
where  is an identity matrix used to account for linking to itself.
14
   The data issue is discussed in the next section.
15
   Brin and Page (1998) use 1/ so equal weight is given to all the countries in the network including the
country itself. We use 1/( - 1) to exclude the country itself to be consistent with the definition  = 0.

                                                      10
represent normal nodes (countries), where   0, the configuration of  is same as the matrix . A
detailed description on the dangling node problem and its solution is in the Appendix B.


The implication of this modification is that all countries receive the same level of connection from the
dangling node rather than none. This modification `forces' countries without outward links to link
with all the other countries with equal weight and passes equal connectedness to all the other
countries. Accordingly, the created links have little effect on the relative ranking of all the other
countries. Given the key information from the index is the relative ranking (level of
interconnectedness relative to the others in the network) instead of actual values, the method
addresses the dangling node issue and provides consistent rankings for countries with complete data 16.


3.2 The probabilistic point of view of the index
We may also consider the financial interconnectedness index from a probabilistic point of view. The
financial interconnectedness index provides the probability of a country being connected to all the
other countries in the network directly or indirectly.


Initially, all countries in the network have equal chances to be chosen as a lending destination. If it is
chosen, a connection is established. The probability of each country to be chosen as a starting point is
1/,
                                                    1/
                                                  =  ... 
                                                    1/


The matrix  then maps the probabilities of connections among countries in the network through the
existing structure of cross-border lending, because entries in ,  , are shares of bank claims from
country  to  . A larger share indicates a bigger chance of  lending to  and therefore a higher
probability of being connected to  ; 0 indicates no chance. Hence, the probability of  being connected
to  through direct connections or first-degree connections is  .


                           11          1 1/     1/(11 +  + 1 )
                         =               ... =        ...      
                           1             1/     1/(1 +  +  )




16
  For countries with missing data, because they are treated as no-links, the rankings would be different from
the actual rankings if data were available. Given the countries with missing data are not major lending
countries, the deviation is understandably small. Detailed discussion is found in the data section.


                                                      11
The probability of second-degree connections or indirect connection via one country in-between is
2  because 2 maps all the paths involving two steps and the possibility for each step. Accordingly,
the probability of -degree connections accounting for indirect connections through  countries is
 . Given that matrix  is column stochastic, the iteration converges to a unique stationary
probability distribution vector   and the   entry in   is the probability or the overall likelihood of
country  being connected of any degree.



                                                        
                                                    1
                                                   
                                                  =  ... 
                                                        
                                                    




This power iteration process is essentially the process to derive the steady state solution to the
recursive system (Eq.2). At every iteration, the vector  is multiplied by the matrix . In the end, the
sequence of  converges to a non-zero steady state eigenvector   associated with the eigenvalue of 1
such that Eq. (2) holds 17. The entries in   are the interconnectedness indexes for all countries, which
are essentially the probabilities of countries being connected of any degree to all the other countries in
the network at a specific point in time.


One note of caution is in order. As indexes are network-dependent and networks are formed at each
period, cross-period comparison of indexes are not sensible. At each time , countries under
observation form a network, in which the method constructs an index for each country. As networks
evolve over time with new entries and exits, the indexes built upon different networks are not
comparable across time. For instance, a lift in the index for UK from 0.5 in 2000 to 0.6 in 2008 may
not be entirely due to an increase in its financial interconnection (a weighted sum of connection with
all the other countries) but could be the fact that several countries previously in the network dropped
out during the GFC.


Nevertheless, the probabilistic view of the index addresses this limitation and becomes valuable for
the application of the index in empirical analysis. From the probabilistic view, the index also
measures the overall probability or chances of a country being connected at each period. For the
above example, notwithstanding change of composition in the network, the chance of UK's being
either directly or indirectly connected indeed increased from 2000 to 2008.


17
   The open source software `igraph' (Csardi and Nepusz 2006) in the R package is used to conduct the power
iteration. An example of a small network of four countries and the iteration process are shown in the Appendix
B.

                                                      12
4. The data set: international banking data
We use international banking statistics to measure a key channel of financial integration ­ bank-
channelled financial integration. Financial accounts in the Balance of Payments imply that financial
integration may result from three types of financial flows among countries -- portfolio flows, foreign
direct investment, and other flows which consist mostly of bank-channelled financial flows. In theory,
we can construct an index based on all three types of flows but data availability on counterparties of
financial transactions explains our focus on integration via the flow of bank funds. Furthermore,
different flows are driven by different forces, so a focus on one type of flow that accounts for a
significant portion of the total flows seems a reasonable choice.


International banking statistics compiled by Bank of International Settlement (BIS) provide the widest
coverage of banks' international activities with country-level locational information. The series on
foreign claims in the set of international locational banking statistics captures for each BIS reporting
country its banks' total on-balance sheet financial claims (assets) against other countries 18. The
compilation of this set of statistics is consistent with the principles of the balance of payments but
different in that it measures amounts outstanding, changes in which are an approximation of flows
recorded in the balance of payments. Compared with the consolidated banking statistics that BIS also
publishes, which include the claims of banks' foreign affiliates, country claims on a residential basis
(locational) are more suitable for constructing a measure of financial integration among countries.
We compile our dataset using the annual, end-of-year stock of international locational claims for all
BIS reporting countries on 217 countries for the period (1983-2016). The claims consist of all
instruments issued by banks from reporting countries to all sectors of the economy of counterparty
countries 19.


The starting year of the period of analysis is 1983. The BIS notes that their international banking
statistics are recorded systematically and consistently from 1983 in which year the cross-border
claims covered by the dataset as a share of the estimated cross-border claims of all banks worldwide
reached more than 80 per cent. This share further increased to 93% in 2016. The three decades cover
remarkable changes in the world's financial landscape; an `up' period, when cross-border financial



18
   Banks refer to BIS reporting institutions including commercial banks, savings banks, credit unions or
cooperative credit banks, and other financial credit institutions. Claims include deposits and balances placed
with banks, loans and advances, trade-related credits, holdings of securities (certificates of deposit, promissory
notes, collateralised debt obligations and asset-backed securities), loan or other claim positions funded with
claims under sale and repurchase agreements; and participations including equity holdings in non-bank
subsidiaries.
19
   Refer to Table A4 in Appendix A for the BIS reporting countries and Chart 1 for the first year when data are
available for each country.

                                                       13
linkages intensified driven by financial liberalization policies in emerging economies and financial
innovation in the developed world, and `down' periods, when the global financial integration process
was broadly interrupted during the 1997-98 Asian Financial Crisis and the 2008-09 global financial
crisis (Appendix Graph 1).


The BIS data have the advantage of being inclusive of banks' international activities. Although a
restricted number of reporting countries, mostly OECD countries in the 1980s and 1990s, are initially
covered, the list expands over time to include emerging economies, so that by 2016 the total number
of reporting countries as source countries reaches 47. For network analysis, the implication is that
only the reporting countries have complete in-bound and out-bound links while the non-reporting
countries have only in-bound links. Nevertheless, this is not likely to pose a significant issue since
the BIS reporting countries make up the majority of active players in the global financial market,
accounting for, around 90 per cent of the cross-border bank claims of all banks around the world.
More importantly, our method addresses 'the missing link' issue as explained in the above section.


5. The Financial interconnectedness indexes


We calculate and report our financial interconnectedness (FI) indexes for individual countries in the
global network including all countries (data available on request) for the period 1983-2016. The
financial interconnection is captured through cross-border bank transactions among countries. For a
given network in a particular year, the indexes add up to 1 by construction and reflect countries'
average likelihood of being connected to any other countries directly or indirectly in the network in
that year. Figure 3 shows the interconnectedness indexes for the top 10 countries in the global
banking network. The most financially interconnected countries in the world are the United Kingdom
and the United States. They possess the highest probability or likelihood to be financially connected
of any degree to the rest of the world.


.




                                                   14
Figure 3 Financial Interconnectedness in the global banking network, top 10


  0.05

  0.04

  0.03

  0.02

  0.01

     0
         1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015

                United Kingdom                 United States                  Cayman Islands                 France
                Germany                        Japan                          Netherlands                    Luxembourg
                China                          Switzerland


Note: Cayman Islands ranks high in financial interconnectedness index because it is a tax haven. We believe it should be
included in descriptive statistics because its role is significant, but given its small size and unusual function in the network
it is excluded from the empirical analysis in the section below.



Furthermore, the structure reflected in the ranking remains largely unchanged over the whole
observation period and the countries in the core remain the same (Figure 3). Over the period, the
indexes for the top 5 show ups and downs. They rise in the early 2000s depicting a golden age of
financial integration until a dip in 2007. Over the next two years, the United Kingdom and the United
States show substantially looser (reduced) financial links to the rest of the world. After 2011 another
reduction is observed in both countries and may reflect the serious concern over the European
Sovereign Debt crisis. Despite brief disturbances, these top runners remain the most integrated with
the global financial market and are still the `core' of the system.




                                                               15
           Figure 4 Skewness and kurtosis of the network: FI versus in-and out-degrees
    a. Skewness and kurtosis of the network with node connection measured by the FI index

                                        Skewness and kurtosis,
             8                     FI as the measure of connection                         70
             7                                                                             60
             6                                                                             50
             5
                                                                                           40
             4
                                                                                           30
             3
             2                                                                             20

             1                                                                             10
             0                                                                             0
                 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015

                                       Skewness (LHS)          Kurtosis (RHS)


    b. Skewness and kurtosis of the network with node connection measured by in-and out-degrees


                                        Skewness and Kurtosis,
              4.5         total in-and out-degrees as measure of connection               18
                 4                                                                        16
              3.5                                                                         14
                 3                                                                        12
              2.5                                                                         10
                 2                                                                        8
              1.5                                                                         6
                 1                                                                        4
              0.5                                                                         2
                 0                                                                        0
                     1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013 2016

                                       Skewness (LHS)          Kurtosis (RHS)




As noted earlier, the existing literature focuses on a standard set of network statistics (Hattori and
Suda 2007; Von Peter 2007; Kubelec and Sa 2012). Measured by the same set of conventional
network statistics, the global banking network depicts a similar picture as in the literature (reproduced
from Figure 1 as Fig 4b): the global banking network is a network with a considerable but declining
skewness and kurtosis, a falling average path length, and a rising clustering coefficient. In other
words, more countries are becoming more tightly connected through banking transactions and the
differences in degree of connection between countries are reducing.


We noted earlier that this picture is heavily affected by changing data availability and the use of
simple in- and out- degree measures to calculate network characteristics like skewness and kurtosis.
One of the strong advantages of our financial interconnectedness index is that it is not affected by the
addition of new nodes in the network at different points in time. It gives a more reliable picture of the

                                                    16
extent to which countries are connected with the network as it is constituted at each point in time.
Calculating skewness and kurtosis of the network from these data gives a different picture of network
structure. Figure 4a, using our measure, is quite different from Figure 4b. Now we have a network
with much higher and steadily rising skewness and kurtosis from 1990 to 2006. As the GFC hit the
system, the rise in skewness and kurtosis is halted. The network now appears to have increasing
divergence in connectedness over the 15 years of rapid growth in international financial transactions
right up to the Global Financial Crisis, with the majority of countries in a cluster with lower
connectedness and the long tail of highly connected countries becoming increasingly strung out.
After the GFC the growth in skewness stopped but there is now none of the decline in skewness that
the conventional measures show from the early 2000s. In fact, our measure shows a network with an
intensifying hub structure over most of the period rather than one with an evening out of connections.
Our data are consistent with a `scale-free' network structure, where a number of hubs have above
average connections, rather than a randomly-distributed network where most hubs having roughly
equal connections. That accords with intuition and common observation of the global financial
network. The in- and out-degree based measures of network structure do not provide such strong
support for the scale-free structure. As Kubelec and Sa (2012) note, this structure could be subject to
large-scale financial contagion if well-connected countries collapse.


Our measure also reveals that the network structure is persistent. Once put in place, it is difficult to
displace (Authur 1989). This is specially the case for financial networks where the high-profile
financial centres enjoy a long and extended period of dominance. Despite the Global Financial Crisis,
the United Kingdom and United States remain the core of the network. This is consistent with Hattori
and Suda (2007)'s observation that neither the LTCM (Long-Term Capital Management) default nor
the 1997-98 East Asian currency crisis caused any major disruption to the structure of the global
financial network.


6. Application: Financial Interconnection and Output Volatility
In the previous sections we demonstrated that our measure gives an intuitively-plausible, information-
rich, picture of network structure that differs from existing studies. This section examines one of the
key questions about the growing interconnectedness of global financial systems, that is how it affects
macroeconomic stability. Since our index captures different network features from existing measures
of financial integration, we now explore its relationship with output volatility. We also analyse
comparisons of our index against other types of measures of financial integration to expand
understanding of how different features of financial interconnectedness relate to output volatility.

Financial integration is a widely researched topic. Since the end of the 1990s there has been
particular interest in its macroeconomic implications as many transition economies embarked on the


                                                    17
path of financial liberalization. Historically, both the international macroeconomic and international
finance literature have highlighted positive effects of financial openness on output volatility. The
classic consumption smoothing hypothesis, built on an intertemporal consumption model, argues that
by allowing countries to borrow abroad, financial openness helps smooth consumption. If output is
volatile because of random external shocks, then access to international financial markets can insulate
consumption from income volatility and thereby improve welfare. If for some reason consumption
itself is volatile, then the ability to smooth consumption by borrowing and lending abroad could help
reduce output volatility. Arguably the same could be true about shocks to investment. Moreover, the
international finance literature highlights the additional benefits of risk diversification that accrue to
financially-open economies that share risks among each other. By diversifying sources of income
streams from their capital assets through differentiating geographical locations or types of assets,
financial openness provides another avenue for countries to reduce income volatility.

While deeper financial openness is often considered conducive to risk sharing, an increasingly
important policy concern is whether it brings greater vulnerability to shocks. Modern financial
systems are tightly linked together and financial flows between them are now very large. Quick
escalation of local economic problems into full-fledged regional or global crises can arise from the
fact that rapid financial integration brings about increasingly complex financial linkages and a
complex network as a result. Our measure of financial interconnection can therefore provide a useful
tool to understand the modern-day financial openness and its effects on important macroeconomic
variables.

The 2017-18 Global Financial Crisis has revived the financial network literature and prompted a set of
new research on the extent of financial interconnection contributions to financial contagion. Elliott et
al. (2014) suggest that as an institution's financial network initially becomes more diversified (i.e. has
more connections) financial shocks are able to travel across borders but, as the diversification
increases, interconnections better insure the network against each other's failure. They assume an
intermediate scale of shock. Acemoglu et al.'s (2015) study, looks at both the interconnectedness of a
network of individual banks and the scale of shocks. They reveal that a more diversified pattern of
financial interconnection enhances financial stability when negative shocks are sufficiently small, but
increases financial volatility when shocks are sufficiently large. The pattern of network connection
(network "type") matters for whether shocks are transmitted, and which is the most susceptible type
of network changes for large shocks compared to small. Their results are consistent with Haldane's
(2017) view that highly interconnected networks may be robust to certain levels of shock but fragile
in the face of greater shocks.

Our new index provides a succinct method for shedding additional light on these claims at the country
level. The following empirical study examines the relationship between financial interconnectedness

                                                     18
and output volatility employing our measure of countries' financial interconnection based on
international banking data.

We estimate a two-way fixed-effects model on a large panel dataset covering 196 countries during
1977-2016. Tax havens were excluded from the sample.


 =  +    +      +      +    ^2 +    +  +  + 


 is output volatility measured by the standard deviation of real GDP growth rates in country  for
each (5-year) period, . FI is the financial interconnection index. By construction individual indexes
are very small numbers so they are multiplied by 100, which does not affect their rankings. 
is an indicator variable identifying a 5-year period (2002-2006) in which the global financial network
formed its most recent structure, occasionally disrupted by small and idiosyncratic shocks. In contrast,
the following 5-year period (2007-2011),  marks a volatile period when intensified financial
interconnection and large financial turbulence/shocks (Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent
European Sovereign Debt Crisis) coexisted.  is a vector of standard controls including logarithm of
absolute value of inflation rates (monetary policy) and standard deviation of the ratio of government
expenditure to GDP (fiscal volatility), and ratio of exports plus imports to GDP (trade openness). 
and  are time and country-fixed effects.


Our index of financial interconnectedness gives a nuanced picture of the link between engagement
with the global banking network and output volatility. The results in Table C1 suggest that financial
interconnectedness per se does not increase volatility of output in a simple way. The main influences
on output volatility are the policy variables. Consistent with common theoretical models and
empirical studies, output volatilities are linked to fiscal and monetary volatilities. A standard deviation
increase in fiscal volatility increases output volatility by about 0.75 standard deviation; countries with
higher (1 per cent increase in) inflation experience higher (about 0.6 standard deviation increase in)
output volatility. The results confirm a statistically and economically significant sensitivity of output
volatility to both fiscal and monetary instabilities. In contrast, there is no evidence linking trade
openness to output volatility. Over time, output volatility is declining, likely a reflection of enhanced
capacities of governments employing monetary and fiscal policies to smooth business cycles.
Financial interconnectedness itself has no significant effect on output volatility when the period is
taken as a whole, but an informative and interesting picture emerges once the two sub-periods, pre-
GFC and post-GFC, are considered separately. During the pre-GFC period beginning in 2000, but not
before, financial interconnectedness helped reduce volatility. In the GFC period, on the other hand,
financial interconnectedness increased volatility, but the effect diminishes the higher the degree of
interconnectedness. To be exact, FI has a positive effect on volatility up to a turning point at around

                                                    19
2.8. Each additional point after that increases volatility by a smaller amount. We compared several
models with different combinations of FI and other variables. Model 5 (Appendix Table C1), with
both FI and FI2 and the GFC interaction terms has better explanatory power than models without this
combination and is the basis of the interpretation given above. The inclusion of these variables has a
small impact on the size of other coefficients and they are generally stable over the model variants.


Interestingly, these results suggest that the picture that Acemoglu et al (2015). paint for individual
institutions, of shock vulnerability that changes with the degree of connection and the scale of shock,
is also visible at the country level. In addition, we add global level information to Elliott's (2014)
small, country-level illustration from a simulation model. Since the Elliot study does not capture the
changing nature of shock transmission through networks in the face of different scales of shock our
picture also adds another dimension.


What we can see from these results is that, as the world entered the period when the global network
moved from a very disconnected structure to a more connected one, output volatility was reduced as
countries became more interconnected with the global banking network. This is consistent with the
early literature and the theoretical conjectures about the possibilities for risk mitigation. During the
GFC period, however, increases in financial interconnectedness exposed countries to higher output
volatility, but only up to a certain level. Beyond a certain point, higher levels of interconnection
begin to reduce the impact on output volatility. As in Acemoglu et al, the impact of being closely
integrated to the financial network changes with both the size of shocks and the changing nature of the
network itself.


We, and others, have argued that understanding the nature of financial networks gives new insight
into what it means for a country to be financially open or "integrated". Before the recent interest in
network analysis there were several heuristic measures used to capture the notion of a country's level
of international financial integration. Two popular measures are the Chinn-Ito (de jure) measure of
openness based on policy settings, and the Lane-Milessi-Ferreti (de facto) index based on quantities
of foreign assets held.


Our next empirical exercise includes our measure alongside these two, widely-used measures to see
whether each separately contributes to explaining output volatility. That is, we look at whether a
model containing our measure provides a better explanation than models containing other measures of
financial integration. For this we consider the effects of the Corbett-Xu indicator of financial
connection alongside the Chinn-Ito (de jure) and the Lane-Milessi (de facto). Our estimating
equation now includes a vector of financial integration indices (FI) rather than just the Corbett-Xu
indicator.

                                                    20
The key insights derived from the first empirical exercise discussed above, containing just our new
index, carry across to the analysis including other indexes. Appendix Table C2 reports the key
results. Again, the results are consistent with standard theoretical models and empirical studies
showing that output volatilities are linked to fiscal and monetary volatilities. In a model that takes no
account of financial openness or interconnection (equation 1 in both Tables C1 and C2), a standard
deviation increase in fiscal volatility increases output volatility by about 0.5-0.7 standard deviation,
countries with higher (1 per cent increase in) inflation experience higher (0.6 standard deviation
increases in) output volatility, trade openness has no effect and volatility declines over time.


The key variables of interest are the group of financial integration related measures. De jure measures
with a focus on removal of rules and regulations against cross-border financial transaction show a
high and positive relationship with output volatility. In other words, the trade-off from lifting capital
controls and removing various barriers to tapping the global financial market is elevated ­ on average
around 1.6 standard deviation increase in ­ output volatility. On the other hand, the de facto index
measuring the volume of international financial transactions relative to GDP is not significantly linked
to output volatility.


While our financial interconnection measure and its square term seem not to affect output volatility,
we again see the complex and distinct effects revealed by its interaction terms with the two period
dummies. The coefficient associated with the interaction term with the pre-GFC period is negative
and significant, compared to a positive and significant coefficient associated with the interaction term
with the GFC period. Introducing the other measures of financial integration does not change the
additional information that is gained from the network-based measure. We still see the phenomenon
that high financial interconnection enhances financial (output) stability when negative shocks are
sufficiently small, but increases volatility when shocks are sufficiently large. Finally, the coefficient
of the interaction term of financial interconnection squared and the GFC remains negative and
significant, confirming the idea that financial interconnection initially spread shocks but eventually
provides better insurance through diversification as the interconnection increases further.


We have not yet carried out full specification tests on the alternative models to form a view on what is
added by our measure over others, but two information criteria measures reported in the tables suggest
that our measure alone captures most of the information, without the other two measures.


7. Conclusion
Based on an adapted version of the eigenvector centrality measure often used in the network
approach, we have built a new measure of financial integration for individual countries, highlighting

                                                    21
interconnectedness of countries through financial linkages in global financial markets. An important
and distinctive feature of the measure lies in its complete coverage of both direct and indirect
connections among countries in the system, which is potentially vital for understanding how shocks
spread in the system.


We find that the United Kingdom and the United States remain the most interconnected countries in
the global banking network despite the 2007-08 global financial crisis. These countries remain the
`core' of the global financial system with the remaining roughly 200 countries forming the
`periphery'. A simple application of the financial interconnectedness index in the analysis of financial
integration and output volatility suggests that complex interconnections captured by the index provide
a nuanced picture of the way in which financial interconnection is linked to output volatility.


There is large scope for future work which could include improving the data by expanding the number
of countries with both inward and outward lending (further data is held by BIS but is not currently
publicly available). Also, we use banks' foreign claims as financial links connecting countries in this
study. This is an important, but only one, dimension of the existing financial linkages among
countries. Other dimensions, such as cross-border portfolio positions and foreign direct investment,
could also be considered to capture potentially different facets of interconnectedness.




                                                   22
References


Acemoglu et al (2015) "Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks." American Economic
      Review, 105, 2, 564-608.

Albert, R., H. Jeong, and A. Barabasi. (2000) "Error and Attack Tolerance of Complex Networks."
      Nature, 406, 378-382.

Allen, Franklin, and Ana Babus (2011) "Networks in Finance." In Network Based Strategies and
      Competences, ed(s). Paul Kleindorfer and Jerry Wind, Wharton School Publishing.

Allen, Frankin, and Douglas Gale. (2000) "Financial Contagion." The Journal of Political Economy,
      108, 1-33.

Arthur, Brian (1989) "Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-In Historical Events."
      Economic Journal 99, 116-131.

Battiston, Stefano, Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro Gallegati, Bruce Greenwald, and Joseph E. Stiglitz.
      (2012a) "Liaisons Dangereuses: Increasing Connectivity, Risk Sharing and Systemic Risk",
      Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 36, 1121-1141.

Battiston, Stefano, Michelangelo Puliga, Rahul Kaushik, Paolo Tasca and Guido Caldarelli (2012b)
      "DebtRank: Too Central to Fail? Financial Networks, the Fed and Systemic Risk", Scientific
      Reports 2 (541).

Bech, L. Morten, and Enghin Atalay. (2010) "The Topology of the Federal Funds Market." Physica
      A, 389, 5223-5246.

BIS (2018), Global coverage of BIS locational banking statistics, BIS (2018),

      https://www.bis.org/statistics/lbs_globalcoverage.pdf

Blasques, Francisco, Falk Brauning and Iman van Lelyveld. (2015) "A Dynamic Network Model of
      the Unsecured Interbank Lending Market", BIS Working Papers No 491.

Brin, S. and Page, (1998). `The anatomy of large-scale hypertextual web search engine'. Computer
      Networks and ISDN Systems 30: 107­117.

Corbett, J. (2010). `Asian Financial Integration', in Globalisation and Economic Integration: Winners
      and Losers in the Asia-Pacific, Noel Gaston and Ahmed Khalid (eds), Cheltenham: Edward
      Elgar.

Csardi, G. and Nepusz, T. (2006). `The igraph software package for complex network research',
      InterJournal Complex Systems, 1695. (http://igraph.org)


                                                   23
Diebold, X. Francis, Kamil Yilmaz. (2014) "On the Network Topology of Variance Decompositions:
     Measuring the Connectedness of Financial Firms." Journal of Econometrics, 182, 119-134.

Dungey, Mardi, Matteo Luciani, and David Veredas. (2014) "The Emergence of Systemically
     Important Insurers." CIFR Working Paper No. WP038 and FIRN Research Paper No. 2494030.

Elliott, Matthew, Benjamin Golub, and Matthew O. Jackson. (2014) "Financial Network and
     Contagion." American Economic Review, 104, 3115-53.

Flood, Robert P. and Rose, Andrew K., Financial Integration: A New Methodology and an Illustration
     (June 2004). IMF Working Paper, Vol., pp. 1-20, 2004. Available at SSRN:
     http://ssrn.com/abstract=878934.

Fracasso, Andrea, and Stefano Schiavo. "Global Imbalances, Exchange Rates Adjustment and the
     Crisis: Implications from Network Analysis." Journal of Policy Modelling, 31, 601-619.

Haldane, G. Andrew. (2009) "Rethinking the Financial Network." Speech at the Financial Student
     Association, Amsterdam.

Gai, Prasanna, Andrew Haldane, and Sujit Kapadia. (2011) "Complexity, Concentration and
     Contagion", Journal of Monetary Economics, 58, 453-470.

Garratt, J. Rodney, and Lavan Mahadeva. (2011) "Mapping Systemic Risk in the International
     Banking Network." Bank of England Working Paper No 413.

Haldane, G. Andrew. (2009) "Rethinking the financial network." Speech at the Financial Student
     Association, Amsterdam.

Haldane, G. Andrew. (2012) "The Dog and the Frisbee." Speech at Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
     Hole, Wyoming.

IMF (2010) Understanding Financial Interconnectedness, Washington, DC: Strategy, Policy, and
     Review Department and Monetary and Capital Markets Department, IMF.

IMF (2011) Mapping Cross-Border Financial Linkages: A Supporting Case for Global Financial
     Safety Nets. Washington, DC: Strategy, Policy, and Review Department, IMF.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Macro E. Terrones (2007). "How Does Financial
     Globalization Affect Risk Sharing? Patterns and Channels," IZA Discussion Papers 2903,
     Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA)

Kubelec, Chris, and Filipa Sa. (2012) "The Geographical Composition of National External Balance
     Sheets: 1980-2005." International Journal of Central Banking, 8, 143-189. (earlier version
     Kubelec, C and Sa, F (2009), "The Geographical Composition of National External Balance
     Sheets: 1980-2005", Bank of England Working Paper)


                                                24
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, (2007). "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
      Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004" Journal of
      International Economics, 73, 223-250.

Minoiu, Camelia, and Javier A. Reyes. (2011) "A Network Analysis of Global Banking: 1978-2009."
      International Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/11/74.

Ogawa, Sumiko, Joonkyn Park, Diva Singh, and Nita Thacker. (2013) "Financial Interconnectedness
      and Financial Sector Reforms in the Caribbean." International Monetary Fund Working Paper
      WP/13/175.

Quinn, Dennis, Martin Schindler, and A. Maria Toyoda, (2011). "Assessing Measures of Financial
      Openness and Integration" IMF Economic Review, Vol. 59, No. 3.

Tressel, Thierry. (2010) "Financial Contagion through Bank Deleveraging: Stylized Facts and
      Simulations Applied to the Financial Crisis." International Monetary Fund Working Paper
      WP/10/236.

von Peter, Goetz. (2007) "International Banking Centres: A Network Perspective." BIS Quarterly
      Review, December 2007.

Watts, D., and S. Strogatz. (1998) "Collective Dynamics of `Small-World' Networks." Nature, 393,
      409-410.

Yellen, L. Janet. (2013) "Interconnectedness and Systemic Risk: Lessons from the Financial Crisis
      and Policy Implications." Speech at the American Economic Association/American Finance
      Association Joint Luncheon, San Diego, California.




                                                 25
Appendix A
                       Table A1a Standard measures of network connectedness for the original 24 BIS reporting countries, 1983-2016
                                 indegree                   outdegree                  instrength                   outstrength                  betweeness                  closeness
                         1983-1999      2000-2016   1983-1999      2000-2016   1983-1999        2000-2016   1983-1999       2000-2016    1983-1999      2000-2016   1983-1999       2000-2016
United Kingdom              12              22        135               182      351                2889      704                 3939     154                341     0.87               0.90
United States               12              22        102               83       286                2555      418                 2107      72                52      0.73               0.63
Cayman Islands              12              22         0                 0       109                1168       0                   0        0                  0      0.52               0.53
Germany                     12              22        126               158      165                1141      227                 2043     104                196     0.82               0.81
France                      12              22        143               181      148                1072      285                 1734     177                332     0.89               0.89
Netherlands                 12              22         47               56        72                770       105                 747       5                 18      0.59               0.58
Italy                       13              23         0                 0       124                687        0                   0        0                  0      0.52               0.53
Japan                       12              22         91               105      256                617       502                 2128      45                76      0.70               0.67
Luxembourg                  6               21        118               147       69                598       196                 689       42                149     0.78               0.78
Spain                       13              23         0                23        36                503        0                  61        0                 17      0.52               0.57
Switzerland                 12              22        117               175       63                495       199                 849      118                278     0.79               0.87
Ireland                     11              20         38               116       20                483        12                 469       5                 85      0.57               0.70
Belgium                     11              22        119               154      104                336       123                 611       82                185     0.79               0.80
Singapore                   13              20         0                 0       106                307        0                   0        0                  0      0.52               0.53
Hong Kong SAR, China        12              22         0                23       185                273        0                  186       0                 17      0.52               0.56
Canada                      13              23         0                19        47                258        0                  196       0                  7      0.52               0.55
Sweden                      12              21         84               106       35                198        17                 247       28                70      0.68               0.68
Denmark                     12              21         57               117       27                172        23                 147       12                104     0.61               0.72
Bahamas, The                12              20         0                 0        80                170        0                   0        0                  0      0.52               0.53
Norway                      12              21         0                 0        15                162        0                   0        0                  0      0.52               0.53
Austria                     12              21         0                61        27                146        0                  188       0                 36      0.52               0.62
Finland                     12              20         42               69        17                119        7                  142       7                 23      0.58               0.61
Netherlands Antilles        10              13         0                 0        13                39         0                   0        0                  0      0.52               0.51
Bahrain                     11              18         0                 0        10                26         0                   0        0                  0      0.52               0.52



                                                                                           26
                          Table A1b Standard measures of network connectedness for 25 top BIS reporting countries by instrength, 1983-2016

                                             indegree               outdegree                instrength                outstrength               betweeness                  closeness
Country                  Group        1983-1999   2000-2016   1983-1999   2000-2016   1983-1999     2000-2016    1983-1999    2000-2016     1983-1999   2000-2016      1983-1999   2000-2016
United Kingdom                   1           12          22         135         182         351           2889         704           3939      153.71         341.34        0.87         0.90
United States                    1           12          22         102          83         286           2555         418           2107       72.05          51.65        0.73         0.63
Cayman Islands                   1           12          22           0           0         109           1168           0              0        0.00           0.00        0.52         0.53
Germany                          1           12          22         126         158         165           1141         227           2043      103.77         195.78        0.82         0.81
France                           1           12          22         143         181         148           1072         285           1734      176.76         332.01        0.89         0.89
Germany                          1           12          22          47          56          72            770         105            747        5.03          18.12        0.59         0.58
Italy                            1           13          23           0           0         124            687           0              0        0.00           0.00        0.52         0.53
Japan                            1           12          22          91         105         256            617         502           2128       45.02          76.17        0.70         0.67
Luxembourg                       1            6          21         118         147          69            598         196            689       42.35         149.35        0.78         0.78
Spain                            1           13          23           0          23          36            503           0            61         0.00          17.19        0.52         0.57
Switzerland                      1           12          22         117         175          63            495         199            849      118.17         277.52        0.79         0.87
Ireland                          1           11          20          38         116          20            483          12            469        5.00          85.24        0.57         0.70
Belgium                          1           11          22         119         154         104            336         123            611       82.43         185.17        0.79         0.80
Singapore                        1           13          20           0           0         106            307           0              0        0.00           0.00        0.52         0.53
Hong Kong SAR, China             1           12          22           0          23         185            273           0            186        0.00          17.02        0.52         0.56
Canada                           1           13          23           0          19          47            258           0            196        0.00           7.07        0.52         0.55
Sweden                           1           12          21          84         106          35            198          17            247       28.01          70.00        0.68         0.68
China                            2           11          21           0           0           9            192           0              0        0.00           0.00        0.52         0.53
Australia                        2           12          21           0          92          20            186           0            191        0.00          99.57        0.52         0.66
Denmark                          1           12          21          57         117          27            172          23            147       11.84         103.63        0.61         0.72
Bahamas, The                     1           12          20           0           0          80            170           0              0        0.00           0.00        0.52         0.53
Norway                           1           12          21           0           0          15            162           0              0        0.00           0.00        0.52         0.53
Austria                          1           12          21           0          61          27            146           0            188        0.00          35.97        0.52         0.62
Finland                          1           12          20          42          69          17            119           7            142        6.57          23.00        0.58         0.61
Brazil                           2           12          20           0          24          44            104           0            43         0.00           4.31        0.52         0.54
                 Note: Authors calculations from BIS, International Banking Statistics, various years. The calculations are done for the whole network that consists of 216 countries
                 in each year. Listed countries (BIS reporting countries) have data on inflows and outflows with various starting points. The remaining countries have inflow data.
                 In-strength and out-strength are in billions of USD.



                                                                                                  27
Table A2 Formulas for network metrics and statistics
 In-degree      In-degree of country  is the total number of links that point to the country,
                                                             
                                                     =  
                                                             

                where  is the source country of each link  , ( = 1, ... ). A directed link is
                established if country  records nonzero foreign claims to country  .
 Out-degree     Out-degree of country  is the total number of links departing from the country,
                                                                 
                                                      =  
                                                                 

                where  is the recipient country of each link  , ( = 1, ... ). A directed link is
                established if country  records nonzero foreign claims to country .
 In-strength    In-strength of country  is the sum of bank claims received by the country,
                                                             
                                                     =  
                                                             

                where  is the amount of bank claims issued by country  to country  .
 Out-strength   Out-strength of country  is the sum of bank claims issued by the country,
                                                              
                                                     =  
                                                              

                where  is the amount of bank claims issued by country  to country .

 Closeness      Closeness of country  is the inverse of the average distance from country  to all
                other countries  in the network,
                                                                    -1
                                                         ( , )
                                                    =         
                                                        - 1
                where the distance between two countries  and , or ( , ), is the smallest number
                of links that must be traversed to go from  to .  is the total number of countries
                in the network.
 Betweeness     The betweeness measure for country  ,  is defined as
                                                          ( )
                                                        
                                                          
                                                =
                                                  ( - 1)( - 2)
                where  denotes the number of shortest paths from country  to  and  ()
                denotes the number of shortest paths from country  to  containing vertex .
 Skewness       Skewness measures the asymmetry of a distribution. The skewness of a network is
                defined as



                                                   28
                                                   ( - )3 /
                                     =
                                           ( - 1)( - 2)[( - )2 /]3/2
              where  is the value of country i's connection, measured by the total number of in-
              and out-degrees or by financial interconnectedness index of the country, ,  is the
              total number of countries.
Kurtosis      Kurtosis measures the `peakedness' of a distribution. The kurtosis of a network is
              defined as
                                      ( + 1) ( - )4 /         3( - 1)2
                           =                                -
                               ( - 1)( - 2)( - 3)[( - )2 /]2 ( - 2)( - 3)
              where  is the value of country i's connection, measured by the total number of
              in-and out-degrees or by financial interconnectedness index of the country, ,  is the
              total number of countries.
Average       Average Path Length is the average of the shortest paths between all pairs of
Path Length   countries in the network,
                                                  2
                                             =           ( , )
                                                 ( - 1)
                                                            

              where the distance between two countries  and , or ( , ), is the smallest number
              of links that must be traversed to go from  to .  is the total number of countries
              in the network.
Clustering    Clustering measures the probability that, given that country  is directly linked to
              countries  and , country  is also directly linked to . The clustering coefficient is
              given by,
                                                ,,,   
                                            =
                                                ,,,  
              where  represents the link between country  and  and  represents the link
              between country  and .
               Notes: the main source of the definitions is Kubelec and Sa (2012)




                                                29
Table A3 Overview of the major studies on the global financial network
 Author(s)          Data source/type    Measures             Main results
 Hattori and Suda   Quarterly data      Connectivity,        The network of cross-border bank
 (2007)             for 215             average path         exposure has become more tightly
                    countries on        length, in-degree    connected over the sample period,
                    foreign claims      and out-degree,      reflected by a higher connectivity,
                    of banks in         clustering           shorter average path length, higher
                    reporting           coefficient          average degree, and higher clustering
                    countries over                           coefficient. This tendency is not
                    the period                               interrupted by the 1997-98 East Asian
                    (1985-2006),                             currency crisis.
                    BIS
                    consolidated                             The stability implication is two-fold:
                    banking                                  an increased probability of systemic
                    statistics                               risk in international financial markets
                                                             (once one country is in crisis) but
                                                             improved efficiency in capital and risk
                                                             allocation.


 Goetz von Peter    Financial claims    In-degree and out-   The best connected locations are
 (2007)             (to banking and     degree, closeness,   generally the largest centres with large
                    non-banking         betweeness,          market share, but the network also
                    sectors             intermediation,      captures locations with relatively small
                    respectively) of    prestige             market share that play important role
                    212 countries,                           of regional intermediation.
                    BIS locational
                    banking
                    statistics
 Haldane (2009)     External stocks     Skewness,            The international financial network
                    of external         kurtosis, and        displays a high and rising degree of
                    assets and          average path         interconnection. In particular, the
                    liabilities in 18   length               network shows a `long-tailed'
                    countries in                             distribution and `small world'
                    1985, 1995 and                           properties.
                    2005, data
                    constructed by


                                                   30
                 Kubelect and Sa                         The stability implication is the system
                 (2008)                                  has become `robust-yet-fragile' with
                                                         more countries sharing risk among
                                                         themselves but more exposed to flow-
                                                         on effects from financial hubs.
Kubelec and Sa   Bilateral FDI      In-degree and out-   The global financial network has
(2012)           data mainly        degree, closeness,   shown growing interconnectivity over
                 from the OECD      betweeness,          the past two decades. The distribution
                 International      intermediation,      of the financial links has shown a long
                 Direct             prestige,            tail.
                 Investment,        skewness,
                 portfolio equity   kurtosis, average    It reemphasizes the trade-off of higher
                 asset data from    path length,         interconnectivity: enhanced risk
                 the IMF            clustering           sharing but increased risk of
                 Coordinated        coefficient          contagion. In particular, the long-tail
                 Portfolio                               structure implies system-wide
                 Investment                              vulnerability of the network to targeted
                 Survey (CPIS),                          attack on the most-connected nodes.
                 and portfolio
                 debt asset data
                 from the IMF
                 CPIS and BIS
                 locational
                 banking
                 statistics; the
                 data period is
                 1985-2005
Ours I           End of year data   In-degree and out-   United States, United Kingdom,
                 for 216            degree, closeness,   France and Germany score highest in
                 countries on       skewness,            terms of standard connection
                 foreign claims     kurtosis, average    measures. The global banking network
                 of banks in        path length,         displays features of a long-tail. These
                 reporting          clustering           findings bear a strong resemblance to
                 countries over     coefficient          the above studies.
                 the period




                                                31
Ours II   (1999-2013),   Interconnectedness United States and United Kingdom
          BIS                               remain the most interconnected
          consolidated                      countries in the global banking
          banking                           network in spite of the 2007-08 global
          statistics                        financial crisis. The global banking
                                            network resembles an explicit `core-
                                            periphery' structure. China is rapidly
                                            integrated with the world and Asian
                                            financial market since the GFC.




                                 32
 Graph 1 Global coverage of the BIS locational banking statistics and list of reporting countries by
 year of access




Source: BIS (2018)




                                                  33
Table A4 Country list
Asian Countries:
Australia, Japan, Hong Kong SAR, Singapore, Bangladesh, Brunei, Cambodia, China, Chinese
Taipei, India, Indonesia, Korea, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, New Zealand, Philippines, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Vietnam


European countries:
Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania


Other countries:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Aruba, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bermuda, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bonaire, Saint Eustatius and
Saba, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Cayman Islands, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros Islands, Congo,
Congo Democratic Republic, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Curacao, Czechoslovakia, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Falkland Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, German Democratic Republic,
Ghana, Gibraltar, Grenada, Guatemala, Guernsey, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, Iran, Iraq, Isle of man, Israel, Jamaica, Jersey, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyz Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Macau SAR, Macedonia, FYR,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia,
Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands
Antilles, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Palestinian Territory, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Russia,
Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tomé and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Serbia and Montenegro,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Sint Maarten, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Soviet Union, St.
Helena, St. Lucia, St.Vincent, Sudan, Surinam, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania,
Timor Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Turks and Caicos,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United States, Uruguay, US Pacific Islands,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Vatican, Venezuela, Wallis/Futuna, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe.


BIS reporting countries:
Australia, Chinese Taipei, Japan, Korea, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherland, Portugual, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, U.K., U.S.,
Canada, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Panama

                                                   34
Appendix B Financial Interconnectedness Index: An Example


                                Figure B1 A small network of 4 countries




The above is a small network that consists of 4 countries with links through bank claims among them.
A third of country 1's total (normalized) bank claims goes to each of the other three countries; half of
country 2's total claims to country 3 and the other half to country 4; all country 3's claims are
received by country 1; country 4's total claims are split into equal halves to country 1 and 3.
Accordingly, the weight matrix A is

                                 a11 a12    a13   a14   0      0      1 1 / 2
                                a    a22    a23         
                                                  a24  1 / 3 0        0 0 
                            A =  21                    =                     
                                 a31 a32    a33   a34  1 / 3 1 / 2    0 1 / 2
                                                                             
                                a41 a42     a43   a44  1 / 3 1 / 2    0 0 


The entries in the matrix ,  represents the weight of each link    and each entries records the
portion of claims of  on  in the source country 's total claims. All the entries in each column sum to
1. Based on Equation (2), to obtain the indexes is to solve for entries in   corresponding to
eigenvalue 1.


                                   A  V = V
                                    =1
                                    0      0      1 1 / 2  x1   x1 
                                   1 / 3 0        0 0     x  x 
                                                          2 =  2
                                   1 / 3 1 / 2    0 1 / 2  x3   x3 
                                                             
                                   1 / 3 1 / 2    0 0   x4   x4 


We start by setting all entries in  equal to ¼, indicating the initial state that all 4 countries are
equally integrated. Then we iterate the process. At step 2, the updated integration index vector is 2 =
2 , and at step 3, 2 = 3 . At step , the sequences tend to converge to the equilibrium value,

                                                     35
                                                   0.38
                                                   0.12
                                              V* =     
                                                   0.29
                                                       
                                                   0.19


If solving the recursive system by linear algebra, there are a number of  , but they are scalar
multiples of each other, so one can normalize to have the dependence indexes so that the sum of all
entries equal to 1 20, which is equal to  .




20 Other dimensions of international financial transactions such as portfolio securities and foreign
direct investment would be measurable in future studies using the same methodology if systematic
locational data is available.


                                                  36
Figure B2 Addressing incomplete data: The issue of dangling nodes




                                    x1   0        0    1 1 / 2  x1 
                                    x  1 / 3      0    0 0      x 
                                    2 =                         2 
                                    x3  1 / 3     0    0 1 / 2   x3 
                                                                
                                    x4  1 / 3     0    0 0   x4 


We continue to use the 4-country small network example to explain the dangling node issue (i.e.
incomplete data on links) and our solution. In Figure C2, country 2 has inward links only but not
outward links, which are missing due to incomplete dataset. Accordingly, entries in column two of the
weight matrix are all zero. The weight matrix is no longer a column stochastic matrix and the
equilibrium values for  are zero as a result. Incorporating the PageRank solution, we replace entries
in the zero column with 1/( - 1), so the weight matrix turns stochastic,


                                    x1   0 1 / 3       1 1 / 2  x1 
                                    x  1 / 3 0         0 0     x 
                                    2 =                        2 
                                    x3  1 / 3 1 / 3    0 1 / 2  x3 
                                                               
                                    x4  1 / 3 1 / 3    0 0   x4 


Now we can solve for eigenvector   to get


                                                  0.39
                                                  0.17 
                                             V* =      
                                                  0.26
                                                       
                                                  0.17 


  provides sensible ranking: country 1 and 3 are highly connected and therefore sit on the top two.
Inflows to country 2 and 4 are the same, 1/3 of country 1's connectedness so they share the same
ranking.

                                                  37
Appendix C Regressions of Financial Indicators and Output Volatility
Table C1 Corbett-Xu Financial Interconnectedness (FI) with Output Volatility
                                  (1)                  (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)
Fiscal volatility              0.770**               0.767**    0.764**        0.756**    0.750**    0.747**
                                (0.348)              (0.349)    (0.349)        (0.350)     (0.351)    (0.351)
Trade openness                   0.030                0.030      0.029           0.030      0.029       0.030
                                (0.022)              (0.022)    (0.023)        (0.023)     (0.023)    (0.023)
Inflation                      0.608***             0.606***    0.607***       0.605***   0.552***   0.555***
                                (0.170)              (0.171)    (0.171)        (0.170)     (0.174)    (0.175)
Period                         -0.197**             -0.188**     -0.156         -0.156    -0.246**   -0.238**
                                (0.095)              (0.095)    (0.107)        (0.108)     (0.110)    (0.110)
FI                                                    0.534      1.955           1.676      1.430       1.292
                                                     (0.356)    (1.643)        (1.750)     (1.591)    (1.663)
FI^2                                                             -0.275         -0.219     -0.227      -0.197
                                                                (0.264)        (0.275)     (0.262)    (0.266)
FI*PreGFC                                                                      -0.965*                 -0.596
                                                                               (0.563)                (0.578)
FI^2*PreGFC                                                                      0.189                  0.131
                                                                               (0.172)                (0.176)
FI*GFC                                                                                    1.716***   1.552***
                                                                                           (0.606)    (0.623)
FI^2*GFC                                                                                  -0.299**    -0.270*
                                                                                           (0.149)    (0.151)
Constant                         -0.079                -0.389     -1.175       -1.009      -0.423      -0.382
                                 (1.913)              (1.799)    (1.470)       (1.442)     (1.545)    (1.526)
N                                  910                  910        910           910         910         910
R2                                0.136                0.136      0.136         0.139       0.143       0.143
F                                 7.747                6.233      5.287        11.014      25.066     21.371
p                                 0.000                0.000      0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000
Standard errors in parentheses* p<.105, ** p<.055, *** p<.015




                                                                      38
Table C2 Output volatility and financial integration measured by de jure, de facto and FI (1977-2016)
                           1 No     2 De Jure only    3 De Facto only   4 Both DJ & DF   5 All index   6 FI square   7 FI interact   8 FI interact   9 De Jure   10 De Facto
                             fin                                                                                                                      interact     interact
                           integ
 Fiscal volatility        0.770**       0.691**            0.556**           0.515*         0.513*       0.513*          0.497*          0.499*       0.671**       0.527*
                          (0.348)       (0.305)            (0.285)          (0.276)        (0.276)       (0.276)        (0.274)         (0.276)       (0.305)      (0.288)
 Trade openness            0.030         0.035              0.034            0.035          0.035         0.035           0.035           0.035        0.035        0.034
                          (0.022)       (0.024)            (0.027)          (0.028)        (0.028)       (0.028)        (0.028)         (0.028)       (0.025)      (0.027)
 Inflation               0.608***       0.648***          0.609***          0.672***       0.671***     0.672***        0.678***        0.607***      0.577***     0.603***
                          (0.170)       (0.186)            (0.168)          (0.184)        (0.184)       (0.184)        (0.184)         (0.188)       (0.197)      (0.170)
 Period                  -0.197**      -0.252***          -0.214**         -0.278***      -0.273***     -0.258***      -0.262***       -0.346***     -0.323***    -0.233***
                          (0.095)       (0.092)            (0.094)          (0.090)        (0.088)       (0.092)        (0.093)         (0.093)       (0.096)      (0.093)
 De jure                                1.778**                             1.620**        1.629**       1.624**        1.762**          1.471*        0.631
                                        (0.788)                             (0.802)        (0.804)       (0.803)        (0.810)         (0.801)       (2.406)
 De facto                                                  0.037             0.180          0.174         0.170           0.177           0.160                     0.276
                                                          (0.142)           (0.201)        (0.204)       (0.205)        (0.208)         (0.205)                    (0.256)
 FI                                                                                         0.318         0.983           0.488           0.482
                                                                                           (0.323)       (1.279)        (1.362)         (1.208)
 FI^2                                                                                                    -0.126          -0.037          -0.075
                                                                                                         (0.194)        (0.202)         (0.188)
 FI*PreGFC                                                                                                             -1.481***
                                                                                                                        (0.463)
 FI^2*PreGFC                                                                                                            0.338**
                                                                                                                        (0.144)
 FI*GFC                                                                                                                                1.743***
                                                                                                                                        (0.588)
 FI ^2*GFC                                                                                                                             -0.316**
                                                                                                                                        (0.144)
 Dj2 or Df2                                                                                                                                             0.925     -0.003**
                                                                                                                                                      (2.585)      (0.001)
 Dj or Df*preGFC                                                                                                                                       -0.733     -0.217**
                                                                                                                                                      (1.794)      (0.110)
 Dj2 or Df2*preGFC                                                                                                                                      0.095      0.003**
                                                                                                                                                      (1.972)      (0.001)
 Dj or Df*GFC                                                                                                                                           1.983       0.028
                                                                                                                                                      (1.768)      (0.132)
 Dj2 or Df2*GFC                                                                                                                                        -1.032       0.000
                                                                                                                                                      (1.944)      (0.001)
 Constant                 -0.079        -1.000            -0.177           -0.891          -1.085        -1.458          -1.209         -0.651         -0.301       -0.350
                          (1.913)       (2.059)           (2.156)          (2.253)         (2.329)       (2.406)        (2.389)        (2.453)        (1.988)      (2.093)
  N                         910           870               904              867             867           867            867            867             870         904
  R2                       0.136         0.140             0.123            0.139           0.139         0.139          0.145          0.146          0.150        0.134
  F                        7.747         6.728             6.929            5.732           4.918         4.433          4.446         15.075          9.270      389.183
  p                        0.000         0.000             0.000            0.000           0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000        0.000
Standard errors in parentheses *p< 0.105 ** p<0.055 *** p< 0.015


                                                                                              39
