                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHERE HAVE ALL THE CHILDREN GONE? AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF CHILD
                ABANDONMENT AND ABDUCTION IN CHINA

                                          Xiaojia Bao
                                        Sebastian Galiani
                                             Kai Li
                                          Cheryl Long

                                       Working Paper 26492
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26492


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2019, Revised April 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26492.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Xiaojia Bao, Sebastian Galiani, Kai Li, and Cheryl Long. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Where Have All the Children Gone? An Empirical Study of Child Abandonment and Abduction
in China
Xiaojia Bao, Sebastian Galiani, Kai Li, and Cheryl Long
NBER Working Paper No. 26492
November 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. J12

                                           ABSTRACT

In the past 40 years, a large number of children have been abandoned or abducted in China. We
argue that the implementation of the one-child policy has significantly increased both child
abandonment and child abduction and that, furthermore, the cultural preference for sons in China
has shaped unique gender-based patterns whereby a majority of the children who are abandoned
are girls and a majority of the children who are abducted are boys. We provide empirical
evidence for the following findings:(1) Stricter one-child policy implementation leads to more
child abandonment locally and more child abduction in neighboring regions; (2) A stronger son-
preference bias in a given region intensifies both the local effects and spatial spillover effects of
the region's one-child policy on child abandonment and abduction; and (3) With the gradual
relaxation of the one-child policy after 2002, both child abandonment and child abduction have
dropped significantly. This paper is the first to provide empirical evidence on the unintended
consequences of the one-child policy in terms of child trafficking in China.

Xiaojia Bao                                       Kai Li
422 South Siming Road                             422 South Siming Road
A312 Economics Building                           Economics Building B502B
Xiamen University                                 Xiamen University
Xiamen, 361005                                    Xiamen, Inte 361005
Fujian                                            China
China                                             likai501@gmail.com
xiaojiabao@xmu.edu.cn
                                                  Cheryl Long
Sebastian Galiani                                 Xiamen University
Department of Economics                           Xiamen, Fujian 361005
University of Maryland                            China
3105 Tydings Hall                                 cxlong@xmu.edu.cn
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
galiani@econ.umd.edu
1. Introduction


The phenomenon of missing girls due to prenatal sex selective abortion has attracted
much academic attention (Sen, 1990; Ebenstein, 2010; Chen, Li and Meng, 2013;
Jayachandran, 2017; Almond, Li and Zhang, 2019). But in reality there is another
serious type of missing children problem, which is boys and girls abandoned or
abandoned after birth (O'Connell Davidson, 2011; The State Council, 2011). Although
there lack accurate reports, the estimated number of abandoned and abducted children
in China ranges from tens of thousands2 to hundreds of thousands a year3, and many
of these children end up being trafficked into illegal adoptions (Cai and Lavaly, 2003;
Liu, Larsen and Wyshak, 2004; Zhang, 2006; Chen et al., 2015), causing long-lasting
social and economic impacts.4 Poverty has generally been identified as one of the key
reasons for missing children (Dessy, Mbiekop and Pallage, 2005; Tamura, 2010;
Anderson and Ray, 2010; Corno and Voena, 2019). Yet, surprisingly, in light of China's
continuing rapid economic growth, the number of missing children has remained high.
In this paper, we explore the institutional and cultural reasons behind this rampant
problem.


The greatest challenge to undertake a study on missing children is the lack of data.
Taking advantage of a recently developed database on family-reported missing persons
maintained       by     the    website      of     Baby      Come       Back      Home       (BCBH)
(https://baobeihuijia.com/Index.aspx),5 currently the largest online platform and non-
governmental organization dedicated to locating missing children in China, we
construct a record of missing child cases for local regions since 1950. As of June 2018,


2 Legal Daily, The Ministry of Public Safety Retrieved 43,000 Abducted Women and Children in 2014,
February 16, 2015, http://legal.people.com.cn/n/2015/0216/c188502-26574114.html
3 Human Trafficking Research Organization, (2014), Human Trafficking in China by Michelle Lillie,

https://humantraffickingsearch.org/human-trafficking-in-china/
4 According to the International Labour Organization (ILO) and Walk Free Foundation, around 5.5

million children under 18 have been victims of child trafficking (ILO, 2017).
5
  The Baby Come Back Home (BCBH) website maintains two main databases on missing children. One
contains reports filed by families looking for their children; the other contains reports filed by child
victims looking for their biological families.
                                                   1
the database included 16,969 child abandonment reports and 24,175 child abduction
reports filed by their families. The number of reported missing children shows a clear
humpback pattern: Compared to its pre-1979 level, the number of reported missing
children increased by more than 9 times during the 1980s-1990s, which corresponds to
the period of strict implementation of the one-child policy in China.


To offer an explanation for the seemingly counter-intuitive increase in child
abandonment and abduction during a period of economic prosperity, we turn to the
implementation of the one-child policy combined with the cultural preference for sons
in China (Hesketh and Zhu, 2006; Almond and Edlund, 2008; Dahl and Moretti, 2008;
Qian, 2008; Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2018). The economic logic is as follows:
Under the one-child policy 6 , families that exceeded the birth quota faced such
punishments as financial penalties, deprivation of promotion opportunities and even
potential job losses (Scharping, 2013; Howden and Zhou, 2014), making it very costly
for parents to consider having a child beyond the quota. Furthermore, in a culture where
sons are preferred over daughters, families might resort to prenatal sex-selection
options or postnatal measures to meet their desired gender mix in face of birth quota
restrictions. For postnatal options, the attractiveness of either one of two alternatives
thus increases, with one option being the abandonment of a baby girl to give the parents
an opportunity to have another child and the other being the purchase of a young boy
by means of illegal adoption of an abducted or trafficked child. This explanation is also
supported by findings that children abandoned are mostly girls (Chen et al., 2015; Xing,
2015) while children abducted are mostly boys (Johnson, Huang and Wang, 1998; Li,
Ren and Zhang, 2013; Xing, Chen and Xu, 2013; Tao, 2017).


We explore the impacts of the one-child policy on missing children using both regional
and temporal variations in penalty fines and reported missing child cases at the level of


6
  While China's birth control policy was never able to achieve a fertility rate close to 1, we use the term
one-child policy (OCP) to refer to the policy that punishes families that give more than one birth, as it is
the most commonly used term in the literature.
                                                     2
local prefectures. Following Ebenstein (2010), Scharping (2013), and Huang, Lei and
Sun (2016), we measure the stringency of the enforcement of the one-child policy at
the provincial level using the ratio between the fine levied for the first unauthorized
birth and the local average per capita annual income. Local provincial governments had
much flexibility in setting the level of local fines following the guidelines of the central
government, and as a result, there is substantial regional and temporal variations during
the study period of 1988-2001. As an income-relative indicator, this fine measurement
already accounts for the first-order relationship between the absolute fine amount and
income level. Indeed, we find that the average penalty did not vary across provinces as
a function of local variables, such as income, the quality of transportation infrastructure
and economic and fiscal conditions, indicating that local fine level is likely exogenous
to economic factors. There is, however, an argument the penalty fine might be affected
by politicians' promotion incentives, which vary with politicians' personal
characteristics (Huang, Lei and Zhao, 2016). Consistent with this argument, we find a
significant correlation between local penalty fine and local politicians' term length.
Therefore, we control for these politicians' characteristics when analyzing the
relationship between penalty fine and missing children to take into account of the role
of politicians' promotion pressure in both fine and missing children in local regions.


Our results show that stricter one-child policy characterized by higher fine level lead to
increases in the number of family-reported child abandonment cases between 1988 and
2001. On average, when the penalty fine increases by the same amount as local
disposable income, the number of reported child abandonment cases increased by 0.3,
which accounts for a 14% increase of the reported child abandonment cases at the
prefectural level. However, the positive impact is only significant for the abandonment
of girls, not for boys. These results imply that families abandon girls increasingly, in
order to avoid higher penalty fines for exceeding the birth quota while still having the
opportunity to have another (potentially) male child, as the burden of the penalty
increases. This is consistent with the existent general population's preference for sons.

                                             3
In contrast to the local effect of these fines on child abandonment, the size of the fine
mainly had an impact on the child abduction rate in neighboring regions. When the
average fine of a prefecture's immediate neighbors increased by the same amount as
the average income in those provinces, one more child was reported to be abducted
from the prefecture. This accounts for a 35.7% increase of the reported child abductions
locally. Unlike child abandonment, the impact of the average level of neighbors' fines
on local child abduction cases was only significant for boys. This is also consistent with
the gender composition pattern whereby most abandoned children were girls and most
of the abducted children were boys. As the cultural preference for sons increased the
demand for the adoption of boys because of birth quota restrictions, the market price
for boys rose relative to the market price for girls. Thus, given similar costs for the
abduction of children of either sex, it became more lucrative for traffickers to abduct
boys. When breaking down the neighboring effect of fine on child abduction by specific
distance ranges, we find that the level of fines mainly increases child abduction in
prefectures located between 300 km and 600 km away. This result is consistent with the
previous finding about child trafficking distance (Wang et al., 2018), since traffickers
have to balance transportation costs with the possibility of being caught by parents or
law enforcement officers.


The general preference for sons not only shapes the contrasting gender patterns of child
abandonment versus child abduction, but also intensifies the impact of the one-child
policy on the incidence of missing children. Using the male-to-female ratio at birth as
an indicator of local gender-preference bias,7 we find the positive impact of these fines
on child abandonment to be greater in regions with a stronger preference for sons. This
is consistent with the hypothesis that families that prefer male heirs are more likely to
abandon a previously born girl so that they can have the chance of giving birth to a boy
in the future while remaining within the birth quota. The positive spillover impact of


7
  The preference for male children has been shown to originate from agricultural practices (Alesina,
Giuliano and Nunn, 2013 and 2018) and institutional arrangements concerning property rights (Bhalotra
et al., 2019).
                                                 4
these fines on child abduction in neighboring regions is also found to be stronger if the
gender-preference bias is greater, which is again in line with the argument that the birth
control policy is an explanatory variable for child trafficking: An increase in the fines
in a prefecture with a stronger gender bias leads to a greater increase in the number of
children abducted from neighboring regions, and a stronger demand for boys in a region
where birth control policies are more strictly enforced prompts traffickers to abduct
more boys from neighboring regions.


Penalty fine affects child abandonment and child abduction differently in different age
groups for children. Higher penalty fines lead to increases in abandonment of newborns
instead of older children. This is probably because the decision to abandon a girl child
is often made quite early on for two reasons: first, as the family's objective is to keep
within the birth quota so that there is a chance of having a boy in the future, it is
desirable to prevent people from learning about the birth; and, second, it would become
harder to abandon the child as emotional attachment grows over time. By contrast,
children in the 1-to-4 year age group are more vulnerable to abduction than children in
other age groups when neighboring regions' enforcement of the one-child policy
becomes stricter, but the stringency of neighboring provinces' enforcement of the one-
child policy does not significantly affect the likelihood that either newborns or children
older than 5 years of age will be abducted. While the reason for newborns being rarely
abducted is straightforward ---infants are usually kept at home and, thus, the abduction
cost will be high--- the reason for the rarity of abductees older than 5 years of age is
that families generally prefer to adopt younger children, before they develop long-term
memories. The results for rates of child abduction in different age groups are also
consistent with the observation that the price paid for an abducted boy tends to be higher
for younger boys (Shen, Antonopoulos and Papanicolaou, 2013).


The positive impacts of penalty fine on missing children rely on the high collection rate
of fines. If fine collection rate is low, families might no longer incorporate the penalty
fine in their decision making of child raising especially beyond-quota births. Following
                                            5
the Law on Population and Family Planning in 2001, the implementation of the one-
child policy generally became more relaxed with less brutal asset confiscation and
lower fine collection rate (Shi, 2006; Gao and Lu, 2006), until 2016 when the one-child
policy came to a full stop. As a placebo test, we studied the period from 2002 to 2016
when the one-child policy is still in place but with a much more relaxed implementation.
We didn't find significant impacts of fines on child abandonment and child abduction
similar to the significant effect for the period from 1988 to 2001.


One important potential concern about our study is the possible under-reporting of
missing children. We show that our results are unlikely to be biased by the
underreporting driven by information access due to income, likelihood to survive until
the period to use the BCBH service, and intension to report a missing child case. Our
results are robust to using the logarithm of the number of child abandonment and
abduction cases, excluding major prefectures that are perceived as top destinations for
child trafficking and excluding minority autonomous regions that have less gender bias
than the Han-dominated regions. The results also remain robust when including
additional controls such as the local income level and the total number of children in
the local prefecture. The results are also not contaminated by the concern of
misreporting of child abandonment as child abduction. Due to potential moral pressure,
families may report child abandonment as child abduction, resulting in more under-
reporting of child abandonment relative to child abduction.


We also rule out the potential confounding effects of other policies and changes which
occurred around the same time as the one-child policy, especially the Household
Responsibility System (HRS) land reform (Almond, Li and Zhang, 2019) and the
penetration of prenatal sex selection technologies (Chen, Li and Meng, 2013). First of
all, our main analysis covers the time period of 1988-2001, whereas the HRS land
reform that began in 1978 had completed by 1984 throughout the country (Lin, 1992).
By this period, the use of prenatal sex-diagnostic technology and sex-selective
abortions had become widely spread throughout Chinese counties, there is very little
                                            6
variation in the availability of such technologies during much of our sample period to
explain the patterns in missing children. Secondly, we find no significant differences in
the effects of one-child policy penalty fines on missing children in rural versus urban
regions during 1988-2001, which suggests that post-birth gender selection through
child abandonment and abduction existed in both rural and urban regions universally.
In fact, more than 70% of abandonment and abduction cases in our data occurred in
urban areas, which were not affected by the HRS land reform directly. The similar
response of missing children in rural and urban regions in response to penalty fines
suggest that access to prenatal sex selection technologies didn't not affect our findings
about the relationship.


This paper extends current studies on families' options to achieve the desired gender
ratio, by focusing on post-birth options instead of pre-birth options. For pre-birth gender
selection, the use of prenatal sex-diagnostic technology and sex-selective abortions are
perceived to be a key reason causing the excessive male-female sex ratio at birth and
the large number of "missing" unborn girls in cultures with strong son-preferences, such
as India and China (Chen, Li and Meng, 2013; Jayachandran, 2017; Almond, Li and
Zhang, 2019). However, families' gender discrimination behaviors continue after child
birth, through differential degree of neglect (Jayachandran and Kuziemko, 2011) and
gender-biased resource allocation in health care and medical attention (Sen, 1990). To
the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first empirical study to explore the
institutional factors involved in child abandonment and abduction. And by studying
another unintended consequence of the one-child policy in China, it also contributes to
the general body of literature on the economics of crime and on population control
policies (Edlund et al., 2013).


The rest of this analysis is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide background
information on the one-child policy and penalty fines in China. Section 3 introduces
our data on missing children and the potential under-reporting bias. Section 4 discusses
our theoretical hypotheses and the empirical model used to relate the birth control
                                            7
policy to the number of missing children in China. Section 5 presents our results and
robustness checks, while Section 6 concludes.


2. One-Child Policy and Penalty Fines
China's one-child policy was first introduced in 1979 and remained in place until 2016
(Ebenstein, 2010; Zhang, 2017), when it was replaced by the two-child policy. Under
the one-child policy, most families were restricted by birth quota. 8 Both pre-birth
authorization and after-birth penalties and rewards are implemented to ensure the
policy's effective implementation. Before a birth, a family was required to obtain a birth
certificate (Sheng Yu Fu Wu Zheng), which was typically released after verification that
the family was under the birth quota. If a family had an unauthorized birth, various
penalties would apply, including fines, deprivation of promotion opportunities and/or
potential demotion of the parents. Families obeying the one-child policy were rewarded
with certificates of merit, cash awards, favorable pension arrangements and the promise
of priority status for receiving schooling and medical services (Wei and Zhang, 2014;
Whyte, Feng and Cai, 2015). Families that had already used their birth quota were also
encouraged to have birth control operations, such as intrauterine device (IUD) insertion
and sterilization procedures.


Of the various policy instruments in place, fines for parents who violated the birth quota
requirement have been the main punitive mechanism for enforcing the one-child policy.
The amount of penalty fines is specified in provincial regulations on family planning
(Ji Hua Sheng Yu Tiao Li) following general guidelines of the family planning law
released by the central government. Throughout much of this period, the central
government gave provincial governments full authority and ample flexibility in the
local implementation of the one-child policy. And starting in the early 1990s, the
implementation outcome of the one-child policy was also used as a key indicator for

8
  Under the policy, most urban families are allowed to have only one child each. A small number of
families meeting certain conditions were allowed to have a second child; the specific conditions included
being parents in rural areas with only a daughter and after a specified birth gap, membership of one of
the parents in an ethnic minority group, etc.
                                                   8
the evaluation and promotion of local governmental officials (Huang, Lei and Sun,
2016). As a result, the strictness with which the one-child policy was enforced varied a
great deal, potentially as a function of the differing political ambitions of the local
leaders concerned.


A typical provincial regulation explicitly specified the level of the fine for the first
unauthorized birth to be paid by each parent and the types of families that would be
subject to such fines. Multiple fines would be levied on families that had more than one
unauthorized birth. Various types of fines have been used by provincial governments in
China since the early 1980s, but they all fall into one of two main categories based on
the mode of payment collection: either a certain percentage of the parent's wages is
deducted each month for a specified period of time, or the fine is collected as a one-
time lump-sum payment. While the monthly deductions have resulted in higher
collection rates, they depend on the employer's ability to collect the fines directly and
are thus mostly applicable in the state sector. With the private sector playing an ever
larger role in the Chinese economy, the second type of collection method has become
more common as time goes by. In general, the specific amount of the fine for birth
control violations depended on the parent's income. For the direct deduction method, a
region would specify a range of monthly percentages (henceforth referred to as Type 1
fines), whereas, for the lump-sum payment method, either a range would be set for the
total payment amount (Type 2 fines) or a multiple of the parent's annual income or the
average local annual income would be used to compute the total payment (Type 3 fines).
While Type 1 fines were used in most regions to begin with, the other two types
gradually came into greater use, with Type 3 fines ending up being the most widely
used by the early 2000s.9



9
  A typical example of how the type of fine evolved over time is provided by the Province of Hebei,
which used Type 1 fines in 1982-1988 and penalized parents for a first unauthorized birth by directly
garnishing 10% of each parent's salary every month for 14 years. Starting in 1989 and continuing on until
2016, however, it switched to Type 3 fines, charging a lump-sum penalty amounting to 2.5 times the
average local annual disposable income for each parent. Tibet, in contrast, maintained a Type 2 fine with
a fixed amount of 3,000 RMB throughout the years from 1980 to 2006.
                                                   9
To facilitate a comparison across regions and over time, following Ebenstein (2010),
we homogenize the various types of fines relative to local income to construct the
income-relative fine for each province. Specifically, for provinces using Type 3 fines,
we adopt the mean value of the range as the income-relative fine, while the other two
types of fines are converted as follows: For provinces using Type 1 fines, the income-
relative fine is calculated by discounting all future percentages of monthly fines at an
annual rate of 2% to obtain their net present value at the start of the period during which
the fine was to be levied; for provinces using Type 2 fines, the mean value of the
specified range of lump-sum fines is divided by the local region's average per capita
disposable income to derive the income-relative fine. In Figure 1 we present the trend
over time of the average income-relative fine, which shows that the ratio has risen from
1.2 to more than 4.1 between 1980 and 2016, thereby placing a larger financial burden
on the parents as time went by. Throughout the period from 1980 to 2016, there were
substantial cross-regional and temporal variations in the income-relative fine, as
provinces adjusted their local fine levels at different times. Most adjustments were
made during the mid-1980s, the early 1990s and the early 2000s, when the central
government released new guidelines for the one-child policy (as shown in Figure A1).


We explore the determinants of local fines and find no significant association with
social-economic factors, except for politicians' office terms. 10 Table 1 presents the
results, where province and year fixed effects are controlled for and bootstrapped
standard errors are clustered at the provincial level to address within-province
variations of penalty fines over time.11 Column 1 shows that the estimated coefficients
of key local socioeconomic factors, including local GDP per capita, wage level, and
transportation availability are all insignificant. But politicians' term length, in particular,
the governor's term is negatively correlated with the penalty fine. This indicates that


10 Provincial social economic variables such as GDP, population, area, cargo transportation, wage and
fiscal information are from China Statistical Yearbooks. Politicians' information is from Politicians
Database by Lingnan College, Zhongshan University (https://gitee.com/arlionn/IRE) and we updated the
data using 2008-2017 using Baidu Baike search.
11
   As shown in the table, the number of clusters is around 30, which is the number of Chinese provinces.
                                                  10
politicians newly taking the office are more likely to choose a higher penalty fine,
consistent with the theory of politicians' promotion incentives helping determine
penalty fines (Huang, Lei and Zhao, 2016).


Another potential determinant of fine level is the local government's need to use it as a
source of fiscal revenue, as the majority of the proceeds from these fines were kept by
local governments rather than being shared with the central government. Column 2
shows that the income-relative fine level is not significantly correlated with local fiscal
revenue capacity or the fiscal gap pressure. In this specification, however, the time
period analyzed is shorter and thus the sample size is smaller due to missing information
on the fiscal variables. As the one-child policy and the HRS land reform (1978-1984)
began around the same time in China, we test whether the local penalty fine level is
correlated with the land reform speed in column 3, by extending the sample period to
1981, although our main analysis focuses on the period of 1988-2001. Using the
proportion of production teams enrolled in the HRS as the measure of the speed of land
reform in local provinces12, we find that the HRS land reform did not significantly affect
the level of penalty fines. This is in line with expectations, as the HRS land reform was
largely completed in the whole nation by 1984 (Lin, 1992; Almond, Li and Zhang, 2019)
while most penalty fine variations occurred in late 1980s and 1990s. In fact, the data
we collected from the Provincial Gazetteers show that over 99% of production teams
in all provinces had been enrolled in the HRS by 1984.


In addition to the fine level, fine collection rate also affects how much financial pressure
the fines placed on families. It is influenced by both the mode of fine collection and the
central government's overall stance toward birth control policies. Before the 1990s, as
fines in most regions were deducted directly from individual's salaries, the collection
rate was close to 100%. When local governments switched from direct deductions to

12
  The percentage of production teams enrolled in the Household Responsibility System (HRS) in each
Chinese province was collected from the Provincial Gazetteers during 1979-1984, with records of Anhui,
Shaanxi, Inner Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang missing.

                                                 11
lump-sum fines, however, the difficulty of fine collection increased substantially. In
response, the central government passed a stricter enforcement regulation in 1992,
which helped maintain the collection rate at relatively high levels during the 1990s. But
toward the turn of the century, while the one-child policy remained on the books,
increasing concerns about potential labor shortages and about the birth rate falling to
an excessively low level prompted the central government to draft the Law on
Population and Family Planning in 2001 (henceforth the LPFP of 2001). For the first
time, the law thus called for the protection of citizens' reproductive rights, in addition
to laying down their family planning obligations, resulting in a dramatic decline in the
fine collection rates (Yao, 2005; Shi, 2006).13


Local case studies have also documented similar patterns of high collection rates in the
1990s and dramatic drops after 2002 (see Figure 1). Jiang and Zhang (1993) reported
that the fine collection rate in Suizhou, Hubei Province, reached an average of 91.59%
during 1985-1993, and similarly high collection rates above 90% till 2001 were also
observed in Tianmen, Hubei Province, by Shi (2006). Following the passage of the
LPFP of 2001, Shi (2006) found that the fine collection rate dropped abruptly to 20%
in 2002 and even lower afterwards. And lower collection rates were also observed in
other regions, such as 45% in Pei County, Jiangsu Province, in 2002 by Meng, Wang
and Zhu (2008), 30% in Quzhou, Zhejiang Province, in 2006 by Huang (2008), and
23.5% in Chenzhou, Hunan Province, in 2007 by Cao (2012). Gao and Lu (2006) also
provide evidence for increased difficulty in collecting birth-related fines at the local
level after the passage of the LPFP in 2001. Thus, we believe that the passage of the
LPFP of 2001 effectively marked the end of the strict enforcement of the one-child
policy and it is therefore appropriated to use these fines to measure the stringency of
the policy only in the years prior to 2002.


3. Data and Potential Reporting Biases


13
     This is also consistent with the drops in birth-control operations after 2002 (see Figure A2).
                                                      12
We now turn to discuss the data used in the analysis and our strategy for addressing the
potential reporting biases related to the data. One of the main tasks in our study is
constructing a dataset of missing children in local prefectures based on family reports.
To control for other factors in the analysis, we also use data on demographic and crime
variables in local prefectures.


3.1 Data on missing children
As is true of other underground activities, there is very little information available on
child abandonment and abduction, and China is no exception, with no official statistics
or reports on the number of cases of child abandonment or abduction (Jiang and
Sánchez-Barricarte, 2013). Following Wang et al. (2018), we use information on
family-reported cases of missing children to measure child abandonment and abduction
obtained from the website of Baby Come Back Home (BCBH), the largest non-
governmental organization in China serving the community of missing persons. More
than 95% of these reports were filed after 2011, and 65% were filed after 2015 (as
shown in Figure 2).14


A missing person case can be logged onto the website either by a family that is looking
for a missing person or by a missing person looking for his or her family. Unlike Wang
et al. (2018), who also use information provided by children looking for their families,
to build regional statistics for missing children, we use only the first type of data, i.e.,
information supplied by families looking for their children. Our reason for doing so is
that, since all self-reported cases are based on recollection, missing children looking for
their biological parents tend to have a vaguer memory of the location and the date of
the incident and their age at the time that they went missing, as most children are quite
young when abandoned or abducted and may have great difficulty providing accurate
information when reporting the incident many years later.

14
   BCBH has also collaborated with the Ministry of Public Security of China to promote the sharing of
information on missing children since the Ministry launched a special operation to counter child
trafficking in April 2009. Ministry of Public Security, 05/07/2009, Brief on the Anti-trafficking Special
Action in China [http://www.mps.gov.cn/n2253534/n2253535/c4018254/content.html] (in Chinese).
                                                   13
Information on a missing person can be provided to BCBH either online or via a hotline.
Volunteers are then assigned to follow up on the reports by cross-checking the
information provided with the families and the local police force, thereby minimizing
false reporting. After the accuracy of the information is verified, reported cases are
included in the database and listed in the forum section of the website for visitors to
access and pass along. Each case report includes the name, gender, birth date, height of
the child at the time he or she went missing, the location and date of the disappearance,
and other descriptive information (see Figure A3). BCBH classifies missing person
reports according to whether the child was deserted or given up for adoption based on
the detailed descriptions provided in each case. Then each case is labeled with the status
of desertion/adoption or abduction.15 In this paper, we define child abandonment as
cases involving children who were either deserted or given up for adoption, i.e., cases
in which families voluntarily surrendered the child. If a child was neither deserted nor
given up for adoption, we classify the case as one of child abduction, i.e., in which the
child was separated from the family involuntarily. 16 The majority of children lost
before 1990 were due to child abandonment, while the majority of children lost after
1990 were abducted (see Figure A4).


Using information given on the registration form, we geocode the longitude and latitude
coordinates of the location where the child went missing.17 Geocoded locations are
then matched to the administrative boundaries of the relevant prefectures.18 The age of
the child at the time of missing is calculated as the difference between the year of their
disappearance and their year of birth. We focus on children who were younger than 14

15
    The database is publicly available at https://www.baobeihuijia.com/so.aspx (in Chinese).
16
    Our categorization of child abduction is slightly broader than the legal definition of abduction, which
refers to cases of children who are missing as a result of criminal action by traffickers. While there are
occasional reports of parents losing a child by accident -- as, for example, when a child becomes lost in
a crowd and then is not found -- such cases (cases that would not be correlated with the demand for
illegal adoption, which constitutes the demand side of child abduction) are extremely rare.
17
    We use the getpoint service offered by Baidu Map at
http://api.map.baidu.com/lbsapi/getpoint/index.html.
18
    For reports that lack detailed street locations of the incident, we use the geographic centroid of the
reported prefecture for the latitude and longitude.
                                                    14
years old at the time of their disappearance, since that is the age group identified in the
official definition of child trafficking in China. From the 41,144 cases of families
looking for missing persons that had been registered by June 2018, we exclude cases
for which information is missing on gender, birth year, year of disappearance or
addresses that cannot be used to identify prefectures;19 this leaves 40,825 cases, out of
which 16,882 are child abandonment cases and 23,983 are child abduction cases. When
focusing on children under 14 years old when they disappeared, we obtain 38,173
reports on missing children, which account for more than 92% of all missing person
reports (see Table A1). Around 44% of the reported cases are of children who are
missing because they were abandoned, as reported by their families, whereas the
remaining 56% concern families who are looking for children who were abducted or
lost involuntarily.


Based on our sample, child trafficking cases exhibit some geographic clustering
patterns, as shown in Figure 3. The 8 provinces for which there are the most reports of
child abandonment are Sichuan, Jiangsu, Anhui, Guangdong, Henan, Hubei, Shandong
and Zhejiang, which account for 53% of all the child abandonment cases in our sample,
but these 8 provinces are home to 47% of China's total population. Child abduction is
even more geographically concentrated than child abandonment. The top 8 provinces
reported as the location of child abductions are Guizhou, Sichuan, Guangdong, Henan,
Yunnan, Hubei, Chongqing and Hunan, which account for 62% of reported child
abductions in our sample but for only 38% of the total population. The destinations for
trafficked children are also geographically concentrated, but in a different set of regions,
which include Henan, Shandong, Hebei, Fujian, Jiangsu, Guangdong, Anhui and
Sichuan. These regions are the destination for about 70% of trafficked children but
account for only 47% of China's total population.20


19
   Vague descriptions of the location of the disappearance are treated as missing information. Examples
include "Our child got lost in front of our house", "Our child got lost on a train" and "Our child got lost
in a market".
20
   It should be noted that the destination information may be inaccurate as it is based on the recollections
of the missing child many years after the incident.
                                                    15
The number of missing children varied substantially over time, as shown in Figure 4.
There are two obvious spikes, one during the Great Famine of 1959-1962 and the other
one during the early 1990s. The number of lost children remained quite stable before
1978, except during the Great Famine of 1959-1962. Starting from 1979, both child
abandonment and child abduction started to increase dramatically. On average, there
are 26 reports from families looking for lost children each year before 1957, but that
number jumped to an average of 217 children each year between 1958 and 1962, to 212
children in 1978, and then reaching more than 2,000 missing children each year during
the early 1990s. Since the mid-1990s, there has been a steep and steady decline in the
number of children reported missing, with that number stabilizing since 2004, with
around 385 children missing each year until 2017. Overall, more than 90% of these
children were lost before 2010, and close to 80% of the disappearances occurred before
2001. Obviously the increases observed in the last two decades of the 20th century
cannot be explained by economic hardship, given the country's economic growth and
the reduction in poverty achieved during that period. A more rigorous examination is
needed to provide a solid explanation for the patterns of missing child incidents in
China.


The two types of missing child cases, child abandonment and child abduction, differ
somewhat in their time trends and in their gender and age composition. Child
abandonment cases show more temporal variations. While their numbers both peaked
in the early 1990s and dropped afterward, the number of child abduction cases has
remained higher than its pre-1978 level after 2010, but the number of child
abandonment cases has nearly returned to its pre-1978 levels. Abandoned children also
tend to be much younger than abducted children at the time of their disappearance.
Children who are abandoned are more likely to be newborns, whereas children who are
abducted tend to be older yet still under 5 years old (see Figure 5). The gender
composition of these two groups of missing children also differs. More than 70% of all
abandoned children are girls, whereas about 70% of trafficked children are boys. And
                                          16
this difference in gender composition was especially stark during the period between
1978 and 2002 (see Figure 6).


3.2 Data on gender preference
One of the main factors that influences child trafficking is the strength of the preference
for sons in the local culture. The most frequently used indicator for son preference is
the sex ratio at birth (SRB) (see Ebenstein, 2010, and Chen et al., 2015). Because, under
the one-child policy, Chinese families could resort to sex-selective abortions to increase
the likelihood of having a son (Abrevaya, 2009; Chen et al., 2013; Oster, Chen and Yu,
2010), it is reasonable to infer that regions with higher boy-girl ratios among newborns
tend to have a stronger cultural preference for boys21. In fact, whereas the average male-
female ratio for newborns is around 103:100 globally, the sex ratio at birth has remained
above 110:100 in the past few decades in China. The substantially larger number of
newborn boys than girls suggests a strong gender bias toward sons, whereas sex-
selective abortions are considered to be the main reason for this distorted gender ratio
(Hull, 1990).


We use the SRB in China's population census of 2010 to reflect gender preference in
local prefectures. The 2010 SRB is used for the following reasons. First of all, gender
preferences are relatively stable over time.22 The mean SRB in Chinese prefectures in
2010 was 1.16, which is much higher than in other countries and points to the important
role of gender preferences in the nation's cultural tradition. The correlation between
2010 SRB and 2000 SRB is more than 90%. 23 While there is substantial variation
across prefectures within China, prefectures with persistently high SRBs include
Huangshi, Anhui Province (1.4) and Putian, Fujian Province (1.31). Prefectures in Inner
Mongolia, in contrast, continue to have relatively low SRBs, reaching a ratio of 1.02 in

21 In addition to sex selective abortions, two other potential reasons leading to the excessive male-female
ratio at birth are underreporting of female births (Cai and Lavely, 2003) and female infanticide (Wu,
Viisainen and Hemminki, 2006).
22
   As shown in Figure A3, the changes in the SRB between 2000 and 2010 indicate neither obvious
convergence nor divergence at the prefecture level over that period.
23 Using 2000 census data to construct the SRB measure also yields similar estimates.

                                                    17
many prefectures. Second, as most of the missing children were lost during 1988-2001
and SRB is directly impacted by the one-child policy during the period, the 2010 SRB
would serve as a relatively exogenous gender preference indicator for analyzing the
relationship between missing children and penalty fines. To further test the validity of
our results, we will also use sex ratio at birth from other years as robustness checks.


3.3 Potential reporting bias
3.3.1 The problem of under-reporting
Due to the self-reporting feature of the database and the unethical nature of the activities
involved, our data on child abandonment and abduction suffer from under-reporting.
As long as the likelihood of under-reporting is uncorrelated with the income-relative
fine level, it will merely increase the measurement error in our dependent variable.
Specifically, under-reporting may occur for any of three reasons. First of all, under-
reporting could be caused by information barriers or financial constraints faced by
parents in search for their children that prevent them from reporting their missing
children to BCBH. Second, families need to have survived at least until 2007, the
founding year of BCBH, in order to have been able to report their missing child on the
BCBH website. Third, under-reporting may be a result of the family's lack of any
intention to search for the child to begin with.


For the first type of source, we test the correlation between fine and GDP per capita or
income in local prefectures in Table 1 and find that local penalty fine level is not
significantly correlated with the local income. It indicates that even though richer
prefectures have higher likelihood for families to report missing children due to more
information access, it only brings measurement error to the number of reported cases.


As the second source of under-reporting has to do with survival bias, which is affected
by the survival rate of the parents, this bias will be greater for earlier cases. According
to age-specific death rate data for China, the death rate of age cohorts younger than 50
is quite stable, while the rate for people older than 50 rises sharply (Abubakar, Tillmann
                                            18
and Banerjee, 2015). Therefore, the resultant under-reporting bias will be substantially
more severe for cases that occurred before 1988, since the parents would be older than
50 by 2015. To address this potential concern, we will limit our sample to cases in which
the disappearance happened after 1988. With the age-specific death rate of cohorts
younger than 50 practically invariant with age in China, we argue that the problem of
under-reporting due to the non-survival of parents will be largely mitigated by this
strategy.


The third type of potential under-reporting bias will be very different in the case of child
abandonment than in the case of child abduction. The likelihood that parents will decide
to search for a missing child or not is influenced by the value of the child to the family.
The more valuable a child is to his or her family, the more likely it is that the parents
will devote resources to search for the child. As most abduction cases involve boys, we
expect a large percentage of families to engage in a search for their abducted children,
with the result that this type of under-reporting bias will less important in abduction
cases. On the other hand, since child abandonment is a decision voluntarily made by
the family, the likelihood of under-reporting will be higher than it will be in the case of
child abduction. Therefore, there will be a greater need to address the potential under-
reporting of child abandonment cases in the empirical analysis. To the extent that this
under-reporting is not correlated with the strictness of the one-child policy in place, it
will not bias our estimates. This is likely, since a decision to search for a child who was
abandoned would be the result of a change in life circumstances which, a priori, does
not have to be correlated with the one-child policy.


3.3.2 Potential misreporting of abandonment as abduction
The dataset provides information on whether a reported case involves a child who was
voluntarily given up or a child who was involuntarily separated from his or her family.
We categorize the former as child abandonment and the latter as child abduction. In
addition to the general issue of the under-reporting of lost or missing children, another
potential problem with our data is that families may misreport an instance of child
                                            19
abandonment as child abduction, since child abandonment is still perceived as morally
unethical despite how surprisingly prevalent it is in China. Misreporting a case of child
abduction as child abandonment is very unlikely, however, so there is a potential
upward bias in reported child abduction and an under-reporting problem for child
abandonment.


Although families may misreport the reason why a child is missing, we believe that
families would still accurately report other related information, such as the gender and
birth year of the child and the year and location of the disappearance. As a result, the
two types of biases caused by misreporting may be addressed by exploring the gender
patterns of missing children. Our current statistics show that most children who are
abandoned are girls. If there is misreporting of children abandonment as children
abduction, then some of the girls reported as having been abducted will actually have
been abandoned. It is then possible to mitigate the impact of misreporting child
abandonment cases as child abduction by focusing on the sample of abduction cases
involving boys only. In this way, we prevent our results concerning the relationship
between the abduction of boys and the one-child policy from being affected by the
misreporting problem. As for the impact of misreporting on child abandonment, as
misreporting due to shame or fear of potential peer criticism is uncorrelated with the
one-child policy, then, as in the case of under-reporting due to the lack of an intention
to look for a missing child, it will merely increase the measurement error for child
abandonment.


Based on the discussion above, the sample period for our main analysis excludes years
after 2001, as the fine level can no longer measure how strict the one-child policy was
enforced after the passage of the LPFP of 2001, whereas the period prior to 1988 is
excluded to maintain relative stability in information access and awareness of child
trafficking. Accordingly, our study focuses on the relationship between missing
children and fines for the time frame of 1988-2001, but we also use the sample period
of 2002-2016 as a placebo test.
                                           20
4. Theoretical Hypotheses and Empirical Model
4.1 Theoretical hypotheses
In traditional Chinese society, there is a preference for sons over daughters. In the
absence of birth control policies, Chinese families would have the option of having
more children until a child of the desired gender is born. Under the one-child policy,
however, this option became much costlier, as hefty fines had to be paid by parents who
had more than one child. This then increased the demand for the two alternatives to
over-quota births, i.e., the abandonment of a first-born girl in order to retain the quota
for another child, or the abduction of a boy.


Because it would give parents another opportunity to have their "first" child in the eyes
of the government, the abandonment of girls became a substitute (however dreadful it
may be) for giving birth to an additional child and having to pay a large fine. But more
of an explanation is needed as to why the abduction of a boy -- or, equivalently, the
purchase of a boy who has been abducted by others -- could also serve as a substitute
for additional births. Parents who felt it extremely important to have a boy but were
unwilling to give up their existing child would have to pay fines for having an additional
child regardless of whether they opted to have another child themselves or to resort to
having a boy abducted. The key advantage of the latter option, however, is that they are
guaranteed to receive a child of the preferred gender, which is not the case if they choose
to have another child of their own; hence the substitute value of boy abduction.


Thus, when the size of the fines increases, the price of having additional children rises
accordingly, thereby fueling the demand for the substitute goods for additional births,
i.e., the abandonment of girls or the abduction of boys. As long as the cost for the
parents of abandoning a baby girl (essentially the traumatic emotional experience of
separating from their own child) is not infinitely high, the supply of this substitute will
be elastic and thus the stricter birth control policy will result in a larger number of baby
girls being abandoned. Furthermore, in regions with a stronger-than-average preference
                                            21
for boys over girls, the supply of girl abandonment is more elastic. Thus, the same
increase in birth control fines will lead to a bigger increase in the number of cases of
girl abandonment in these regions. In the case of boy abduction, as long as there is
uncertainty as to the gender of a future naturally born child, the increased fine and thus
the higher price of additional births will drive up the demand for abducted boys.
Additionally, in regions with a stronger-than-average preference for boys over girls, the
same increase in birth control fines will lead to a bigger increase in the demand for
abducted boys, since their gender (the desired one) is known. Thus, in parallel with the
dynamics observed in the case of girl abandonment, the same increase in birth control
fines will lead to a bigger increase in the number of boy abductions in these regions.


4.2 Empirical model
Taking advantage of regional and temporal variations in birth control policies, we will
then empirically test the theoretical hypotheses outlined above. In particular, we will
estimate the average effect of changes in income-relative fines on the number of cases
of child abandonment and child abduction, along with the heterogeneity of such effects
due to differences in gender preferences across Chinese regions.


Although penalties for violating the one-child policy also included other measures, such
as demotion, deprivation of promotion opportunities, restrictions on eligibility for the
hukou family registration program and the loss of other social benefits, we focus on the
fines as a measurement of the stringency of the one-child policy because it is the policy
component that is most widely used and for which the most information is readily
available. We use the following empirical model to estimate the impacts of fines on
missing children:


                         Y = F + X +  +  +  t +  ,                               (1)


where the dependent variable, Y , is the quantity of child abandonment or abduction
in prefecture i in year t, F is a vector of fine variables, including local fines and fines
                                            22
in other regions, while X is a set of control variables that includes local population
density, total number of arrests in the local region, which reflects both the crime rate
and the strength of the policing effort, as well as terms and ages of provincial leaders
(including the party secretary and governor of each province). Prefecture fixed effects
are included to control for unobservable cross-prefecture variations that do not vary
over time, such as regional variations in the preferences for males, family size
preferences and the local culture's level of tolerance of unethical activities. Year fixed
effects are included to control for variations that are the same across prefectures, such
as national trends in child trafficking and other crimes. Furthermore, prefecture-specific
trends are included to control for time-varying factors that take a linear form at the
prefectural level, such as regional anti-trafficking efforts, and local variations in media
and transportation infrastructure. Standard errors are clustered at the prefecture level to
correct the within-prefecture correlation of the error term.


Because child abduction is an inter-regional, underground business, penalties in the
form of fines may not only affect child trafficking in the local prefecture but also child
abduction in other prefectures. To better distinguish the effects of the fines levied in
different regions, we explore the spatial impacts in two different ways. Firstly, we focus
on the immediate neighboring provinces or the 1st-order provincial neighbors of the
local prefecture, by constructing their population weighted fine level, since cross-
provincial trafficking cost is much higher than within-province trafficking (Wang et al.,
2018). By exploring whether the average fine level in the 1st-order neighbors affects
the number of missing children in a prefecture, we can identify the existence of spatial
spillover effects since penalty fines are determined at the provincial level. Alternatively,
we explore more gradual spatial changes and classify all other prefectures based on
their geographic distances to the local prefecture into the following categories: those
that are 0-300 km, 300-600 km, 600-900 km and further than 900 km away from the
prefecture. The size of the fine in each group of prefectures is then calculated as the
population-weighted average fine in the same distance group in order to reflect the
relative stringency of the enforcement of the one-child policy in these regions.
                                            23
In order to identify how local gender preference affects the impact of the one-child
policy on child trafficking, we include two types of interactions between the size of the
fine and the sex ratio at birth (SRB) in the estimations: local fine and local SRB, and
the average fine and the average SRB of neighboring regions, as shown in Equation (2)
below:


                    Y = F + 2 (F  SRB ) + X +  +  +  t +                               (2)


Given that child abandonment is mainly the result of decisions made by families in the
local region, the coefficient of the interaction of local fine and local SRB is expected to
be positive for abandonment. Moreover, because girls are more likely to be abandoned
than boys, the increase in child abandonment should be higher for regions with a
stronger preference for males. By comparison, the level of child abductions is mainly
influenced by the gender preferences of the neighboring regions that are subject to the
one-child quota because child traffickers tend to find destination households some
distance away from the original location of the missing child in order to avoid being
caught. Specifically, we use a discrete variable of a high-SRB group, with the 2010
SRB above 1.17 (the national average SRB level in 2010) to reflect regional variations
in gender preference. As a robustness check, we also explore the interactions of fine
variables with the continuous measurement of SRB as well as SRB measures from other
years.


5. Results
5.1 Fines and child abandonment
We find that higher penalty fines lead to significant increases in child abandonment in
the local prefecture. Table 2 presents the estimated coefficients for fines and child
abandonment using regression model (1) for the period of 1988-2001. Column 1 shows
that, when the fine level increases by one unit or, in other words, the monetary penalty
is increased by the equivalent of the per capita average annual local income, the number
                                            24
of reported cases of child abandonment increases by 0.3 in the local prefecture. Given
that the average number of reported cases of child abandonment is 2.15 per year at the
prefectural level, such an increase in the fine corresponds to a raise of around 14% in
reported cases of child abandonment. The impact of the fines on child abandonment is
significant only for girls, as shown in columns 2 and 3 of Table 2. Girl abandonment
increases by 0.25 or a 14.9%, when the income-relative fine increases by 1. The
abandonment of boys is not significantly affected by the local fine, although the
coefficient is positive. Given the restricted birth quota and the preference for sons in
the Chinese culture, parents will have an incentive to abandon girls for the purpose of
avoiding the fines and saving their birth quota for a potential boy in the future. And the
more stringent the enforcement of the birth control policy, the more likely girls are to
be abandoned by their families. The above results support our theoretical predictions.


The results show that larger fines lead to an increase in child abandonment only in the
same local prefecture, whereas the coefficients for average fines in neighboring
provinces relative to child abandonment are not statistically significant (see column
4).24 As expected, we do not observe spatial spillover effects of the fines on child
abandonment in other regions, and the pattern is similar for the abandonment of both
boys and girls. Because the main effect of higher fines is to increase the financial cost
of violating the one-child policy, child abandonment, which is the result of a decision
made by the parents of the abandoned child themselves, is only affected by the
stringency of the local one-child policy and should not be affected by the stringency of
its enforcement in other regions.


Among the control variables, neither population density nor law enforcement affect the
number of reported child abandonment cases significantly, probably because child
abandonment was not severely punished in China before 2001, although it was legally

24
     The standard errors in the specification reported in column 4 of Table 2 are clustered at the province-
year level, as there might be positive correlations in the error term in prefectures within the same province
in a certain year due to similar culture of child abandonment, close communications and other similarities.
                                                     25
defined as a crime. This finding is also consistent with the voluntary nature of child
abandonment, since this suggests that it is not correlated with typical crime or
environmental factors, such as population density and the crime rate. We do find
significant correlations between the governor's term with the number of total child
abandonment and girl abandonment. This is consistent with the theory of politician
promotion incentives in that politicians try to improve local governance and overall
social conditions in the early terms of their office to impress the upper level evaluators.


Finally, the positive and significant coefficient of local fine remains when we remove
all control variables and when we replace the prefectural trends with provincial trends,
as shown in columns 5 and 6.


5.2 Fines and child abduction
Child abduction differs from child abandonment in China in two ways. First, the
destination of children who are abducted tends to be more distant from the location of
the abduction, as child traffickers travel afar to avoid recognition by the parents and
capture by the police. Second, most of the children abducted in China are boys, whereas
most of the children abandoned are girls.


Table 3 presents the estimated coefficients for fines and child abductions. In contrast to
the findings for child abandonment and in line with the above discussion, the number
of children who are abducted is significantly influenced by the size of the fine in nearby
provinces but not by its size in the local region. When the population-weighted fine in
neighboring provinces increases by one unit, there is 1 more reported case of child
abduction, which amounts to about 35.7% of the total number of cases of child
abduction in the local prefecture (see column 1). Given that almost all provinces
increased the stringency of their enforcement of the one-child policy by raising local
fines and that the policy compliance rate remained high between 1988 and 2001, the
positive coefficient that we observe helps to explain the sharp increase in child
abductions during that period in China.
                                            26
As a majority of the children abducted are boys, we find that the size of the fines has a
significant effect only on the number of boys who were abducted, as shown in columns
2 and 3. The number of missing boys due to abduction increases by 0.89 or 43.4% of
the average level when neighbors' penalty fine increase by 1 unit; but we do not find
similar patterns in the case of girls. This is consistent with the theoretical argument that
a stricter enforcement of the birth control policy would drive up the demand for boys,
making it more lucrative for traffickers to abduct boys. Anecdotal evidence also
indicates that the cost of adopting a boy is much higher than the cost of adopting a girl
(Shen, Antonopoulos and Papanicolaou, 2013). In contrast to the upward pressure
exerted by local fines on the abandonment of girls, the effect of fines in terms of the
abduction of boys is significant only in nearby prefectures, i.e., prefectures located in
the local region's first-order neighboring provinces (see column 2). This is in line with
the expectation that child traffickers attempt to evade capture by taking the abducted
children further away from the abduction site.


Among the control variables, the coefficient of population density is positive and close
to being significant (at 5% level), while the coefficient of local arrests is negative and
insignificant. This indicates that the probability that a child, especially a boy, being
abducted is higher in more densely populated regions and lower in regions with stricter
law enforcement. As it is crucial for offenders who abduct a child to avoid being
apprehended, the cost of abducting a child is expected to be lower in more densely
populated regions and where law enforcement is laxer. Local politicians' characteristics
are not significant here although the provincial secretary's term is negatively correlated
with the number of children abducted, suggesting that cross-regional illegal child
trafficking activities might be difficult to be constrained by efforts in one local
prefecture. Our estimates of the positive impacts of neighbor's fines on child abduction
remain robust when we cluster standard errors at the province-year level, remove all
controls or replace prefectural trends with province trends, as shown in columns 4-6.

                                            27
5.3 Spatial patterns of child abandonment and child abduction
We explore the geographic spread of the birth control policy's impact further in this
section by using more detailed distance information instead of neighboring relationship
of administrative provinces. This is particularly relevant for child abduction cases, as
longer trafficking distances would increase the transportation cost and exposure risk for
traffickers while reducing their risk of being discovered by the children's families or
by local police. Child traffickers therefore have an incentive to choose a destination
located at an intermediate distance in order to minimize the total cost of their operation.
And in fact, previous research on child abduction has found that children are primarily
trafficked to neighboring provinces and places within 500 km from the location of the
abduction (Wang et al., 2018).


To examine the geographic patterns empirically, for each local prefecture we assign all
other prefectures to one of four groups based on their geographic distance from the local
prefecture: those within 300 km, 300-600 km, or 600-900 km from the prefecture and
those further than 900 km away from it. Then, for each prefecture group, we construct
the average fine levied in all the prefectures in the same group using their respective
populations as weights. Figure 7 presents the estimated coefficients and their 95%
confident intervals of the population-weighted average fine in each distance group on
child abandonment and child abduction (see Table A2 for more detailed information).
Consistent with the above results, child abandonment, which mostly involves girls, is
positively influenced only by the size of the locally levied fine, whereas the coefficients
for fines in all four groups of non-local prefectures are not significantly different from
zero for child abandonment. In contrast, child abduction is significantly influenced by
the size of the fines levied in prefectures located between 300 and 600 km away, or
from 3 to 6 hours' driving distance from the local prefecture, while the coefficients for
the fines in the local prefecture and other groups of non-local prefectures are not
significant. This confirms the previous finding that most children trafficked are taken
to destinations within 500 km of their abduction site (Wang et al., 2018). As larger fines
increase the demand for child adoption and thus the value of children who are abducted,
                                            28
the spatial spillover effects of fines on child abduction point to the widespread
geographic impact of birth control policies on child trafficking.


5.4 Gender preferences, fines and missing children
As predicted in Section 4.1, gender preferences play an important role in determining
the impacts of the one-child policy. Table 4 presents the estimated coefficients in
equation (2), including interactions of fine variables and the indicator variable for
whether a region has high SRB in 2010 or not as the gender preference intensity
measure. The coefficient of the interaction between local fine and local high SRB
indicator is positive and significant for all abandonment and girl abandonment, as
shown in columns 1-2. The results indicate that the impact of the fine on child
abandonment is significantly higher in regions with a stronger gender bias. The
interaction impact of penalty fine and gender bias preference is especially true for girl
abandonment. Prefectures with stronger preference for boys are more likely to see
increased abandonment of girls by families wishing to keep the birth quota so that they
can potentially have another baby in the future. As shown in columns 3 and 4, when the
interactions of neighbor fine and neighbor's high SRB status are included, the positive
coefficients of interactions between local fine and high SRB status remain robust. And
the results are preserved when we use interactions of fine variables with the continuous
SRB measure instead of discrete indicators (as shown in Table A3).


In contrast to the situation with regard to child abandonment, the level of child
abduction is significantly influenced by the fine level in neighboring provinces, and
thus we include the interaction between the immediate neighbors' average fine and
those regions' overall SRB in the estimation in order to study the impact of gender
preferences. As shown in columns 5-8 of Table 4, the coefficient for the interaction of
the fine and high SRB status in the neighboring regions is positive while being
borderline significant at the 10% level for all child abduction. For boy abduction, the
coefficient of neighbors' fine and neighbors' high SRB status is positively significant.
The results indicate that a larger increase in the number of boy abduction cases will be
                                           29
observed in a prefecture when birth control fines in its neighboring provinces are higher
if those provinces also have a stronger gender bias toward boys. In contrast to child
abandonment, the interactions of local fine and local high SRB status are not significant
when included in columns 7 and 8. This indicates that local fine and local gender
perception bias do not significantly affect boy abduction, consistent with the distant
abduction pattern in our results on how fines affect child abduction. The results remain
when we use the continuous measure of SRB, as shown in Table A4.


5.5 Missing children in different age groups
Unlike the case in other countries, the main purpose of child trafficking in China is to
put the children up for illegal adoption to get around the birth control policy. This offers
another dimension in which we can conduct additional tests for the argument that birth
control policies have been a reason for why children go missing in China. In particular,
we explore the age patterns of children abandoned and abducted and how their age
frequency has been impacted by changes in birth control policy.


While we focus on the intention to keep the birth quota for a chance of having a boy in
the future as the main reason for girl abandonment, researchers have also documented
cases where some families abandon children with disabilities or severe diseases. If the
parents' decision to abandon a child is mainly driven by changes in the one-child policy,
then families would abandon children at very early ages in order to avoid official checks.
But if the latter reason is the main one, then the age at abandonment will spread over a
wider range. Figure 8 presents the estimated coefficients and their 95% confidence
intervals for fines' effects on the number of child abandonment and abduction in five
age groups: 0, 1, 2-4, 5-9 and 10-14 (see detailed results in Table A4). The results show
that fines significantly and positively influence child abandonment only for newborns
(babies younger than 1 year of age), while the abandonment of children in any of the
other age groups is not significantly affected by the size of the fines. The result thus
supports our argument that families abandon their children (mainly girls) to avoid fines
in preparation for a future birth.
                                            30
In contrast, we find that stricter enforcement of the one-child policy mainly increases
the number of abductions of children between 1 and 4 years old. When neighboring
provinces increase the average fine by 1, the number of 1-year-old children abducted
would increase by 0.22 and the number of abducted children between 2 and 4 years of
age would increase by 0.80. The level of the average fine in neighboring provinces did
not, however, significantly impact the number of abducted children who are either
younger than 1 or older than 5. While younger children are preferred for illegal
adoptions because of their limited early memory and attachment to their biological
parents, newborns are usually kept indoors and accompanied by adults almost all of the
time, making them much less accessible to child traffickers. As a result, children
between the ages of 1 and 4 are the primary target of child traffickers, since they are
still malleable enough to form new memories with their adoptive families and also are
engaged in more outdoor activities and are thus more accessible. These findings are
therefore consistent with our argument concerning birth control policies' impact on the
number of missing children.


5.6 Placebo test: missing children after 2002
Although the one-child policy was not officially abolished until 2016, when it was
replaced by the two-child policy, the enforcement of the one-child policy was eased a
great deal after the passage of the Law on Population and Family Planning (LPFP) in
2001 in response to mounting criticism of the harsh measures adopted by local officials
to meet their birth control targets, including forced abortions performed during late-
stage pregnancies. The LPFP emphasizes that individuals' reproductive rights should be
respected and mandates civilized law enforcement responses to violations of the one-
child policy. Local governments are also required to use economic incentives and other
more civilized approaches in order to meet local birth control targets. As a result, the
enforcement of the one-child policy has been relaxed substantially after 2002. Under
the LPFP, forced abortions are no longer permitted, and fines for having an additional
child can no longer be collected using force. Several researchers have documented a
                                           31
significant drop in the collection rate for these fines since the early 2000s (Shi, 2006,
and Gao and Lu, 2006). The passage of LPFP has thus been regarded as the main reason
for the gradually relaxation of the one-child policy since 2001.


Without the effective collection of birth control fines, the link between the size of the
fine and the number of missing children ceases to exist. Thus, the sample for the period
after 2002 can be used as a placebo test of the argument linking the one-child policy
and missing children. Specifically, we analyze the impact of the fines on child
abandonment and child abduction in 2002-2016, with the estimation results shown in
Table 5. As expected, most of the fine variables do not significantly affect either child
abandonment or child abduction. 25 In other words, neither the size of child
abandonment nor that of child abduction changes significantly in response to changes
in fine level after 2002. Furthermore, the number of reported cases of children
abandonment dropped dramatically, to around 46 cases per year on average, during
2012-2015, suggesting that families became more likely to keep their unauthorized
children after 2002.


Given that no obvious changes have occurred in gender preferences in the past two
decades, the demand for male heirs appears to have remained more or less the same.
Therefore, the different patterns observed before and after 2002 provide further support
for the proposition that it is the strict enforcement of the one-child policy that provides
an explanation for the higher incidence of child abandonment and child abduction
during the last two decades of the 20th century in China.


5.7 Robustness checks
We test the robustness of our main findings by conducting additional tests, with the
results shown in Table 6. To begin with, we replace the dependent variable used in the

25
   The only significant result is the negative coefficient of local fine on boy abandonment. As the number
of boy abandonment cases is quite small in the overall child abandonment sample, the significance is
most likely driven by spurious correlation with a few observations of boy abandonment taking the non-
zero value.
                                                   32
previous estimations, i.e., the total quantity of child abandonment and abduction, with
the logarithm of child abandonment and abduction, so that the coefficients can be
interpreted as the percentage change in the number of missing children. Column 1
shows that our results remain robust, indicating that the existence of fines significantly
increases the incidence of child abandonment and abduction, whether measured in
terms of absolute levels or percentage changes.


One concern with regard to our main results is that zeros have been assigned to
observations (prefecture-year pairs) in which there are no reports of missing children.
This could be seen as a problem of data censoring, because zero values may represent
either observations with no children missing or under-reporting in cases with missing
children. We address this potential problem by estimating a Tobit model that takes into
account of the left-censoring feature of child abandonment and child abduction
measurements. We use the generalized panel Tobit model proposed by Honoré (1992)
to estimate the coefficients of the fines and report the results in column 2 of Table 6.
The coefficient of local fine for child abandonment remains significant and the
coefficient of neighbors' fine for child abduction is positive and significant at the 89%
confidence level, indicating that our findings remain robust to addressing this potential
nuisance.


Since capital cities tend to have larger populations and larger population flows, there
are more cases of missing children in those cities. We exclude provincial capital cities
from the sample and obtain largely similar results (as shown in column 3). As the one-
child policy was implemented less strictly in ethnic minority regions, in one
specification we exclude the five autonomous provinces that have large ethnic minority
populations and again obtain robust results (see column 4).26


Our results are also largely robust to the inclusion of both linear and nonlinear


26
     These five regions are Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, Guangxi, Xinjiang and Tibet.
                                                   33
prefectural trends (see column 5), as well as to the inclusion of additional control
variables (see column 6), such as GDP per capita (in logarithms) and the number of
children under 5 years of age in the prefecture. The results indicate that the coefficients
of fine payment variables are quite similar to the main results given in Tables 2 and 3,
despite the fact that the number of observations drops by close to 30% due to missing
GDP information for some prefectures. Overall, the effects of the fines on child
abandonment and child abduction remain robust.


As mentioned previously, there is also the concern of misreporting child abandonment
as child abduction. Given the general pattern of the abandonment of girls and the
abduction of boys, the misreporting of child abandonment as child abduction, if any, is
more likely to concern girls. Thus, we construct a pseudo abandonment variable as the
sum of total abandonment plus girl abduction. As shown in column 7, our results remain
robust to using this new sample, which implies that the misreporting problem is not a
problem.


Another potential confounding factor affecting the patterns of missing children is the
availability of prenatal sex selection technologies, as they may substitute for post-birth
measures for obtaining children of the preferred sex. We address this issue in column 8
by using the sample data for 1990-2001 instead of 1988-2001, as the diagnostic
ultrasound technology had been introduced to practically all Chinese counties by 1990
(Chen, Li and Meng, 2013). Our results remain robust, indicating that the penalty fine
of the one-child policy has caused increases in child abandonment and abduction even
when families already had access to pre-birth gender selection technologies.


5.8 Separating rural versus non-rural samples
To further address the concern regarding how the access to sex-selective abortions in
local families would affect the impact of fines on missing children, we explore the
potential effects of the HRS land reform next. Because child abandonment and
abduction are also family behaviors related to sex selection, the pre-birth sex selection
                                            34
might substitute for post-birth gender selection. Following the argument that rural
families had relatively less access to pre-birth sex selective abortions than urban
families (Almond, Li and Zhang, 2019), we classify all reported cases into rural and
non-rural categories based on the reported location where the child went missing. A
case is classified as rural if the reported location has the keyword of "village" and non-
rural otherwise. And more than 70% of child abandonment and abduction cases in our
sample were reported to have occurred in non-rural areas.


Table 7 lists the regression results of fines on child abandonment and abduction in rural
and non-rural areas separately. It shows that the positive effects of local fine on child
abandonment and positive impacts of neighbors' fine on child abduction are significant
in both rural and non-rural regions, with the effects in non-rural areas slightly larger
than rural areas but the difference being statistically insignificant. This indicates that
even though the non-rural areas may have better access to prenatal sex selection,
families still resort to the post-birth sex selection approach of child abandonment and
abduction to achieve the desired gender ratio among children. In addition, as non-rural
regions are less likely to be affected by the HRS land reform, these results also help
mitigate the confounding impact of the land reform on child abandonment and
abduction, providing additional support for the independent effect of the one-child
policy.


5.9 Checking data validity using the Great Famine (1959-1961) event
As discussed earlier, the impact of the one-child policy on the number of missing
children is mainly attributable to the additional financial burden faced by families of
having to pay fines for having another child. Studies have also shown that the number
of missing children has tended to increase during or after major natural disasters (Shen,
Antonopoulos and Papanicolaou, 2013). One explanation is that severe disasters often
lead to decreases in household income and food availability, driving up the cost of
raising a child and hence the likelihood of abandonment. In addition, the amount of care
that families give their children also tends to decrease in such situations due to the
                                            35
ensuing chaos. As a result, children are more likely to go missing either because they
are abandoned or abducted.


If the reports of missing children in the BCBH database provide a representative sample
of the actual number of missing children in Chinese regions over time, then we would
expect to see a larger number of missing children during the Great Famine of 1959-
1961, when many Chinese provinces experienced severe famines caused by crop
failures, and a large part of the country saw its population shrink due to starvation and
food-shortage-induced mortality (Mu and Zhang, 2011; Meng, Qian and Yared, 2015).


We check for this pattern by studying the relationship between the number of missing
children and the intensity of the impact of the Great Famine across Chinese regions.
Table 8 presents the regression results for the impact of provincial death rates (Meng,
Qian and Yared, 2015) on the number of missing child cases in each province using the
BCBH data for 1950-1970. Column 1 shows that a higher death rate is significantly and
positively correlated with the total number of children reported missing. According to
Meng, Qian and Yared (2015), the death rate increased from 10.6 per 1,000 in 1957 to
15 per 1,000 in 1959 and then to 23 per 1,000 in 1960. Thus, our estimates imply that
the total number of missing children increased by around 9.1 per 1,000 from 1957 to
1960, which accounts for 277% of the average annual level. Column 2 reflects a
positive correlation for missing boys, while column 3 reports a positive association for
missing girls. Thus, for both boys and girls, there was a higher probability that they
would be separated from their families during the famine years. Columns 4 and 5 further
show that both child abandonment and child abduction were positively correlated with
the severity of the Great Famine at the provincial level. Columns 6-10 present similar
patterns when the death rate is replaced by the Great Famine dummy, which takes a
value of 1 for the years from 1959 to 1961. These patterns thus help to corroborate the
quality of the BCBH database.


6. Conclusion
                                           36
Child trafficking has been a major underground economic activity globally and
economic hardship faced by families has been attributed as a main determinant.
However, against a backdrop of rapid economic growth, China experienced a sharp
increase in child abandonment and child abduction in the 1980s and 1990s. We argue
that the combination of the one-child policy and the cultural preference for sons is the
main explanation for the large numbers of child abandonment and child abduction cases
during those years. The combination of these two factors has also shaped the unique
gender composition of child trafficking in China, where most of the children abandoned
are girls and most of the children abducted are boys.


Our empirical analysis relies on two sets of data: the family-reported missing child
cases filed on the website of Baby Come Back Home (BCBH), the largest online
platform for posting information on missing children, are used to construct the dataset
on missing children for each prefecture in all years from 1979 to 2018; and variations
in the strictness of the one-child policy in local provinces are measured at the provincial
level by the income-relative fine for the first unauthorized birth. Based on empirical
case studies and statistics on birth control operations and fee collection rates, we then
divide the period during which the one-child policy was in effect into two sub-periods:
1979-2001, when the policy was more strictly enforced, and 2002-2016, when it was
applied less stringently. To address the potential problem of underreporting, we further
limit the period of our main analysis to the years after 1988.


During the stringent policy enforcement period, higher fines are found to significantly
increase child abandonment. When the per parent fine amount increased by the amount
of average local per capita annual income, the number of child abandonment cases
increased by 0.3, which is equivalent to a 14% increase in the average annual number
of abandonment cases. The impact of the fines in driving up the rate of child
abandonment is confined to cases involving girls, which is consistent with the general
preference for sons in China. Higher fines increase the number of cases of abandonment
of girls in the local prefecture and have no spillover effects on other regions. In contrast,
                                             37
increases in fines lead to a significant increase in child abductions in neighboring
provinces; the impact of such increases is confined to abduction cases involving boys,
with increases in those fines having no significant impact on the abduction of girls
either in the local region or other regions. When the per parent fine amount increases
by the local average annual per capita income, the number of children abducted from
neighboring provinces increases by 1, which is equivalent to a 35.7% increase over the
average level.


The cultural preference for sons heightens both the local impact of the fines on the
abandonment of girls and the spillover effect on the abduction of boys. Child
abandonment in regions with a stronger preference for sons increases more sharply in
response to increases in the fines. By the same token, fine increases in regions with a
stronger cultural bias towards sons trigger larger spillover effects on the abduction of
boys in neighboring regions. Furthermore, we find that geographic distance explains
much of the spatial spillover effects regarding the abduction of boys. Overall, we find
that the impact of these fines on child abandonment is the largest in the case of
newborns while the spillover effect of the fines on child abduction is the strongest in
the case of children from 1 to 4 years old.


Importantly, our results are not confounded by two other policies that may also impact
families' decisions regarding child abandonment and abduction, the implementation of
the HRS land-reform policy and the availability of pre-natal sex-selection technologies.
Although the HRS policy started at about the same time as the one-child policy in China,
the nation-wide land reform was completed by 1984. Thus, by using data from 1988-
2001, our study focuses on a time period when the one-child policy was implemented
independently from the land reform policy. Furthermore, we find that the positive
effects of penalty fines on child abandonment and abduction are of similar size in both
rural and non-rural areas, whereas the effects of land reform should only be observed
in rural regions.

                                              38
Similarly, as pre-natal sex-selection technologies had become widely available through
Chinese counties by 1990 (Chen, Li and Meng, 2013), there was little variation in their
availability in much of our sample period of 1988-2001, implying little explanatory
power for such technologies in accounting for child abduction and abandonment.
Furthermore, limiting the sample to 1990-2001 preserves our findings and dividing the
rural and non-rural regions (where the availability of pre-natal sex-selection
technologies may differ) shows no significant difference in the results for the two
subsamples, both bolstering the one-child policy explanation of missing children
instead of the pre-natal sex-selection story.


To our knowledge, this is the first study to explore the institutional reasons behind
missing children in China, where the combination of the one-child policy and a cultural
preference for sons has shaped the unique gender pattern of child abandonment and
child abduction practices. By focusing on families' decisions on child abandonment and
abduction, or post-birth sex selection, our study supplements the current literature about
prenatal sex selection family decisions. While the application of pre-natal sex-selection
technologies has led to a large number of missing women in India and China, child
abandonment and abduction may have long lasting impact on the education, income
and life quality of surviving individuals. Furthermore, our study identifies an additional
unintended consequence of the one-child policy, thereby contributing to the analysis of
the impacts of the largest-ever fertility control policy in human history.




                                            39
References
Abrevaya, J. (2009). Are There Missing Girls in the United States? Evidence on Gender
Preference and Gender Selection. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
1(2): 1­34.
Abubakar, I. I., Tillmann, T., & Banerjee, A. (2015). Global, regional, and national age-
sex specific all-cause and cause-specific mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990-2013:
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet, 385(9963),
117-171.
Alesina, A., Giuliano, P., and Nunn, N. (2013). On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women
and the Plough. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 469­530.
Alesina, A., Giuliano, P., and Nunn, N. (2018). Traditional Agricultural Practices and
the Sex Ratio Today. PloS One, 13(1): e0190510.
Almond, D., Li, H., and Zhang, S. (2019). Land Reform and Sex Selection in China.
Journal of Political Economy, 127(2): 560-585.
Anderson, S., and Ray, D. (2010). Missing Women: Age and Disease. Review of
Economic Studies, 77: 1262-1300.
Bhalotra, S., Chakravarty, A., Mookherjee, D., and Pino, F.J. (2019). Property Rights
and Gender Bias: Evidence from Land Reform in West Bengal. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 11(2): 205-237.
Cai, Y., Lavaly, W. (2003). China's Missing Girls: Numerical Estimates and Effects on
Population Growth, China Review, 3(2): 13-29.
Cao, B. (2012). Study on Administration of Collecting Social Maintenance Fee under
Family Planning: Example of Suxian District in Chenzhou. Journal of Hunan
University of Finance and Economics, 28(06): 28-33.
Chen, Y., Ebenstein, A., Edlund, L., and Li, H. (2015). Girl Adoption in China: A Less-
known Side of Son Preference. Population Studies, 69(2): 161­178.
Chen Y., Li, H., and Meng, L. (2013). Prenatal Sex Selection and Missing Girls in China:
Evidence from the Diffusion of Diagnostic Ultrasound. Journal of Human Resources,
48(1): 36-70.
Corno, L., and Voena, A. (2019). Selling Daughters: Age of Marriage, Income Shocks
                                           40
and the Bride Price Tradition. IFS Working Paper W16/08.
Dahl, G., and Moretti, E. (2008). The Demand for Sons. Review of Economic Studies,
75: 1085-1120.
Dessy, S., Mbiekop, F., and Pallage, S. (2005). The Economics of Child Trafficking
(part ii). Cahier de recherche/Working Paper, 05-09.
Ebenstein, A. (2010). The "Missing Girls" of China and the Unintended Consequences
of the One Child Policy. Journal of Human Resources, 45(1): 87­115.
Edlund, L., Yi, J., Li, H., and Zhang, J. (2013). Sex Ratio and Crime: Evidence from
China. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(5): 1520-1534.
Gao, J., and Lu, Y. (2006). Study on Social Upbringing Fee Collection in Dezhou,
Shandong Province. Population & Economics, 2006(2): 17­22.
Hesketh, T., and Xing, Z.W. (2006). Abnormal Sex Ratios in Human Populations:
Causes and Consequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(36):
13271-13275.
Honoré, B. E. (1992). Trimmed Lad and Least Squares Estimation of Truncated and
Censored Regression Models with Fixed Effects. Econometrica, 60(3): 533­565.
Howden, D., and Zhou, Y. (2014). China's One-Child Policy: Some Unintended
Consequences. Economic Affairs, 34(3): 353­369.
Huang, W., Lei, X., and Sun, A. (2016). When Fewer Means More: Impact of One-
Child Policy on Education of Girls. IZA Working paper.
Huang, W., Lei, X. and Zhao, Y. (2016). One-child Policy and the Rise of Man-made
Twins. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(3): 467-476.
Huang, Y. (2008). The Problems of Social Maintenance Fees: Example of Leqing.
Population and Family Planning (in Chinese), 2008(07):28-29
Hull, T. H. (1990). Recent Trends in Sex Ratios at Birth in China. Population and
Development Review, 16(1), 63­83.
International Labour Organization (2017). Global Estimates of Modern Slavery: Forced
Labour and Forced Marriage.
Jayachandran, S. (2017). Fertility Decline and Missing Women. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 9(1), 118-39.
                                         41
Jayachandran, S., & Kuziemko, I. (2011). Why do Mothers Breastfeed Girls Less Than
Boys? Evidence and Implications for Child Health in India. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126(3), 1485-1538.
Jiang, Q., and Sánchez-Barricarte, J. (2013). Child Trafficking in China. China Report,
49(3), 317­335.
Jiang, G. and Zhang, Q. (1993). Approaches to Enhance the Management of Penalty
Fines on Unauthorized Births in Suizhou. Fiscal Accounting Communication (in
Chinese), 1993(08):45
Johnson, K., Huang B., and Wang L. (1998). Infant Abandonment and Adoption in
China. Population and Development Review, 24(3): 469-510.
Li, C., Ren, R., and Zhang, X. (2013). The Current Condition of Child Trafficking and
Child Protection in China: Empirical Analysis Based on 133 Public Cases. Journal of
People's Public Security University of China (Social Science Edition), 29(6): 16-25.
Lin, J. Y. (1992). Rural Reforms and Agricultural Growth in China. The American
Economic Review, 34-51.
Liu, J., Larsen, U., and Wyshak, G. (2004). Factors Affecting Adoption in China, 1950­
87. Population Studies, 58(1), 21­36.
Meng, X., Qian, N., and Yared, P. (2015). The Institutional Causes of China's Great
Famine, 1959-1961. Review of Economic Studies, 82(4): 1568­1611.
Meng, H., Wang, G. and Zhu, X. (2008). Approaches to Raise the Collection Rate of
Social Maintenance Fees in Pei County. Journal of Nanjing College for Population
Program Management (in Chinese), 2008(01): 33-37
Mu, R., and Zhang, X. (2011). Why Does the Great Chinese Famine Affect the Male
and Female Survivors Differently? Mortality Selection Versus Son Preference.
Economics & Human Biology, 9(1): 92­105.
O'Connell Davidson, J. (2011). Moving Children? Child Trafficking, Child Migration,
and Child Rights. Critical Social Policy, 31(3): 454­477.
Oster, E., Chen, G., and Yu, X. (2010). Hepatitis B Does Not Explain Male-Biased Sex
Ratios in China. Economics Letters, 107(2): 142-144.
Qian, N. (2008). Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-
                                          42
Specific Income on Sex Imbalance. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3): 1251-
1285.
Scharping, T. (2013). Birth Control in China 1949-2000: Population Policy and
Demographic Development, Routledge.
Sen, A. (1990). More than 100 Million Women are Missing. The New York Review of
Books, 37(20), 61-66.
Shen, A., Antonopoulos, G. A., and Papanicolaou, G. (2013). China's Stolen Children:
Internal Child Trafficking in the People's Republic of China. Trends in Organized
Crime, 16(1): 31­48.
Shi, D. (2006). Study on Reasons Why It Is Difficult to Collect Social Upbringing Fee.
Market & Demographic Analysis, 2006(2): 78­80.
Tamura, Y. (2010). Migrant Smuggling. Journal of Public Economics, 94(7-8): 540­
548.
Tao, L. (2017). Prevention and Characteristics of Child Trafficking Based on 200
Sentencing Documents. Youth and Adolescent Studies, 2017(5): 19­24.
The State Council (2011). Action for Child Development in China (2011-2020).
Wang, Z., Wei, L., Peng, S., Deng, L., and Niu, B. (2018). Child-Trafficking Networks
of Illegal Adoption in China. Nature Sustainability, 1(5): 254-260.
Wei, Y., and Zhang, L. (2014). Re-examination of the Yicheng Two-Child Program. The
China Journal, (72): 98­120.
Whyte, M. K., Feng, W., and Cai, Y. (2015). Challenging Myths about China's One-
Child Policy. The China Journal, (74): 144­159.
Wu, Z., Viisainen, K., Hemminki, E. (2006). Determinants of High Sex Ratio among
Newborns: A Cohort Study from Rural Anhui Province, China. Reproductive Health
Matters, 14(27), 172-180.
Xing, H. (2015). Studying the Crime of Selling Own Children. Journal of People's
Public Security, University of China (Social Sciences Edition), 33(4): 17­24.
--, Chen, R., and Xu, F. (2013). Characteristics of Child Trafficking Development:
Analysis on 447 Sentencing Documents. Juvenile Delinquency Prevention Research,
2017(1): 38­43.
                                          43
Yao, Y. (2005). The Difficulty of Collecting Social Raising Fund and Its Solutions.
Population and Family Planning (in Chinese), 8(1): 21­22.
Zhang, J. (2017). The Evolution of China's One-Child Policy and Its Effects on Family
Outcomes. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(1): 141­160.
Zhang, W. (2006). Who Adopts Girls and Why? Domestic Adoption of Female Children
in Contemporary Rural China. The China Journal, (56): 63­82.




                                         44
7 Appendix
7.1 Tables
                           Table 1: Fines and Socioeconomic Factors
                                            (1)                    (2)                (3)
 Dep var: Fine                              1988-2001              1995-2001          1981-2001
 ln real GDP per capita                     -0.198                 -0.174             0.253
                                            (0.598)                (0.948)            (0.291)
 ln cargo transport                         -0.043                 0.248              0.124
                                            (0.164)                (0.723)            (0.140)
 ln wage level                              -0.037                 -0.033             0.142
                                            (0.313)                (0.254)            (0.313)
 Province secretary term                    0.041*                 0.014              0.028
                                            (0.023)                (0.026)            (0.019)
 Province secretary age                     0.0312                 -0.199             0.064
                                            (0.233)                (0.331)            (0.127)
 Province secretary age sq                  -3e-4                  0.002              -5.49e-4
                                            (0.002)                (0.003)            (0.001)
 Province governor term                     -0.064**               -0.032             -0.046
                                            (0.025)                (0.036)            (0.029)
 Province governor age                      0.052                  -0.059             0.061
                                            (0.040)                (0.080)            (0.040)
 Province governor age sq                   -3.57e-4               6.06e-4            -4.61e-4
                                            (4.33e-4)              (8.59e-4)          (4.14e-4)
 Fiscal revenue/GDP                                                0.356
                                                                   (0.898)
 Fiscal revenue/expenditure                                        -0.035
                                                                   (0.412)
 Percentage of production teams                                                       -0.362
 enrolled in HRS                                                                      (0.916)
 Observations                               316                    149                409
 R-squared                                  0.674                  0.913              0.616
 provFE                                     Y                      Y                  Y
 yearFE                                     Y                      Y                  Y
 Number of clusters                         27                     25                 22
Note: All economic variables are in real values using 1980 price levels. Transportation is measured by
the logarithm of total cargo transportation in local provinces each year. Column 2 has fewer
observations due to missing values of fiscal variables. Column 3 controls for the percentage of
production teams enrolled in the Household Responsibility System (HRS) in Chinese provinces, for
which data was collected from the Provincial Gazetteers, with records of Anhui, Shaanxi, Inner
Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang missing between 1981 and 1983. Bootstrapped standard errors clustered
at the provincial level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                    45
                               Table 2: Fines and Child Abandonment (1988-2001)
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)
         Dep var: abandonment          All         Boys       Girls            All            All           All
         Mean                          2.15        0.47       1.68             2.15           2.15          2.15
         Local fine                    0.300***    0.044      0.250***         0.300***       0.310***      0.310***
                                       (0.089)     (0.036)    (0.076)          (0.084)        (0.094)       (0.090)
         Avg. fine in 1st-order        0.064       0.053      0.011            0.064          0.130         0.110
         neighboring regions           (0.240)     (0.090)    (0.210)          (0.240)        (0.230)       (0.220)
         ln density                    -0.140      0.012      -0.150           -0.140
                                       (0.230)     (0.095)    (0.200)          (0.180)
         ln arrest                     0.190       0.039      0.150            0.190
                                       (0.160)     (0.077)    (0.130)          (0.150)
         Province secretary term       -0.008      0.003      -0.011           -0.008
                                       (0.026)     (0.009)    (0.024)          (0.024)
         Province secretary age        0.006       0.035      -0.029           0.006
                                       (0.061)     (0.024)    (0.057)          (0.070)
         Province secretary age sq     2e-5        -3e-4      4e-4             2e-5
                                       (6e-4)      (2e-4)     (6e-4)           (7e-4)
         Province governor term        -0.044*     0.007      -0.051**         -0.044*
                                       (0.023)     (0.008)    (0.020)          (0.024)
         Province governor age         0.029       0.033      -0.004           0.029
                                       (0.040)     (0.021)    (0.037)          (0.056)
         Province governor age sq      -4e-4       -3e-4      -1e-4            -4e-4
                                       (4e-4)      (2e-4)     (4e-4)           (6e-4)
         Observations                  3,461       3,461      3,461            3,461          3,461         3,461
         R-squared                     0.722       0.497      0.687            0.722          0.721         0.626
         prefFE                        Y           Y          Y                Y              Y             Y
         yearFE                        Y           Y          Y                Y              Y             Y
         Trend                         pref        pref       pref             pref           pref          prov
         Cluster by                    pref        pref       pref             prov-year      pref          pref
         Number of clusters            276         276        276              396            276           276
Note: The dependent variable is the number of child abandonment. The fine levels in neighboring provinces are the population-
weighted average fines in corresponding neighboring provinces. Standard errors clustered at the prefecture level are shown in
parentheses for all columns except column 4. Standard errors in column 4 are clustered at the provincial-year level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              46
                                 Table 3: Fines and Child Abduction (1988-2001)
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)
              Dep var: abduction             All         Boys        Girls     All           All        All
              Mean                           2.80        2.05        0.75      2.80          2.80       2.80
              Local fine                     2e-4        -0.033      0.033     2e-4          -0.043     -0.090
                                             (0.220)     (0.220)     (0.048)   (0.250)       (0.250)    (0.250)
              Avg. fine in 1st-order         1.000***    0.890**     0.110     1.000**       0.850**    0.840*
              neighboring regions            (0.370)     (0.350)     (0.095)   (0.440)       (0.430)    (0.430)
              ln density                     1.010       0.920       0.095     1.010**
                                             (0.710)     (0.720)     (0.089)   (0.430)
              ln arrest                      -0.840      -0.770      -0.071    -0.840
                                             (0.700)     (0.630)     (0.100)   (0.600)
              Province secretary term        -0.048      -0.046      -0.002    -0.048
                                             (0.033)     (0.031)     (0.010)   (0.035)
              Province secretary age         0.049       0.043       0.006     0.049
                                             (0.120)     (0.110)     (0.035)   (0.110)
              Province secretary age sq      -3e-4       -3e-4       -5e-5     -3e-4
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)     (4e-4)    (0.001)
              Province governor term         0.020       0.024       -0.005    0.020
                                             (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.012)   (0.049)
              Province governor age          0.015       0.031       -0.016    0.015
                                             (0.059)     (0.053)     (0.024)   (0.069)
              Province governor age sq       -2e-4       -3e-4       2e-4      -2e-4
                                             (6e-4)      (6e-4)      (3e-4)    (0.001)
              Observations                   3,461       3,461       3,461     3,461         3,461      3,461
              R-squared                      0.856       0.825       0.625     0.856         0.855      0.825
              prefFE                         Y           Y           Y         Y             Y          Y
              yearFE                         Y           Y           Y         Y             Y          Y
              trend                          pref        pref        pref      pref          pref       prov
              Cluster by                     pref        pref        pref      prov-year     pref       pref
              Number of clusters             276         276         276       396           276        276
Note: The dependent variable is the number of child abduction. The fine levels in neighboring provinces are the population-
weighted average fines in corresponding neighboring provinces. Standard errors clustered at the prefecture level are shown in
parentheses for all columns except column 4. Standard errors in column 4 are clustered at the provincial-year level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              47
        Table 4: The Heterogeneity of Fines and Missing Children by Son Preference (1988-2001)
                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                               Abandonment                                        Abduction
                             All         Girls        All          Girls       All          Boys         All          Boys
Local fine                   0.100       0.099        0.120        0.110       0.009        -0.023       -0.094       -0.140
                             (0.083)     (0.077)      (0.082)      (0.075)     (0.220)      (0.220)      (0.190)      (0.29)
Fine in 1st-order nbr        0.071       0.016        -0.410       -0.280      0.610        0.420        0.630        0.430
                             (0.240)     (0.210)      (0.400)      (0.350)     (0.380)      (0.340)      (0.390)      (0.28)
Fine*D(high SRB)             0.450**     0.360**      0.440**      0.350**                               0.240        0.280
                             (0.200)     (0.170)      (0.190)      (0.170)                               (0.320)      (0.29)
Fine in 1st-order nbr*                                0.820*       0.510       0.660        0.800**      0.650        0.790**
D(nbr high SRB)                                       (0.440)      (0.370)     (0.430)      (0.370)      (0.430)      (0.33)
Observations                 3,461       3,461        3,461        3,461       3,461        3,461        3,461        3,461
R-squared                    0.724       0.688        0.725        0.689       0.856        0.825        0.856        0.825
prefFE                       Y           Y            Y            Y           Y            Y            Y            Y
yearFE                       Y           Y            Y            Y           Y            Y            Y            Y
preftrend                    Y           Y            Y            Y           Y            Y            Y            Y
Number of clusters           276         276          276          276         276          276          276          276
Note: The dependent variables are the number of child abandonment and abduction separately. All regressions control
logarithm of population density, logarithm of total criminal arrests and provincial secretary and governor characteristics (age,
age square and terms). A prefecture is classified as having a strong preference for boys if the sex ratio at birth (SRB) in 2010
was no less than 1.17. Standard errors clustered at the prefecture level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                                              48
                         Table 5: Fines and Missing Children after 2001 (2002-2016)
                               (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)
                                   Abandonment                             Abduction
                               All   Boys    Girls               All         Boys    Girls
  Local fine                   -0.014    -0.016**    0.003       -0.028      -0.052    0.025
                               (0.015)   (0.008)     (0.013)     (0.041)     (0.038)   (0.027)
  Fine in 1st-order            -0.040    -0.043      0.004       -0.048      -0.032    -0.016
  neighbor                     (0.050)   (0.028)     (0.047)     (0.140)     (0.120)   (0.092)
  ln density                   0.350     0.180       0.170       -2.230**    -1.940    -0.280
                               (0.240)   (0.130)     (0.170)     (0.990)     (1.220)   (0.480)
  ln arrest                    0.072     0.022       0.049       0.210       0.070     0.140
                               (0.048)   (0.024)     (0.039)     (0.140)     (0.094)   (0.097)
  Province secretary term      0.270     0.150       0.120       -2.550**    -2.350*   -0.210
                               (0.290)   (0.120)     (0.230)     (1.100)     (1.270)   (0.480)
  Province secretary age       0.061     0.013       0.048       0.160       0.041     0.120
                               (0.048)   (0.023)     (0.041)     (0.140)     (0.091)   (0.100)
  Province secretary age sq    3e-4      -0.002      0.002       0.013       0.006     0.007
                               (0.005)   (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.018)     (0.014)   (0.010)
  Province governor term       0.027     -0.019      0.046       -0.130      -0.003    -0.130
                               (0.048)   (0.025)     (0.048)     (0.140)     (0.120)   (0.120)
  Province governor age        -3e-4     2e-4        -4e-4       0.001       -1e-4     0.001
                               (4e-4)    (2e-4)      (4e-4)      (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)
  Province governor age sq     -4e-4     -0.002      0.002       -0.003      -0.015    0.012
                               (0.007)   (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.019)     (0.013)   (0.012)
  Observations                 3,609     3,609       3,609       3,609       3,609     3,609
  R-squared                    0.400     0.272       0.352       0.767       0.721     0.533
  prefFE                       Y         Y           Y           Y           Y         Y
  yearFE                       Y         Y           Y           Y           Y         Y
  preftrend                    Y         Y           Y           Y           Y         Y
  Number of clusters           287       287         287         287         287       287
Note: The dependent variables are the number of child abandonment and abduction separately. Standard errors clustered at
the prefecture level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                            49
                                                                        Table 6: Robustness Checks
                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)               (8)
                                                    ln          Tobit        Remove       Remove       Nonlinear     Other       Expanded          1990-
                                                                             capital      minority     trend         controls    abandonment       2001
                     A: Abandonment
                     Local fine                     0.034*      0.250***     0.280***     0.370***     0.200*        0.260**     0.330***          0.220**
                                                    (0.020)     (0.074)      (0.088)      (0.110)      (0.120)       (0.120)     (0.110)           (0.092)
                     Fine in 1st-order neighbor     -0.071      -0.009       -0.140       0.120        -0.0110       0.260       0.180             -0.200
                                                    (0.050)     (0.160)      (0.210)      (0.250)      (0.250)       (0.330)     (0.240)           (0.240)
                     Observations                   3,461       3,462        3,065        3,163        3,461         2,477       2,961             3,461
                     R-squared                      0.682                    0.673        0.723        0.760         0.746       0.748             0.769
                     B: Abduction
                     Local fine                     0.029       -0.073       -0.038       0.004        0.310         -0.260                        0.100
                                                    (0.021)     (0.110)      (0.220)      (0.260)      (0.250)       (0.200)                       (0.190)
                     Fine in 1st-order neighbor     0.150***    0.280        0.740**      1.160***     1.210***      1.370***                      1.430***
                                                    (0.055)     (0.230)      (0.300)      (0.380)      (0.340)       (0.310)                       (0.460)
                     Observations                   3,461       3,462        3,065        3,163        3,461         2,477                         2,961
                     R-squared                      0.754                    0.788        0.858        0.898         0.872                         0.851
                     prefFE                         Y           Y            Y            Y            Y             Y           Y                 Y
                     yearFE                         Y           Y            Y            Y            Y             Y           Y                 Y
                     preftrend                      Y                        Y            Y            Y             Y           Y                 Y
                     Number of clusters             276                      246          250          276           271         276               276

Note: Column 5 includes both linear and quadratic year trends for each prefecture. Column 6 includes controls for children under five years of age and a logarithm of GDP per
capita in local prefectures. The dependent variable in column 7 is the total of abandoned children plus abducted girls. Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions control
logarithm of population density, logarithm of total criminal arrests and personal characteristics of provincial secretary and governor including their ages, age squares and on-
office terms. Standard errors clustered at the prefecture level are shown in parentheses. except column 2. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                                                        50
                                        Table 7: Fine and Missing Children in Rural and Non-rural Regions (1988-2001)
                                                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)
                                                                                         Abandonment                Abduction
                                                                                   Rural        Non-rural     Rural      Non-rural
                                                   Mean                            0.56         1.59          0.84       1.95
                                                   Local fine                      0.140***     0.160**       0.070      -0.070
                                                                                   (0.035)      (0.073)       (0.054)    (0.200)
                                                   Fine in 1st-order neighbor      0.018        0.045         0.400**    0.600**
                                                                                   (0.087)      (0.200)       (0.160)    (0.250)
                                                   Observations                    3,461        3,461         3,461      3,461
                                                   R-squared                       0.510        0.687         0.684      0.838
                                                   prefFE                          Y            Y             Y          Y
                                                   yearFE                          Y            Y             Y          Y
                                                   preftrend                       Y            Y             Y          Y
                                                   Number of clusters              276          276           276        276
Note: The dependent variables are children abandonment and children abduction in rural and non-rural regions in China. An abandonment or abduction cases is identified as
rural if the reported lost location is identified to a location in a rural village, and non rural otherwise. All regressions control logarithm of population density, logarithm of total
criminal arrests and personal characteristics of provincial secretary and governor including their ages, age squares and on-office terms. Standard errors clustered at the prefecture
level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                           51
                                                    Table 8: The Great Famine and Missing Children (1950-1970)
                            (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)        (9)         (10)
                            All                                                                  All
                                          Boys          Girls        Abandoned      Abducted                   Boys          Girls      Abandoned   Abducted
                            missing                                                              missing
  Mean                      3.28          1.74          1.54         2.15           1.12         3.28          1.74          1.54       2.15        1.12
  Death rate                0.700*        0.400*        0.290*       0.290          0.410*
                            (0.380)       (0.220)       (0.160)      (0.170)        (0.200)
  D(famine                                                                                       7.750***      4.060**       3.690***   3.640**     4.110***
  1959-1961)                                                                                     (2.790)       (1.550)       (1.280)    (1.390)     (1.450)
  Observations              546           546           546          546            546          546           546           546        546         546
  R-squared                 0.394         0.388         0.352        0.388          0.386        0.334         0.306         0.33       0.375       0.276
  provFE                    Y             Y             Y            Y              Y            Y             Y             Y          Y           Y
Note: The death rate data for the provinces are from Meng, Qian and Yared (2015). The famine dummy variable takes a value of 1 for the years from 1959 to 1961. Standard
errors clustered at the provincial level are shown in parentheses. The number of clusters is 29. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                      52
7.2 Figures




             Figure 1: Trend in Fines for the First Unauthorized Birth and Fine Collection Rates
Note: The solid line plots the average per parent fine in the unit of yearly income for the first unauthorized birth for all
provinces, while the dots of different shapes give fine collection rates in local regions for different years, based on findings in
Jiang and Zhang (1993), Shi (2006), Meng et al. (2008), Huang (2008) and Li (2003).




                                                                53
Figure 2: Number of Cases Registered on the Baby Come Back Home Website, by Year




                                       54
Figure 3: Map of Family-reported Child Abandonment and Abduction in China




                                   55
                        Figure 4: Trend of Family-reported Missing Children in China
Note: All data are from family-reports of families looking for missing children on the website of Baby Come Back Home by
June 2018.




                                                          56
Figure 5: Family-reported Child Abandonment and Child Abduction, by Age




   Figure 6: Gender Ratio of Family-reported Missing Children, by Year




                                   57
            Figure 7: Coefficients of Fines on Child Abandonment and Abduction by Distance
Note: This figure plots out the estimated coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals of fines in regions with different
distance bins away on child abandonment and abduction separately. The specific estimated coefficients are in Table OA2.




                                                            58
           Figure 8: Coefficients of Fines on Child Abandonment and Abduction by Age Groups
Note: This figure plots out the estimated coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals of local fines and neighboring fines
on child abandonment and abduction by different age groups according to the age at which a child got missing. The specific
estimated coefficients are in Table OA3.




                                                             59
     Figure 9: Heterogeneity of Impacts of Fines on Child Abandonment and Abduction by Income,
                                     Urbanization, Population Inflow and SRB
Note: This figure plots out the estimated coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals of local fines and neighboring fines
on child abandonment and abduction.




                                                             60
Online Appendix
                                         Table A1: Illustration of Sample Size
                                             Remove                       1988-                           Other
                Total             All                        U14                       2002-2016
                                             missing                      2001                           periods
           Abandonment          16,969        16,882       16,761          9,037          852            5,303
           Abduction            24,175        23,983       21,412         12,096         5,400           2,538
           Sum                  41,144        40,865       38,173         21,133         6,252           7,841
Notes: Column 2 removes reported cases with missing information on age, birth year, disappearance year or disappearance
locations which cannot be identified at the prefecture level. "Other periods" corresponds to 1924-1987 and 2017-2018.




                               Table A2: Missing Children and Fines, by Distance
                                         (1)     (2)              (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
                                         Abandonment                         Abduction
                                         All     Boys             Girls      All       Boys        Girls
                 Local fine              0.250**    0.018         0.230***   -0.043     -0.080     0.038
                                         (0.098)    (0.040)       (0.083)    (0.220)    (0.230)    (0.054)
                 Fine 0-300 km           0.071      0.050         0.021      -0.200     -0.160     -0.043
                                         (0.110)    (0.052)       (0.092)    (0.260)    (0.240)    (0.049)
                 Fine 300-600 km         -0.280     -0.110        -0.180     0.850**    0.800**    0.045
                                         (0.190)    (0.081)       (0.170)    (0.390)    (0.390)    (0.100)
                 Fine 600-900 km         -0.230     -0.055        -0.180     0.320      0.290      0.032
                                         (0.210)    (0.092)       (0.180)    (0.340)    (0.320)    (0.120)
                 Fine over 900 km        -0.960     -0.680**      -0.280     -0.640     -0.950     0.310
                                         (0.760)    (0.320)       (0.690)    (1.230)    (1.020)    (0.420)
                 Observations            3,363      3,363         3,363      3,363      3,363      3,363
                 R-squared               0.722      0.500         0.686      0.857      0.826      0.625
                 prefFE                  Y          Y             Y          Y          Y          Y
                 yearFE                  Y          Y             Y          Y          Y          Y
                 preftrend               Y          Y             Y          Y          Y          Y
                 Number of clusters      264        264           264        264        264        264
Note: Fines in regions falling within the distance ranges are all population-weighted fines for all regions in the range. All
regressions control logarithm of population density, logarithm of total criminal arrests and personal characteristics of
provincial secretary and governor including their ages, age squares and on-office terms. Standard errors clustered at the
prefecture level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                             61
                                     Table A3: Fines, SRBs and Missing Children
                             (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
                                                Abandonment                                       Abduction
                             All          Girls      All            Girls        All        Boys       All       Boys
    Local fine               -2.780**     -2.230*    -2.720**       -2.180*      0.006      -0.028     -2.140    -2.660**
                             (1.380)      (1.240)    (1.370)        (1.230)      (0.220)    (0.230)    (1.350)   (1.290)
    Fine in 1st-order nbr    0.070        0.016      -11.900***     -9.360**     -10.800    -9.950     -10.50    -9.660
                             (0.240)      (0.220)    (4.340)        (3.8500)     (6.800)    (6.030)    (6.730)   (5.960)
    Fine*SRB                 2.650**      2.130*     2.590**        2.090*                             1.850     2.260**
                             (1.220)      (1.100)    (1.210)        (1.090)                            (1.190)   (1.140)
    Fine in 1st-order nbr                            10.200***      7.970**      9.990*     9.210*     9.790*    8.960*
    *nbr SRB                                         (3.710)        (3.300)      (5.930)    (5.290)    (5.860)   (5.220)
    Observations             3,461        3,461      3,461          3,461        3,461      3,461      3,461     3,461
    R-squared                0.724        0.688      0.725          0.689        0.856      0.825      0.856     0.825
    prefFE                   Y            Y          Y              Y            Y          Y          Y         Y
    yearFE                   Y            Y          Y              Y            Y          Y          Y         Y
    preftrend                Y            Y          Y              Y            Y          Y          Y         Y
    Number of clusters       276          276        276            276          276        276        276       276
Note: The dependent variables are the number of child abandonment and abduction separately. All regressions control
logarithm of population density, logarithm of total criminal arrests and provincial secretary and governor characteristics (age,
age square and terms). Prefecture-specific SRB in 2010 was dropped due to prefecture fixed effects. Standard errors clustered
at the prefecture level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              62
                              Table A4: Fines and Missing Children, by Age Group
                                                   (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
                                                   0            1           2-4        5-9        10-14
                     A: Abandonment
                     Mean                          2.44         0.43        0.25       0.13       0.02
                     Local fine                    0.390***     0.027       0.006      0.025      -3e-4
                                                   (0.100)      (0.045)     (0.027)    (0.027)    (0.007)
                     Fine in 1st-order neighbor    0.086        0.100       0.044      0.005      -0.011
                                                   (0.300)      (0.10)      (0.080)    (0.052)    (0.021)
                     Observations                  2,259        2,259       2,259      2,259      2,259
                     R-squared                     0.642        0.368       0.303      0.279      0.229
                     Number of clusters            265          265         265        265        265
                     B: Abduction
                     Mean                          0.21         0.30        1.9        1.36       0.44
                     Local fine                    0.013        0.074       0.140      -0.240     0.019
                                                   (0.026)      (0.049)     (0.120)    (0.230)    (0.033)
                     Fine in 1st-order neighbor    0.070        0.220**     0.800**    0.320      -0.007
                                                   (0.076)      (0.110)     (0.380)    (0.210)    (0.087)
                     Observations                  2,278        2,278       2,278      2,278      2,278
                     R-squared                     0.320        0.416       0.829      0.715      0.412
                     prefFE                        Y            Y           Y          Y          Y
                     yearFE                        Y            Y           Y          Y          Y
                     Preftrend                     Y            Y           Y          Y          Y
                     Number of clusters            264          264         264        264        264
Note: All regressions control logarithm of population density, logarithm of total criminal arrests and personal characteristics
of provincial secretary and governor including their ages, age squares and on-office terms. Standard errors clustered at the
prefecture level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              63
                          Table A5: Fines, Missing Children and SRB in Multiple Years
                           (1)          (2)        (5)              (6)           (3)          (4)        (7)         (8)
                                                1959 SRB                                             2000 SRB
                                 Abandonment                Abduction                                           Abduction
                                                                                        Abandonment

Local fine                 -0.760       0.270**     -0.790          -0.008        -1.160       0.190*     -1.680*     -0.180
                           (0.630)      (0.130)     (0.560)         (0.160)       (0.800)      (0.097)    (1.010)     (0.260)
Fine in 1st-order nbr      8.270        0.062       -48.900***      -0.090        -9.810**     -0.280     -0.920      1.160***
                           (9.350)      (0.360)     (11.600)        (0.300)       (4.310)      (0.370)    (6.570)     (0.430)
Fine*SRB                   0.970*                   0.730                         1.240*                  1.430*
                           (0.560)                  (0.550)                       (0.700)                 (0.750)
Fine in 1st-order nbr      -7.670                   46.500***                     8.410**                 1.640
*SRB                       (8.6700)                 (10.900)                      (3.660)                 (5.680)
Fine*d(high SRB)                        0.049                       0.012                      0.300                  0.460*
                                        (0.180)                     (0.270)                    (0.200)                (0.240)
Fine in 1st-order nbr*                  -0.004                      1.920***                   0.690                  -0.290
d(high SRB)                             (0.410)                     (0.410)                    (0.430)                (0.450)
Observations               3,461        3,461       3,461           3,461         3,461        3,461      3,461       3,461
R-squared                  0.723        0.722       0.858           0.857         0.724        0.724      0.856       0.856
prefFE                     Y            Y           Y               Y             Y            Y          Y           Y
yearFE                     Y            Y           Y               Y             Y            Y          Y           Y
preftrend                  Y            Y           Y               Y             Y            Y          Y           Y
Number of clusters         276          276         276             276           276          276        276         276
 Note: All regressions control logarithm of population density, logarithm of total criminal arrests and provincial secretary and
 governor characteristics (age, age square and terms). A prefecture is classified as having a strong preference for boys if the
 sex ratio at birth (SRB) was no less than 1.07 in 1959 or no less than ?? in 2000. Standard errors clustered at the prefecture
 level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                         64 / 68
Figure A1: Variations in Fines, by Province (1980-2016)




                                                          65 / 68
Figure A2: Number of Birth-Control Operations in China: 1971-2016




  Figure A3: Example of Missing Child Case Reported to BCBH




                                                                    66 / 68
Figure A4: Ratio of Abandonment/Abduction Based on Family-reported Missing Children




           Figure A5: Sex Ratio at Birth in Chinese Prefectures: 2000-2010




                                                                                      67 / 68
