                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  STRANDED FOSSIL FUEL RESERVES AND FIRM VALUE

                                         Christina Atanasova
                                         Eduardo S. Schwartz

                                         Working Paper 26497
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26497


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2019




We thank the seminar participant at Simon Fraser University, Université ParisDauphine, and Auckland
University of Technology for helpful comments and suggestions. The authors would also like to thank
Armin Kavian for his valuable research assistance and IBCA for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christina Atanasova and Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Stranded Fossil Fuel Reserves and Firm Value
Christina Atanasova and Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 26497
November 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. G12,Q3,Q5

                                            ABSTRACT

Do capital markets reflect the possibility that fossil fuel reserves may become "stranded assets" in
the transition to a low carbon economy? We examine the relation between oil firms' value and their
proved reserves. Using a sample of 600 North American oil firms for the period 1999 to 2018, we
document that while reserves are an important component of oil firm value, the growth of these reserves
has a negative effect on firm value. This negative effect on value is stronger for oil producers with
higher extraction costs. When we decompose total reserves into developed and undeveloped reserves,
we show that the negative effect of reserves growth on value is due to firms growing their undeveloped
oil reserves. Unlike developed, undeveloped reserves require major capital expenditures and longer
time before they can be extracted. We also document that the negative effect is stronger for undeveloped
oil reserves located in countries with strict climate policies. Our evidence is consistent with markets
penalizing future investment in undeveloped reserves growth due to climate policy risk. High level
of institutional ownership, stock market liquidity and analyst coverage do not change the negative
effect of undeveloped reserves growth on firm value.


Christina Atanasova
Simon Fraser University
BC V5A 1S6, Canada
cva3@sfu.ca

Eduardo S. Schwartz
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu
 



".... according to Carbon Tracker, a think-tank, more than half the money the big oil companies
plan to spend on new fields would be worthless in a world that halved emissions by 2030." The
Economist, September 21st, 2019


"Stranded assets" are assets at risk of becoming obsolete from unanticipated or premature
write-offs, downward revaluation or being converted to liabilities due to regulatory or
environmental changes. In this paper, we examine whether the market valuation of firms
owning fossil fuel reserves reflects the risk that these assets may become stranded in the
transition to a low-carbon economy. This question is of critical importance as many financial
institutions and regulators have identified the mispricing of stranded asset risk as a potential
systemic risk and threat to financial stability.
        Recent developments have hit the energy markets hard. The oil price war between
Saudi Arabia and Russia, the unprecedented collapse in oil demand caused by the coronavirus
pandemic, the negative prices as storage space has disappeared have been catastrophic for oil
producers. Banks are preparing for a wave of bankruptcies by setting up their own oil
companies to operate seized assets whereas regulators in Texas are considering setting limits
on the state's oil production. Although not in the context of environmental changes, the global
shocks caused by these events have made the importance and severity of stranded asset risk
more apparent than ever.
        In this paper, we focus on North American oil producers and their reserves for several
reasons. First, the stock market for oil firms' equities as well as the market for crude oil and
other oil products are very liquid. The markets for coal products and coal firms' equities, on the
other hand, are more fragmented and less liquid, with the markets for natural gas in-between.
Second, North American oil producers face low domestic political risk, and foreign exchange
exposure. These firms are also subject to stringent regulation and monitoring unlike firms in
other countries that are traded in markets that are often fragmented, illiquid, and vulnerable to
manipulation.1 Finally, conventional oil production has now peaked and is on a long-run global
decline. Contrary to the conventional wisdom of the 1970s and 1980s, oil is not running out. It
is, instead, changing form to unconventional oils that require new, highly energy intensive

                                    
1
  Companies, such as the Brazilian Vale and the Russian Lukoil, are stark examples where bad corporate 
governance, a spike in political risk and currency weakness have had a huge impact on market valuations. 


 
 

production techniques and new processes to deal with their inaccessible placements or unusual
compositions.2 3 According to Rystad Energy, there are about 264 billion barrels of recoverable
oil reserves (the most likely estimate for existing fields, discoveries and as-of-yet undiscovered
fields) in the United States and 167 billion barrels in Canada. According to scientists (e.g.
McGlade and Ekins, 2015), if these reserves were exploited, the resultant emissions of CO2
would correspond to an increase in atmospheric greenhouse gases beyond the threshold above
which we risk a global extinction event. 
         As early as 2012, institutional investors drew attention to the risk of fossil fuels
becoming stranded because of a 2C carbon budget.4 This carbon budget specifies the maximal
amount of cumulative carbon emissions that can be emitted without exceeding a 2C increase in
temperature above the preindustrial levels. In the United Nations Climate Change (UNCC)
2015 Paris agreement, world governments confirmed their intention to limit global warming
"well below 2°C above pre-industrial level" and pursue efforts to "limit the temperature
increase to 1.5°C". The 2018 report of the International Energy Agency (IEA) suggests that to
have any chance of hitting the 2°C target requires drastic and immediate cuts in the use of
fossil fuels. Instead, data from the Global Carbon Project (2019) show that output from fossil
fuels have grown by around 2.7% in 2018, the largest increase in seven years. This increase in
CO2 emissions leaves the world far from the trajectory needed to meet global climate goals. Oil
producers are therefore heavily exposed to the risk of being unable to burn all their reserves
when climate policy becomes more ambitious.
         In this paper, we document that while total proved reserves are an important
component of oil producers' value, the growth of these reserves is penalized by the market.5 Oil
reserves are found in geologic formations known as fields that lie beneath the earth's surface,

                                     
2
   According to the Energy Information Administration, 49% of all U.S. crude oil proved reserves are in shale oil and 
96% of Canada's proved reserves are in oil sands.  
3
   Pembina Institute (2017), an Albertabased environmental group, reports that oil sands greenhouse gas emissions 
intensities are between 14% and 37% per cent higher than conventional crude oil. Shale oil, on the other hand, is 
responsible for methane leakage (partly through deliberate venting). For shale oil to be more "climatefriendly" 
than coal, there should be no more than 3% leakage. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) and University of Colorado (2017) report, the leakage is between 4% and 9%. 
4
   Financial services companies such as HSBC picked up on the 2011 report by the Climate Tracker Initiative on 
"Unburnable Carbon  Are the World's Financial Markets Carrying a Carbon Bubble?". 
5
   The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) uses the term "proved reserves" for oil and gas and "proven 
reserves" for coal reserves. Proved oil reserves are the estimated quantities of oil that, with reasonable certainty, 
are recoverable under existing economic and operating conditions. These estimates are based on available 
geologic and engineering data.  


 
 

and oil production companies extract these reserves for processing and sale. To recover the
reserves, the firm needs to drill wells into the field. Drilling is an up-front investment in future
production. Drilling costs range from a few hundred thousand dollars for a relatively shallow
well that is a few thousand feet deep to millions of dollars for a very deep well. Once drilled,
these costs are almost completely sunk. When we decompose total reserves into developed and
undeveloped, we show that the positive effect of reserves on firm value is due to the amount of
developed oil reserves and the negative effect is due to the growth of undeveloped oil reserves.
The distinction between developed and undeveloped proved oil reserves is that the former are
reserves which are extracted from existing wells while the latter are classified as reserves from
new wells on undrilled acreage or existing wells where a major irreversible capital expenditure
is required for completion6.
        Both developed and undeveloped reserves are treated as assets for the oil producer, so
they should have a positive (or at least non-negative) effect on their value.7 Recent events,
however, have demonstrated the risky nature of fossil fuel reserves. On April 20th, 2020, West
Texas Intermediate crude for May delivery settled at negative $37.63 per barrel, meaning
producers were paying traders to take the oil off their hands. This is a stark example of
stranded asset risk, i.e. an unexpected demand shocks can not only erase the value of these
assets but turn them into liabilities.
        Our results suggest that even before the COVID 19 pandemic, capital markets priced
stranded asset risk to a certain extent. We show that oil firm valuation was increasing only in
reserves that were already developed while the growth (and thus the future investment in
exploration and development) of undeveloped oil reserves had an economically and statistically
significant negative effect on oil producers' value. In particular, one standard deviation increase
in the growth of undeveloped reserves decreased firm value (Tobin's Q) by about 2.6%. This


                                    
6
   Before 2010, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, allowed only proved reserves to be publicly reported. 
After 2010, firms can also report probable and possible reserves. Probable reserves are reserves that have an 
estimated confidence level of approximately 50% of being successfully recovered. Possible reserves are those with 
only 10% estimated probability of recovery. The SEC requires the lower probability of recovery to be verified by a 
third party before an oil company can publicly report probable and possible reserves to potential investors. 
7
   Oil reserves are by far the most important assets that oil firms own. Financial analysts and investors pay great 
attention to information related to reserve changes released from these companies. For example, when the 
Swedish oil company Lundin announced a significant discovery of oil and gas the Norwegian continental shelf in 
2011, their share price appreciated more than 30% in one day. In January 2004, when Shell announced a 28% 
downward revision of their proved oil reserves, their share price fell 12% over the 34 weeks following the 
announcement. 


 
 

negative effect was stronger for oil producers with higher extraction costs. Our results are
consistent with the recent major write downs in the Canadian oil sands undeveloped reserves
where companies cut back on their development plans because of the higher extraction cost. In
2017, ConocoPhillips and ExxonMobil each wrote down more than 2 billion barrels of their
previously proved undeveloped tar sands reserves.8
        To examine further the effect of stranded assets risk on firm value, we hand collect data
on oil reserves locations from the companies' annual reports. We show that the negative effect
is stronger for oil producers with large undeveloped reserves in countries with strict climate
policies. We also interact the growth in undeveloped reserves with an indicator variable for the
period after the 2015 Paris climate agreement to examine if there has been a change in the
sensitivity of firm value to undeveloped oil reserves growth. Our empirical results provide
support for a much stronger negative effect of undeveloped reserves growth following the 2015
Paris agreement. Overall, our evidence is consistent with markets penalizing firms' investment
in undeveloped reserves growth due to climate policy risk. The markets seem to take into
consideration, at least partially, that while these reserves require substantial capital
expenditures to be developed, they might never be utilized.
        We show that our main results remain the same when we carry out several robustness
tests. Our results do not change when we use alternative measures of firm value and oil
reserves. We also confirm our main results for a subsample of US firms only as well as for a
subsample of all firms traded on US stock exchanges (this includes all Canadian firms cross-
listed in the US). Focusing on these sub-samples of firms allows us to carry out a cleaner test of
our main findings as US firms face more stringent reporting and regulatory requirements and
trade in equity markets that are much bigger, less segmented, and more liquid. For the US
firms and the cross-listed Canadian firms, we collect additional data on institutional ownership,
analysts' coverage and stock liquidity. We examine the effect of these variables on the validity
and strength of our results. Institutional investors are influential shareholders who could alter
the information and trading environment of a firm and therefore affect its value. Similarly,
increase in analysts' coverage could result in reduction in information asymmetry and/or



                                   
8
  At the end of each year, oil companies must report proved reserves to the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC). The SEC allows companies to classify undeveloped reserves as proved if the company has a 
development plan for drilling those reserves within five years of being booked. 


 
 

increase in monitoring activities. This can influence firm's stock market liquidity and therefore
its value.
         Our results show that institutional ownership does not explain or change the negative
effect of undeveloped oil reserves growth on firm value. Prior evidence on the effect of
institutional investors has been mixed. Several studies have documented that investors are
already considering climate change risks as relevant. For example, Krueger, Sautner and
Starks, (2019) document that larger longterm, and environmental, social and governance
(ESG)oriented investors actively manage their climate risk exposure (e.g. analyzing portfolio
firms' carbon footprints and stranded asset risks). Krueger et al (2019), however, show that
perceived overvaluations of fossil fuel firms are not large and that most investors do not
consider divestment as the most effective approach for addressing climate risks. Similarly,
Bolton and Kacperczyk (2019) find that divestment effects from large investors do not
generally explain the carbon risk premium that they document.
         Our results remain unchanged when we include analysts' coverage and stock market
liquidity in our regression analysis. We show that neither analyst coverage nor stock market
liquidity changes the relation between the growth of undeveloped oil reserves and the decrease
in firm value. Finally, in all our regression specifications, we control for all the variables that
have been shown to affect firm value as well as include year fixed effects and the (logarithm of)
crude oil price to ensure that the results are not driven by the developments of the underlying
commodity price, and in particular the large drop in oil prices after 2014.9
         We believe our paper is the first to show that while reserves are an important
component of oil firm value, the growth of these reserves has a negative effect on firm value.
We contribute to several strands of the literature. First, our paper is related to the literature on
the so-called "carbon bubble". The Carbon Tracker Initiative (2013) was the first attempt to
estimate the amount of stranded fossil fuel reserves of listed firms based on the global carbon
budget from 2000-2050 aimed at limiting global warming to 2°C above pre-industrial levels.10
Despite the large proportion of potentially unusable "stranded" reserves, oil companies still
invest predominantly in locating and developing new reserves. Previous studies have failed to


                                     
9
  In a robustness test, we show that our results remain the same when we use changes and volatility of oil prices 
instead of logarithm of oil price. 
10
    The value of global financial assets at risk from climate change has been estimated at US$2.5t by Dietz, Bowen, 
Dixon & Gradwell (2016) and US$4.2t by the Economist Intelligence Unit (2015). 


 
 

document a negative market reaction to these large exploration expenditures. This fact has
prompted academics and policy makers to argue that financial markets might carry a "carbon
bubble". Studies have also examined the effect of a possible carbon bubble on financial stability
and economic development (see, e.g. Weyzig, Kuepper, van Gelder, and van Tilburg 2014;
Schoenmaker, van Tilburg, and Wijffels 2015; Batten, Sowerbutts, and Tanaka 2016).
            Our paper also contributes to the literature that studies the pricing implications of
climate risk (see, e.g., Andersson, Bolton, and Samama (2016), Daniel, Litterman, and Wagner
(2019), or Litterman (2013)), and the uncertainty about climate change policies (see Freeman,
Wagner, and Zeckhauser (2015)). HSBC (2013) report is the first study to estimate the value-
at-risk (VaR) from stranded assets for the six largest oil and gas companies (Shell, BP, Total,
Statoil, Eni, and BG). They measure the amount of unburnable reserves based on costs data
from Wood Mackenzie11. The study shows that a moderate reduction in the demand for oil (due
to stranded reserves) could reduce the firms' equity value by 40% to 60%. Ilhan, Sautner and
Vilkov, (2019) show that climate policy uncertainty is priced in the option market. Specifically,
the cost of option protection against tail and variance risks is larger for firms with more
carbon-intense business models. Batten, Sowerbutts, and Tanaka (2016) analyze the market
reaction to climate change news in an event study that covers the period 2011-2016. They
examine news which contains the words "carbon bubble", "unburnable carbon", or "fossil fuel
divestment". They find a positive and significant effect on the abnormal return for renewable
energy companies, and a negative but insignificant effect on the abnormal return of oil and gas
companies. The authors argue that the insignificant effect is the result of investors' having
difficulties assessing future climate policies and their long-run risks for fossil fuel companies. In
a similar spirit, Byrd and Cooperman (2016) use events announcements concerning
developments in the Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) technologies for the period 2011 to
2015. They find a positive and significant effect for news on breakthroughs in CCS
developments. Setbacks in CCS development, however, have a negative but insignificant effect
on the abnormal returns of fossil fuel companies. The authors interpret this as evidence that,
either investors have already priced in the potential risk of climate-related stranded fossil fuels,
or investors believe that governments would never limit the production of fossil fuel.




                                        
11
      The VaR of stranded assets is calculated by aggregating the values of all unburnable projects. 


 
 


         Recent asset pricing models have highlighted the importance of climate risks as a long
run risk factor. For example, Bansal, Ochoa, and Kiku (2017) study the welfare implications of
rising temperature and propose a temperature-augmented long-run risks model that accounts
for the interaction between temperature, economic growth and risk. Bolton and Kacperczyk
(2019) and Hsu, Li and Tsou (2019) highlight the importance of carbon risks and
environmental pollution in the crosssection of stock returns. Growing evidence indicates that
climate risks may be priced in financial markets (Hong, Li, and Xu 2019; Daniel, Litterman, and
Wagner 2019; Kumar, Xin, and Zhang 2019). At the firm level, Addoum, Ng, and OrtizBobea
(2019) show that extreme temperatures can adversely affect corporate earnings and Kruttli,
Tran and Watugala (2020) show that extreme weather is reflected in stock and option market
prices. Ginglinger and Moreau, (2019) provide evidence that suggests that after the Paris
Agreement, greater climate risk leads to lower firm leverage with firms decreasing their
demand for debt and lenders reducing their lending to firms with the greatest risk.
         Finally, our paper is related to the literature concerned with the financial effects of
environmental regulation (see, e.g. Porter and Van der Linde (1995), Palmer, Oates, and
Portney (1995), or Ambec, Cohen, Elgie, and Lanoie (2013)). The risk of stranded fossil fuel
reserves and climate change risks in general are no longer considered to affect only future
generations.12 A survey of institutional investors attitude towards climate change reveals that a
large fraction of investors considers climate change risks (especially transition risks) as already
present and believe these risks will materialize within the next five years (Krueger, Sautner,
and Starks, 2019).
         The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 motivates the paper and discusses
the context of our research questions. Section 3 discusses the sample data and presents
summary statistics. Section 4 describes our research design and Section 5 presents the results
of the paper. Section 6 concludes.




                                     
12
   In addition, the anticipated spike in temperatures will not affect the world evenly. Studies show that productivity 
peaks when temperatures average 55°F (13°C), meaning global warming may increase productivity in the northern 
countries while having devastating effects on the tropical countries, i.e. climate change could worsen global 
inequality. 


 
 


2. Background to the study
For the past few centuries, economic growth has involved the accumulation of fossil-fueled
capital, such as coal power plants and gasoline-fueled vehicles which release greenhouse gases
(GHG) to the atmosphere. To prevent the resulting climate change that precipitates the risk of
extreme drought, wildfires, floods and food shortages for hundreds of millions of people, all
countries must reduce emissions to near-zero levels (IPCC, 2014). Such transition implies
moving from production based on fossil fuel capital to production based on carbon-neutral
capital. Most economists agree that the optimal policy to enforce such a transition is to use a
carbon price, imposed through a carbon market or, perhaps preferably (Goulder and Schein,
2013), a carbon tax.13 Combined with targeted innovation policies, a carbon price could redirect
investment away from polluting and towards clean capital at a relatively low cost (IPCC, 2014).
In this context, calls for a global carbon price in the order of $40 to $80 dollars per ton of CO2
appear increasingly plausible (Stiglitz et al., 2017).
         Following the 2015 Paris Agreement, the number of jurisdictions pricing carbon has
increased substantially to a coverage of about 20 % of global greenhouse gas emissions (World
Bank, 2019). Many financial institutions, however, have warned that an abrupt and coordinated
increase in carbon prices could cause a major shock to the stock market, with the potential for
systemic risk. Fossil fuel assets may lose part or all their value, and therefore become
"stranded". For example, Bank of England's governor expressed strong concerns for the
potential role that stranded assets could play in destabilizing the global economy (Carney,
2015). Since 2016, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), an agency of the European
Central Bank, considers the abrupt implementation of climate policy (defined as "hard landing")
as part of the systemic risks to the global financial system (ESRB 2016).14 Their main concern
is the enormous reserves of fossil fuels that would need to remain in the grounds to avoid
dangerous interventions with the climate system, but which are currently on the fossil fuel
companies' balance sheets. If there is a collapse in asset valuations, the initial shock that climate
policy would create by forcing the obsolescence of large fossil fuel assets could trigger
systemically relevant effects. ESRB's policy recommendations include the mandatory disclosure

                                     
13
    The quintessential example is British Columbia's carbon tax, which adds C$30 per metric ton to fossil fuels sold 
and combusted in the province (which account for over 70 percent of its total greenhouse gas emissions). It is 
generally accepted that the tax is reducing emissions in British Columbia without harming the provincial economy. 
14
    The risk of hard landing is the risk of late transition to a lowcarbon economy, where governments will suddenly 
take drastic actions. 


 
 

of carbon intensity by some firms as well as the inclusion of climate-related prudential risks in
stress tests (leading to "climate stress tests") and other macroprudential strategies.
        Despite the large fraction of potentially stranded reserves, fossil fuel companies
themselves find it "highly unlikely" that carbon emissions would be cut to reach the 2°C target
by 2050 (Exxon Mobil, 2014).15 In addition, the largest fossil fuel firms have argued that
carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) technology will become sufficiently affordable,
therefore more of current fossil fuel reserves can be burned without exceeding the carbon
budget. Caldecott, Kruitwagen, and Kok (2016), however, find that the slow deployment and
high cost of CCS make it very unlikely that the IPCC scenarios for wide-spread full-capacity
CCS will be met.16 Based on a cost comparison by Rubin, Davison, and Herzog (2015), CCS
technology costs as much (and possibly more) in 2015 as it did in 2005. In contrast, wind
levelized cost of energy (LCOE) has decreased by 61% from 2009 to 2015 and utility-scale solar
LCOE has decreased by 82%.1718 Lazard's (2017) LCOE calculations show that utility-scale
solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind energy have become cheaper than nuclear, coal, and even
natural gas combined cycle.19
        Nevertheless, Shapiro (2020) documents that in most countries, import tariffs and non-
tariff barriers are substantially lower on dirty industries than on clean industries, where
"dirtiness" is defined as the CO 2 emissions per dollar of output. This difference in trade policy
creates a global subsidy to CO 2 emissions in internationally traded goods and therefore
contributes to climate change. The paper estimates that this global implicit subsidy amounts to
several hundred billion dollars annually. The industry's location or "upstreamness" in global


                                    
15
    Recent lawsuits against oil giants such as BP, Chevron, ConocoPhillips, ExxonMobil and Royal Dutch Shell, have 
highlighted claims that these companies have known for some time about the consequences of globalwarming 
gases generated by burning fossil fuels, but sought to obscure them. 
16
    The think tank Ceres estimates that $12.1 trillion are needed as investment in new clean power generation over 
the next 25 years to limit climate change to 2°C. 
17
    The levelized cost of energy (LCOE) is an economic measure of the average cost to build and operate a power
generating asset divided by energy output of this asset over its lifetime. The measure is the minimum price at 
which electricity generated by the asset must be sold to breakeven. LCOE is often cited as a convenient summary 
measure of the overall competitiveness of different generating technologies. 
18
    Utilityscale solar refers to large scale electricity generation either through a photovoltaic power or through 
concentrated solar power. The utilityscale solar sector has led the overall U.S. solar market in terms of installed 
capacity since 2012. 
19
    The nuclear fuel cycle, for example, starts with exploration for uranium and the development of mines to extract 
uranium ore and ends with highly radioactive material that must be removed and stored under water at the 
reactor site in a spent fuel pool for several years. The natural gas combine cycle is currently the most economical 
of all conventional energy sources. 


 
 

value chains accounts for a large share of the correlation between CO2 intensity and trade
policy. i.e. more upstream industries have both lower protection and greater emissions. One
explanation for this correlation is lobbying competition. Firms may lobby for high tariffs on
their own outputs, but also lobby for low tariffs on the goods they use as inputs. Because final
consumers are poorly organized, politicians give the least protection to the upstream (the
dirtiest) industries and the greatest protection to the downstream (the cleanest) industries.
         Along the same line, Yergin and Pravettoni (2016) reject the existence of a carbon
bubble for fossil fuel companies. They argue that 80% of the market capitalization for large oil
companies reflects short to medium-term reserves (i.e. reserves that will reach the market in
five to ten years), whereas the transition to renewable energy may take decades20. With strong
advocates arguing for and against the likelihood of fossil fuel reserves becoming unburnable,
investors may find it difficult to confidently embed carbon risk into fossil fuel companies share
prices. With widespread growth in passive portfolio management in diversified indexes that
includes a large weighting for fossil fuel stocks, institutional investors may also be unable to
divest fossil fuel corporation stocks to reduce their stranded asset risk. Similarly, active
portfolio managers may fear lower returns relative to market benchmarks as performance goals
(see, e.g. Gilbert 2015). This paper examines whether (and when) capital markets have
recognized the potential loss of value to oil companies due to unburnable fossil fuel reserves.


3. Sample Data and Summary Statistics
We begin with the universe of publicly traded firms in the COMPUSTAT supplement Industry
Specific: Oil & Gas dataset for the period 1999 to 201821. The dataset contains annual firm-level
data on developed and total proved oil reserves, oil production and exploration costs. We
obtain accounting data and annual share price data for each firm from COMPUSTAT
Fundamentals, and data on analyst coverage and ownership data for US firms are from
Thomson Reuters. Daily stock prices and volume data are from CRSP.
         Figure 1 presents the distribution of firms and the annual average crude oil price for
each year of the sample period. Over 37% of the firms in the initial sample become inactive

                                     
20
    Based on a survey of industry analysts, a 2017 report ominously titled "All Swans are Black in the Dark" found 
that equity research firms generally "only look at the next five years" to incorporate risk considerations. This 
creates systematically mismatched time horizons between risk considerations and sources of stranded reserves 
risks. 
21
    Prior to 1999, the data on oil reserves in COMPUSTAT Industry Specific: Oil & Gas have very low coverage. 


 
 

during our sample period with almost a third of them after the sharp decline in oil prices in
2014. Anderson, Kellogg, and Salant ( 2014) show that once the investment to drilling is made,
firms do not alter production rates or delay production due to oil price changes: the shape of the
production profile is consistent throughout the data, including the periods when the price of oil
was very low. This profile is consistent with a production technology in which production rates
are constrained by geologic characteristics of the oil reservoir such as its pressure, the
remaining volume of oil near the well, and rock permeability.
         Table 1 provides the distribution of firms by country together with firm-level book and
market-to-book (Tobin's Q) value of assets, market leverage, capital expenditures and total
proved reserves for each country (averaged by firm and year) as well as country-level total
proved oil reserves (averaged by year).22 Most of the firms in the COMPUSTAT Industry
specific dataset are North American oil producers with majority being small companies as
shown by the average value of total assets and barrels of total proved oil reserves. As discussed
in the introduction to this paper, we eliminate all firms that are not incorporated in the US or
Canada.
         We apply the standard filters to clean the data. We drop all observations for which data
on total and developed reserves, total assets, capital expenditures, long and short-term debt and
shares outstanding and stock price are missing. We also remove all royalty trusts and asset
management companies, utilities as well as subsidiaries, private firms, and LBOs. We remove
all penny stocks and all companies that have had only negative book equity during our sample
period. The final sample consists of 6oo US and Canadian oil producers for the period 1999 to
2018. We hand collect data on the location of both developed and undeveloped proved oil
reserves from the companies' annual reports for each firm-year of our sample.
         Panel A of Table 2 presents summary statistics for our sample firms. The average firm
has around $5.6 billion USD in total assets. The median firm, however, is small with just over
$350 million in total assets. The average (median) Tobin's Q value is 2.63 (1.08). Compared to
the average firm in the COMPUSTAT Fundamentals database, the average firm in our sample
has similar mean (median) market leverage 27% (21%) but unlike firms in the COMPUSTAT
universe, on average (for the median firm) almost 72% (97%) of this debt is long-term. The


                                     
22
   The sample also does not cover several international firms with very large oil reserves as they are not publicly 
traded companies. For example, Saudi Arabian Oil Company, whose total proved oil reserves exceed 200 billion 
barrels, is fully owned by the government of Saudi Arabia. 


 
 

median firm in our sample has large capital expenditures, 21.20% of book assets, compared to
the COMPUSTAT universe average of 2.63%. Finally, the average (median) firm in the sample
has 0.044 (0.023) barrels of oil per dollar of total assets.
         In panel B of Table 2, we illustrate our idea in a simple way. Panel B shows the financial
characteristics of the sample firms with high (top quartile) and low (bottom quartile) levels of
total reserves and high and low growth in total reserves. Not surprisingly, the large firms in
our sample have large levels of total proved reserves and therefore higher valuations. However,
firms with higher reserves growth have significantly lower Tobin's Q than firms with low total
reserves growth. These firms also have higher leverage and capital expenditures than firms
with low reserves growth. The next section provides more context to this idea and discusses
the research design for our study.


4. Research Design
4.1. Empirical Specifications
We use the standard measure of firm value, Tobin's Q, calculated as the sum of the market
capitalization of the firm's common equity, the liquidation value of its preferred stock, and the
book value of its debt divided by the book value of assets. To test the link between oil reserves
and firm value, we estimate the following general form panel regression model:


                                                                                                             (1)


where Reserves is calculated as oil reserves in barrels scaled by firm's total assets, i.e. the unit is
barrels per US dollar of total assets and Res Growth is the percentage change in oil reserves
           ,            ,
                             . First, we use the amount of total proved reserves, then we split total
                  ,

proved reserves into developed proved reserves (Developed) and undeveloped (total-developed)
proved reserves (Undeveloped).23 To get the most comprehensive data, we only consider the
amount of proved oil reserves and do not include possible or probable reserves.24 Table A1, in

                                     
23
   We also estimate the dollar amount of total as well developed and undeveloped proved reserves by multiplying 
the number of barrels by the average oil price per barrel sold and then scale them by total assets. The results 
remain the same. 
24
    Proved oil reserves are "the estimated quantities of oil, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, 
can be estimated with "reasonable certainty" to be economically producible from a given date forward, from 


 
 

the Appendix, provides the definitions of all variables used in the study. Regression
specification (1) captures the relation between the level and growth of total proved oil reserves
and firm value as well as the separate effect of developed and undeveloped reserves. For all
regression specifications, we cluster standard errors at the firm level and include firm-year
fixed effects.
        The dependent variable in most of our analysis is lnQ (the natural logarithm of Tobin's
Q) rather than Q. Amihud, Schmid and Solomon (2017) show that the regression model fits the
data much better with lnQ as the dependent variable compared to Q.25 Other researchers use
lnQ when studying the effects of some variables on firm value. For example, Sanders and Block
(2011) show that the effect of intangible capital (measured by R&D expenditures, patents and
trademarks) on firm's value, is best explained in a model where the dependent variable is lnQ.
We carry out several robustness checks, where we estimate specification (1) using Tobin's Q,
the annual market-to-book ratio of equity (MTB) or the market capitalization in line with
studies in the accounting literature. Our results remain unchanged.
        When we estimate regression specification (1), we control for all the variables that (as
previous studies have shown) might affect firm value. The control variables are as follows. We
include market leverage defined as total book value of debt divided by equity market cap plus
total book debt. Size is the log of beginning of year total assets and profitability is defined as
the earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization scaled by lagged assets. The
effect of profitability on Tobin's Q is ultimately an empirical issue as on one hand more
profitable firms may have more favorable investment opportunities, leading to higher
valuations. On the other hand, high levels of cash flow may also signal that the firm is in a
mature phase and has limited growth opportunities.
        We also include capital expenditures divided by beginning of year (lagged) total assets
as a more direct measure of firms' investment opportunities, i.e. the investments that the firm
undertook. Firms that invest more likely have higher growth opportunities that should
translate into a higher Q value. We also include dividends calculated as the dividends paid in
the year divided by lagged assets. On one hand, this variable may capture the effect of capital
constraints. Alternatively, firms that pay dividends may have more free cash flow, which may
                                   
known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations" (US 
Security and Exchange CommissionSEC). 
25
    The logarithmic transformation makes lnQ have a smaller positive skew and smaller deviation from the normal 
distribution than that of Q. 


 
 

potentially be used to overinvest in marginal or even negative NPV projects such as the
acquisition or exploration of undeveloped oil reserves. Shareholders may value high dividends
as they will mitigate such agency costs. All these controls have been used in previous studies,
e.g., Allayannis and Weston (2001), Carter, Rogers, and Simkins (2006), Roll, Schwartz and
Subrahmanyam (2007) and Bolton, Chen and Wang (2011).
        The value of an oil firm should clearly be related to the price of oil, so we include the
logarithm of (West Texas Intermediate) price of crude oil. All our regression specifications
contain year dummies (and the annual oil prices for the period 1999 to 2018). This allows us to
ensure that our results are not driven by the large drop in oil prices after 2014.
        Next, we examine the effect of costs on the relation between oil firm value and its
reserves. The possible shift to a low-carbon economy will require a dramatic change in the
current growth model for oil producers. Carbon Tracker's (2019) reports shows that no new oil
sands projects fit within a Paris-compliant world. Despite this, in 2018 ExxonMobil approved
capital expenditures of $2.6bn for the Aspen oil sand project. US shale specialists also have
portfolios that are entirely out of the permissible carbon budget.26 We argue that oil producers
with higher extraction costs will face higher risk of stranded assets as firms will develop first
the reserves with the lowest extraction costs. To analyze this issue, we estimate the following
regression model:


                                                                                                          (2)
                                                                                            


where Cost is a proxy for extraction costs calculated as the average annual operation costs per
barrel of annual oil production for firm i in year t.27 The control variables are the same as in
regression specification (1).
        We also carry out a battery of robustness tests. First, we estimate regression
specification (1) for the sub-sample of US firms. We also collect additional data for the US


                                    
26
    In 2018 and 2019, all the major oil companies approved projects that fall outside a "well below 2 degrees" 
budget on cost grounds. These will not deliver adequate returns in a lowcarbon world. Examples include Shell's 
$13bn Canada LNG project and BP, Total, ExxonMobil and Equinor's Zinia 2 project in Angola and BP, Chevron, 
ExxonMobil and Equinor's project in Azerbaijan (see Carbon Tracker (2019) for more details.). 
27
    For example, the Cost measure for Hess was around $37 per barrel in 2018. Hess produced 101 million barrels of 
oil equivalent (MMboe) and had $3,780 million in total operating expenses. 


 
 

traded firms in our sample that allows us to carry out several tests. We examine the effect of
institutional ownership, analyst coverage and stock market liquidity on the validity and
strength of our results. Institutional investors are influential shareholders who can alter the
information and trading environment of a firm and therefore affect its value. In recent years,
the percentage of institutional ownership has increased significantly.28 The institutional
investors' choice to increase their holdings of a company might be a valuable signal affecting
the decisions of not only the management of the company but also of analysts and individual
investors. We estimate the effect of institutional ownership, analysts' coverage and stock
market liquidity in separate regressions as they are highly correlated. Previous studies have
examined the effects of institutional ownership on firms information and trading environment.
For example, Boone and White (2015) show that higher institutional ownership is associated
with greater management disclosure, analyst following, and liquidity, resulting in lower
information asymmetry. In contrast, Kadach and Schain (2016) document a negative effect of
institutional ownership on analysts' coverage.
        In addition, some activists' institutional investors have urged divestment of coal and oil
and gas firms. In 2017, Norway's $1 trillion sovereign wealth fund started work on the
divestment of holdings in international petroleum companies. The World Bank committed to
no longer be lending money for oil and gas exploration. Some University endowment funds,
such as Harvard, have also approved divestment from fossil fuel firms. Recent research,
however, suggests that it is unlikely that current or previous divestment campaigns have
produced any substantial effect on firm value. Teoh, Welch, and Wazzan (1999) provide
empirical evidence that the South African boycott to end apartheid, the most prominent
divestment campaign to date, did not have any effect on the valuation of companies with ties to
South Africa or on the South African financial markets. Two papers have examined the type of
stocks that may be unacceptable to proponents of socially responsible investing (SRI), who
refuse to hold stocks in firms that they view as generating social harm. Hong and Kacperczyk
(2009) argue that these stocks, called "sin stocks," have lower price-to-book ratios, less
institutional ownership, and less analyst coverage. Geczy, Stambaugh, and Levin (2005)
provide similar evidence. Bolton and Kacperczyk (2020) show that that institutional investors
implement exclusionary screening based on direct emission intensity (called scope 1 emissions)

                                   
28
  Institutional ownership more than doubled since 1999. Mean institutional ownership for the US companies in 
our sample for 1999 is 16.27% and 38.28% in 2018.  


 
 

in a few salient industries.29 The authors show that, although in aggregate, institutional
investors hold a significantly smaller fraction of companies with high emission intensity, they
do not underweight companies with high levels of emissions. We add to this literature by
examining whether institutional ownership influences the relation between firm value and
stranded asset risk.
        We also examine the effect of analyst coverage and stock liquidity on our results.
Studies have shown that analyst coverage and stock market liquidity improve firm value.
Jiraporn, Chintrakarn and Kim (2012) show that analysts, as information intermediaries,
provide oversight over management and thus help alleviate agency conflicts. Similarly, Fang,
Noe and Tice (2009) document that firms with liquid stocks have better performance as
measured by the firm market-to-book ratio.


4.2. Stranded Assets Risk and Firm Value
In this section, we further examine the effect of stranded assets risk on firm value. First, as an
alternative measure of oil reserves, we use Modified reserves. This measure was suggested by
Delis, Greiff and Ongena (2019) to address a possible problem that might arise because large
firms could hold oil reserves in more than one country to (potentially) exploit lax climate
policies of countries and to move their exploration activities there. An oil firm owing
exploration rights for reserves in a country with strict climate policy faces a higher probability
of reserves becoming stranded than a firm with fossil fuel reserves in a country with loose
climate policy.
        To examine this question, for each firm-year, we require data on the amount of total,
developed and undeveloped proved oil reserves for each location across different countries. As
such data are not readily available in conventional databases, we hand-collect them from the
firms' annual reports. To capture the differences in the firms' allocation of oil reserves by
country, we calculate the Modified reserves of firm i in year t as:


                                               ,                                                         (3)
and


                                    
29
  The Greenhouse Gas Protocol groups carbon emissions into three categories: direct emissions (scope 1), indirect 
emissions from consumption of emission intensive inputs (scope 2), and other indirect emissions (scope 3). 


 
 


                                                     ,                                                   (4)


where we compute Modified reserves measure separately for total reserves and for developed and
undeveloped proved oil reserves. In equation (3), Reserves is the amount in barrels per dollar of
book value of the assets of (total or developed and undeveloped) oil reserves of firm i in country
j in year t. In equation (4), Res Growth is the percentage change in (total or developed and
undeveloped) oil reserves of firm i in country j in year t. Climate policy is the climate policy index
of country j in year t. A detailed measure of a country's climate policy stringency should include
both its climate policy goals and its actual climate policy effort. The former is measured by the
efficiency in climate policy implementation while the latter is measured by climate policy
outcomes such as CO2 emissions.
        We are aware of only two datasets that offer information both on emissions and on
policy efforts for a large number of countries: (i) the Climate Change Performance Index
(CCPI) created by the non-governmental organization and think-tank Germanwatch and (ii)
the Climate Change Cooperation Index (C3I) by Bernauer and Böhmelt (2013). The CCPI is an
index that evaluates and compares the climate protection performance of 56 countries for the
period 2007-2018. A country's performance is assessed based on 14 indicators in the following
four categories: (1) GHG Emissions (weighting 40%); (2) Renewable Energy (weighting 20%);
(3) Energy Use (weighting 20%); (4) Climate Policy (weighting 20%).
        The C3I, on the other hand, evaluates countries' overall climate policy performance, as
well as performance in terms of political behavior (output) and emissions (outcome). Currently,
the index is available for 172 countries for the period 1996-2014. Both indices take values
between 0 and 100 (inclusive) with higher values indicating stricter climate policy (more
climate-friendly countries) and as shown by Bernauer and Böhmelt (2013) the two climate
policy indices are very highly correlated. We generate a firm-year measure of climate policy
exposure (risk) from the product of their reserves (reserves growth) and the C3I from 1999 to
2014 and the CCPI climate policy measure from 2015 to 201830. Based on the above discussion,
a higher Modified Reserves measure indicates a higher average level of oil reserves in countries
with stricter climate policy.


                                    
30
  We calculate two different types of the modified reserves measures using separately the C3I and the CCPI data. 
The results are the same as when we combine the two datasets. 


 
 

        While the risk of stranded fossil fuel reserves was initially considered to be mostly a
long-term risk (Caldecott, Tilbury, and Carey 2014), the 2015 Paris climate agreement was a
departure that brought policy action much more forward in time. The transition to a low-
carbon economy has now become a medium (and even a short) term concern for financial
markets. The second part of our stranded asset risk analysis examines whether the negative
relationship between undeveloped reserves growth has become stronger after 2015. We expect
that there has been a change in the sensitivity of firm value to oil reserves growth after the
Paris agreement where now financial markets penalize even more the growth of undeveloped
oil reserves.


5. Estimation Results
5.1. Firm Value and Oil Reserves
In this subsection, we discuss the benchmark results to our study. To examine whether market
valuations of oil producers reflect the risk of stranded asset, we first examine the relationship
between their value and the proved oil reserves they own. Table 3 shows the estimation results
from regression specification (1). Columns (1) and (4) show the effect of reserves (total reserves
for column (1) and developed and undeveloped reserves for column (4)) on firm value. Columns
(2) and (5) show the relation between value and reserves growth whereas columns (3) and (6)
combine the two measures of reserves (levels and growth) for total and developed and
undeveloped reserves respectively. From column (1), total reserves are an important
component of oil producers' value as the coefficient is positive as well as economically large and
statistically significant. From column (2), however, we see that the positive effect of the amount
of total reserves is decreasing as the coefficient of total reserves' growth is significantly
negative. The magnitude and sign of the coefficients of both oil reserves measures remain the
same when we estimate them together (column 3).
        When we split total reserves into developed and undeveloped (columns (4) to (6)), we
see that the positive effect of total reserves on value (columns (1) and (3)) is due to the amount
of developed reserves, which have a significant positive effect. The negative effect of total
reserves growth on firm value (columns (2) and (3)), on the other hand, is due to the growth of
undeveloped reserves as it has a significant negative effect on firm value. From column (6) we
see that the effect of the level of undeveloped reserves is negative and significant. More
importantly, the coefficient of undeveloped reserves growth is not only significant but also


 
 

economically very large with one standard deviation increase in the growth in undeveloped
reserves decreasing firm value (Tobin's Q) by 2.6% of the mean growth. This result is
consistent with the recent exploration cuts and undeveloped oil reserves write offs of major
North American oil producers.
       While the coefficient of the level of undeveloped reserves remains negative, it is not
always significant. The significant negative coefficient of undeveloped reserves growth,
however, remains robust across all our specifications. This is the key result of our study: the
growth in undeveloped reserve has a negative effect on firm value. Our finding supports the
2019 Carbon Tracker report that highlights the fact that future oil reserves that are generated
from current capital expenditures will most likely remain in the ground. Our result suggest
that market participants recognize, at least partially, that these investments are potentially
negative NPV projects that will destroy firm value.
       The sign and magnitude of the control variables is largely as expected. Firm size has a
significant negative effect on value as typically large firms face fewer growth opportunities.
Leverage also has an economically large and significant negative effect. This result is consistent
with the findings in Gilje, Loutskina and Murphy (2019) who show that, for their sample of 69
oil and gas firms, the highly levered firms pull forward investment and complete projects early
at the expense of long-run project returns and project value. They show that this behavior is
particularly pronounced prior to debt renegotiations consistent with equity holders sacrificing
long-run project returns to enhance collateral values and, by extension, mitigate lending
frictions at debt renegotiations.
       Like previous studies, capital expenditures have (mostly) significantly positive effect on
oil firm's value; profitability has a significant negative effect whereas dividends are not a
significant determinant of oil producers' value. Finally, the effect of oil prices is large, positive
and significant as expected where one 1% increase in oil prices increases firm value (Tobin's Q)
by 0.84% (see column (6)).
       Next, we examine the effect of extraction costs on our results. We argue that for
producers with high extraction costs, the stranded asset risk will be higher as firms will
develop first the reserves with the lowest extraction costs. We measure extraction costs as the
average annual operating costs divided by annual oil production. Table 4 shows the estimation
results from regression specification (2) which extends specification (1) by including the
interactions of our reserves measures with the operating costs per barrel of oil for firm i in year



 
 

t. The control variables are the same as in regression specification (1). Columns (1) to (3) show
that extraction costs have only a marginal effect on the relationship between total
reserves/reserves growth and firm value. Columns (4) to (6), however, show that it is the high
extraction costs producers that generate the negative effect of undeveloped reserves and
undeveloped reserves growth on firm value. From column (4) and (6), we can see that the
negative effect of undeveloped reserves on firm value is driven by the high extraction costs oil
producers. Similarly, while the undeveloped reserves growth has a significant negative effect
for all firms, this effect is stronger (more negative) for the high extraction costs producers. The
control variables remain the same as in Table 3.


5.2. Stranded Asset Risk and Firm Value
This subsection reports the results from our analysis of the effect of stranded assets risk on firm
value. Table 5 shows the estimation coefficients from regression specification (1) using the
modified reserves measure in specification (3) and the modified reserves growth in specification
(4). The modified measure of reserves accounts for the location diversification of reserves across
countries. An oil firm owing exploration rights for reserves in a country with strict climate
policy faces a higher probability of reserves becoming stranded than a firm with oil reserves in
a country with loose climate policy.
       The results in Table 5 remain the same as our main findings in Table 3. The table
shows that the growth in modified undeveloped reserves have a significant negative effect on
firm value. Our evidence supports the conjecture that for countries with stricter climate
policies, the effect of undeveloped reserves growth on value, is larger than for countries with
lax climate policy. The coefficient of the growth in modified undeveloped reserves in Table 5 is
larger than the same coefficient in Table 3 and the adjusted R-squared is around 50% higher
than in all the other regressions. In Table 3 (column 6), one standard deviation increase in
undeveloped reserves growth decreases firm value (Tobin's Q) by 2.6%. In Table 5 (column) 6,
one standard deviation increase in the modified undeveloped reserves growth decreases firm
value (Tobin's Q) by more than 10%.
       We show further that our results are consistent with markets penalizing firms'
investment in undeveloped reserves growth due to climate policy risk. We examine the effect of
the 2015 Paris agreement on the sensitivity of firm value to the amount and growth in oil
reserves. Table 6 presents the estimation results from regression specification (1) when we



 
 

include the interaction of the level and growth in our measures of reserves with a dummy
variable for the period after the Paris agreement (a dummy variable equal to one for the period
2015-2018) to examine if there has been a change in the sensitivity of firm value to oil reserves.
Our empirical results provide support for a much stronger negative effect after 2015. While the
growth of undeveloped reserves was valued negatively even before the Paris agreement, after
2015 the (negative) sensitivity of firm value to undeveloped reserves growth almost doubled
(column (5) and (6)) from around -0.0008 to around -0.0016. Overall, our evidence is consistent
with capital markets penalizing future investment in undeveloped reserves growth due to
climate policy risk. The sign and magnitude of the control variables remain the same as in
Table 3.


5.3 Institutional ownership, Liquidity and Analysts Coverage
In this section, we carry out several robustness tests to our main results. First, in Table 7 we
present the estimation coefficients from our benchmark specification for a sub-sample of US
firms only. The results remain qualitatively the same (i.e. the same sign and magnitudes
although significance levels are lower due to the smaller sample size) as the results for the full
sample in Table 3. In particular, the growth in undeveloped reserves have a negative effect on
firm value.
       In addition, we collect supplementary data on institutional ownership, analysts'
coverage and stock liquidity. We examine the effect of these variables on the validity and
strength of our results. Table 8 presents the estimation results for specification (1) for
subsample of firms with high vs low institutional ownership, analyst coverage and stock
liquidity. Table A2 in the Appendix to this paper augments the results from Table 7 by adding
institutional ownership, analyst's coverage and stock market liquidity as control variables. As
discussed in section 4, institutional investors can alter the information and trading
environment of a firm and therefore affect its value. Most empirical studies on institutional
ownership find that, given their independence, expertise, and ability to monitor managers
effectively, institutional investors have a positive effect on firm value that is attributable to
better monitoring and changes in the corporate governance structures (Aggarwal et al., 2011;
Gompers & Metrick, 2001; McConnell & Servaes, 1990; Smith, 1996). Using international
samples, Ferreira and Matos (2008) and Bena et al. (2017) document a positive effect of
institutional ownership on firm value, with this effect driven primarily by foreign and thus



 
 

more independent institutions. Homanen and Liang (2018) show that higher institutional
ownership is unconditionally correlated with higher firm valuation.
            We obtain quarterly data on institutional ownership (as a percentage of shares
outstanding) from the Thomson 13F database. We use the yearly average as our measure of
institutional ownership. Panel A of Table 8 presents the estimation results from regression
specification (1) when we split firms into two subsamples based on their institutional
ownership. We use the annual median value of our measure of institutional ownership as the
cutoff point between high level (above the median) and low level (below the median) of
institutional ownership. For brevity, we only report the coefficients on the reserve's measures.
The rest of the coefficients are the same as the results in Table 331.
            The results in Panel A of Table 8 shows that it is not institutional investors who drive
the market penalty for high reserves growth. We find that there is no significant difference in
the coefficient of undeveloped reserves growth for firms with high vs low institutional
ownership, i.e. high percentage of institutional ownership does not mitigate the negative effect
of undeveloped reserves on firm value. Our result that institutional investors are not driving
this negative effect is in line with Bolton and Kacperczyk (2019) who find that divestment
effects from large institutional investors do not generally explain the documented carbon risk
premium.
            Panel B of Table 8 presents the results for analyst coverage and its effect on the relation
between firm value and oil reserves. We obtain analyst information from the I/B/E/S database.
For each fiscal year of a firm, we take the average of the 12 monthly numbers of earnings
forecasts given by the summary file and treat that as a raw measure of analyst coverage
(Coverage). This measure relies on the fact that most analysts following a firm issue at least
one earnings forecast for that firm during the year before its fiscal year ending date and that
most of them issue at most one earnings forecast. We then take natural logarithm of (one plus)
this raw measure and construct a measure of analyst coverage (LnCoverage). We find that
analyst coverage has a strong independent effect on firm value (see Table A2) as it has a
significant positive coefficient in all specifications. More importantly, we document some
evidence that for firms with higher analyst coverage, the negative market penalty for stranded
asset risk is higher. From (1), we see that there a higher penalty on reserves growth for oil
producers with high analyst coverage. Similarly, from (2), we see that the negative effect of
                                          
31
      The full results are available on request. 


 
 

undeveloped reserves on value is about five times stronger (more negative) for high analyst
coverage firms. Previous studies have suggested several channels through which stock analysts
can have an effect of firm value. They can improve stock price efficiency, which enhances the
feedback in the stock market, increase information acquisition, which improves the information
set for managerial decision making and enhance corporate governance, which mitigates the
moral hazard problem (see Brogaard, Shi, Wei and You, 2019). Most importantly, the last raw
of column (2) shows that analyst coverage does not change the negative relation between firm
value and the growth in undeveloped reserves. The coefficients for the two samples are not
significantly different.
        Finally, in Panel C of Table 8, we also examine the effect of stock market liquidity on
firm value and whether the effect of undeveloped reserves differs for stocks with different
degree of liquidity. Our measure is the annual turnover, calculated as the annual volume traded
(in number of shares) divided by the number of common shares outstanding. The results in
Panel C of Table 8 show that stock liquidity also does not change the negative relation between
firm value and the growth in undeveloped reserves.
        Table A2, in the Appendix, reports the results when we include institutional ownership,
analyst coverage and liquidity as control variables in regression specification (3). Most
importantly, our result that markets penalize the growth of undeveloped reserves remains
robust. We also carry out additional robustness tests (not reported here but available on
request) using different definitions of firm value, the oil reserve measures and different control
variables. The negative effect of undeveloped reserves on firm value remain the same in
magnitude and significance. We estimate specification (1) using three alternative measures of
firm value: Tobin's Q, the annual market-to-book ratio of equity (MTB) or the market
capitalization in line with studies in the accounting literature. Our results remain unchanged.
Similarly, we estimate specification (1) using an alternative measure of the dollar amount of
total as well developed and undeveloped proved reserves calculated by multiplying the number
of barrels by the average oil price per barrel sold and then scale them by total assets. The
results remain the same. Finally, the results remain the same when we use changes and
volatility of oil prices instead of the logarithm of oil price. Overall, we provide robust evidence
that markets penalize future investment in undeveloped reserves growth due to climate policy
risk.




 
 


Conclusions
Global temperatures have increased significantly in the past half century and extreme weather
events, such as cold and heat waves, droughts and floods, as well as natural disasters, are
becoming more frequent and severe. A persistent rise in temperature, changes in precipitation
patterns and/or more volatile weather events can have long-term macroeconomic effects by
adversely affecting labor productivity, slowing investment and damaging human health. Recent
studies on climate science provide strong evidence that the main cause of contemporary global
warming is the release of CO2 gases to the atmosphere by human activities (Mitchell et al.,
2001 and Brown et al., 2016).
       In this paper, we provide evidence on the relation between oil companies' firm value and
the growth in their developed and undeveloped oil reserves. Previous studies have failed to
document a significant negative stock market reaction to stranded asset risk. Our results
suggest that while oil reserves are an important component of firm value, the effect of growth
in these reserves, on the other hand, has a significantly negative effect on value throughout the
sample period. This negative effect is particularly stronger after the 2015 Paris agreement.
       When we decompose total reserves into developed and undeveloped, we show that the
positive effect is due to the amount of developed oil reserves and the negative effect is due to
the growth of undeveloped oil reserves. One standard deviation increase in the growth of
undeveloped proved oil reserves decreases firm value (Tobin's q) by 2.6%.
       Our evidence is consistent with markets penalizing firms' undeveloped reserves growth
due to climate policy risk. First, we document that oil producers with higher extraction costs
face higher risk of stranded assets as firms develop first the reserves with the lowest extraction
costs. Our results show that the positive effect of total reserves on firm value is much smaller
for oil producers with high extraction costs. On the other hand, the negative effect of
undeveloped reserves growth on firm is generated by the high extraction costs oil producers.
       Second, our estimation results based on the modified reserves measure also suggest that
capital markets consider the possibility of future stranded assets. An oil producer owing
exploration rights for oil reserves in a country with strict climate policy faces a higher
probability of reserves becoming stranded than a firm with oil reserves in a country with loose
climate policy. We show that the growth in modified undeveloped reserves have a stronger
negative effect on firm value.




 
 

       Finally, our results show that while analyst coverage has an independent effect on oil
producers' value, it does not explain or change the negative effect of undeveloped oil reserves
growth on firm value. The results are similar when we consider institutional ownership and
stock market liquidity. Overall, our results suggest that the firm's trading environment or
informational opacity do not explain the relation between the growth of undeveloped oil
reserves and the decrease in firm value.
       Our paper contributes to research that documents evidence for the climate change risk
of fossil fuel firms. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first study to show that investing
in developing future oil reserves is a not a positive NPV proposition that could potentially
destroy firm value. We hope that our findings help to spur both theoretical and empirical
research in this area. For example, future research can examine whether a transition to a
renewable energy and greener production in general is recognized by capital markets and
therefore increases firm value.




 
 


References
Addoum, Jawad M. and Ng, David T. and Ortiz-Bobea, Ariel, (2019). "Temperature Shocks and
Establishment", Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411225

Allen MR, Frame DJ, Huntingford C, Jones CD, Lowe JA, Meinshausen M, Meinshausen N.
(2009). "Warming caused by cumulative carbon emissions towards the trillionth tonne.",
Nature, 458(7242):1163-6

Ambec; S., M. Cohen, S. Elgie and Paul Lanoie, (2013), "The Porter Hypothesis at 20: Can
Environmental Regulation Enhance Innovation and Competitiveness?", Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 7, (1), 2-22

Andersson, M., P. Bolton, and F. Samama (2016) "Hedging climate risk," Financial Analysts
Journal 72(3), 13-32.

Allayannis, G. and J. Weston, (2001), "The Use of Foreign Currency Derivatives and Firm
Market Value", Review of Financial Studies, 14, (1), 243-76,

Amihud, Yakov and Schmid, Markus and Davidoff Solomon, Steven, (2017). "Do Staggered
Boards Affect Firm Value?", Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2948141

Sandra Batten; Rhiannon Sowerbutts and Misa Tanaka, (2016), Let's talk about the weather:
the impact of climate change on central banks, WP 603, Bank of England working papers

Battistion, S., A. Mandel, I. Monasterolo, F. Schuetze, and G. Visentin (2017). A Climate
Stress-Test of the Financial System. Nature Climate Change, 7, 283-288.

Bernauer, T. and T. Böhmelt (2013). National Climate Policies in International Comparison:
The Climate Change Cooperation Index. Environmental Science & Policy, 25, 196­206.

Bolton, Patrick and Kacperczyk, Marcin T., Do Investors Care about Carbon Risk? (October
16, 2019). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3398441

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang. 2011. A unified theory of Tobin's q, corporate investment,
financing, and risk management. Journal of Finance 66:1545­1578.

Audra L. Boone and Joshua White, (2015), The effect of institutional ownership on firm
transparency and information production, Journal of Financial Economics, 117, (3), 508-533

Botta, E. and T. Kozluk (2014). "Measuring Environmental Policy Stringency in OECD
Countries: A Composite Index Approach", OECD Economics Department Working Papers,
No. 1177, OECD Publishing, Paris.

Burck, J., L. Hermwille, and C. Bals (2016). CCPI Background and Methodology. Germanwatch
and Climate Action Network Europe.




 
 

Byrd, J. and E. S. Cooperman (2016). Ecological Limits, Technology and Stranded Coal
Reserve Assets. Working paper. 33

Caldecott, Kruitwagen, Dericks, and Kok, (2016). "Stranded Assets and Thermal Coal: An
Analysis of Environment-Related Risk Exposure", Stranded Assets Programme, SSEE,
University of Oxford. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2724550

Caldecott, B., J. Tilbury, and C. Carey (2014). Stranded Assets and Scenarios. Stranded Assets
Programme Discussion Paper, University of Oxford's Smith School of Enterprise and the
Environment.

Carbon Tracker Initiative (2011). Unburnable Carbon ­Are the World's Financial Markets
Carrying a Carbon Bubble? Technical report.

Carbon Tracker Initiative (2013). Unburnable Carbon 2013: Wasted Capital and Stranded
Assets. Technical report.

Carbon Tracker Initiative (2019). Carbon Tracker Annual Review 2018-2019. Technical report.

Carter, D., Rogers, D., & Simkins, B. (2006). Does Hedging Affect Firm Value? Evidence from
the US Airline Industry. Financial Management, 35(1), 53-86

Daniel, K., R. Litterman, and G. Wagner (2019), Declining CO2 price paths, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 116 (42) 20886-20891

De Haas, R., and A. Popov (2018). Financial development and industrial pollution. EBRD
Working Paper No. 217. European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,

Manthos D., K. Greiff, and S. Ongena, (2019), "Being Stranded with Fossil Fuel Reserves?
Climate Policy Risk and the Pricing of Bank Loans", Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper
No. 18-10. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125017

Dietz, S., A. Bowen, C. Dixon, and P. Gradwell, ( 2016). "`Climate value at risk' of global
financial assets," LSE Research Online Documents on Economics 66226, London School of
Economics and Political Science

Dyer, E. (2015). Climate change study says most of Canada's oil reserves should be left
underground. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 6 November 2015.

ESRB (2016). Too Late, Too Sudden: Transition to a Low-Carbon Economy and Systemic
Risk. Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee No 6, ESRB Advisory Scientific Committee.

ExxonMobil (2014). Energy and Carbon ­ Managing the Risks.
http://cdn.exxonmobil.com/~/media/global/files/energy-and-environment/13report---
energy-and-carbon---managing-the-risks.pdf. Accessed February 9, 2017. 34

Vivian W. Fang; Thomas Noe and Sheri Tice, (2009), Stock market liquidity and firm value,
Journal of Financial Economics, 94, (1), 150-169


 
 

Mark C. Freeman & Gernot Wagner & Richard J. Zeckhauser, (2015). "Climate Sensitivity
Uncertainty: When is Good News Bad?," NBER Working Papers 20900, National Bureau of
Economic Research

Geczy, Christopher Charles and Stambaugh, Robert F. and Levin, David, (2005) Investing in
Socially Responsible Mutual Funds. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=416380

Gilje, E., E. Loutskina, and D. Murphy, (2019) Drilling and Debt, Journal of Finance,
Forthcoming.

Ginglinger, Edith and Moreau, Quentin, (2019). Climate Risk and Capital Structure, Université
Paris-Dauphine Research Paper No. 3327185. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3327185

HSBC (2013). Oil & Carbon Revisited: Value at Risk from Unburnable Reserves. HSBC Global
Research.

Hong, H., and M. Kacperczyk (2009). "The Price of Sin: The Effects of Social Norms on
Markets.", Journal of Financial Economics, 93, 15-36.

Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Kai Li, and Chi-Yang Tsou (2019) "The pollution premium," Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming

Ilhan, Emirhan, Zacharias Sautner, and Grigory Vilkov (2019) "Carbon tail risk," Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204420 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3204420.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC (2014). Climate Change 2014: Synthesis
Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 151 pp.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2018, Special Report: Global Warming of
1.5°C.

Jacob, M. and J. Hilaire (2015). Unburnable Fossil-fuel Reserves. Nature 517, 150­152.

Jiraporn, Pornsit and Chintrakarn, Pandej and Kim, Young Sang, (2012). Analyst Following,
Staggered Boards, and Managerial Entrenchment, Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2070132

King, D., D. Schrag, Z. Dadi, Q. Ye, and A. Ghosh (2015). Climate Change: A Risk Assessment.
The Centre for Science and Policy, University of Cambridge.

Kleimeier, S., and M. Viehs (2016). Carbon Disclosure, Emission Levels, and the Cost of Debt.
Working Paper. Maastricht University.

Krueger, P., Z. Sautner, and L.T. Starks (2019). "The Importance of Climate Risks for
Institutional Investors.", Review of Financial Studies "Climate Finance". Forthcoming.



 
 

Kumar, Alok and Xin, Wei and Zhang, Chendi, (2019) Climate Sensitivity and Predictable
Returns. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3331872

Kruttli, Mathias S. and Roth Tran, Brigitte and Watugala, Sumudu W., (2020) Pricing
Poseidon: Extreme Weather Uncertainty and Firm Return Dynamics, EBRD Working Paper
No. 229. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3451323

Le Page, M. (2011). Carbon Bubble Could Threaten Markets. New Scientist, October 2011.
Available at: https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn21031-carbon-bubble-could-threaten-
markets-maybe/

McGlade, C. and P. Ekins (2015). The Geographical Distribution of Fossil Fuels Unused When
Limiting Global Warming to 2 °C. Nature 517, 187­190.

Meinshausen M1, Meinshausen N, Hare W, Raper SC, Frieler K, Knutti R, Frame DJ, Allen
MR. (2009) Greenhouse-gas emission targets for limiting global warming to 2 degrees C.,
Nature. 2009 Apr 30;458(7242):1158-62.

Karen Palmer & Wallace E. Oates & Paul R. Portney, 1995. "Tightening Environmental
Standards: The Benefit-Cost or the No-Cost Paradigm?," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
American Economic Association, vol. 9(4), pages 119-132

Porter, M. and C. Linde (1995) "Toward a New Conception of the Environment-
Competitiveness Relationship, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 97-118

Edward R., J. Davison, and H. Herzogc (2015), The cost of CO2 capture and storage, 
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, Volume 40, September 2015, Pages 378-400

Schoenmaker, D., R. van Tilburg, and H. Wijffels (2015). What Role for Financial Supervisors
in Addressing Systemic Environmental Risks? Sustainable Finance Lab Working Paper,
Sustainable Finance Lab.

Shapiro, Joseph S. (2020). "The Environmental Bias of Trade Policy", NBER Working Paper,
No. 26845

Siew Hong Teoh; Ivo Welch and C Paul Wazzan, (1999), The Effect of Socially Activist
Investment Policies on the Financial Markets: Evidence from the South African Boycott,
Journal of Business, 72, (1), 35-89

Tordo, S., D. Johnston, and D. Johnston (2010). Petroleum Exploration and Production Rights:
Allocation Strategies and Design Issues. World Bank Working Paper no. 179. Washington,
DC. World Bank.

Weyzig, F., B. Kuepper, J. W. van Gelder, and R. van Tilburg (2014). The Price of Doing Too
Little Too Late; The Impact of the Carbon Bubble on the EU Financial System. Green New
Deal Series volume 11, The Greens/EFA Group ­ European Parliament.




 
 

Yergin, D. and E. Pravettoni (2016) "Do investments in oil and gas constitute systemic risk?",
IHS Energy Strategic Report




 
 

Figure 1: Sample Firms Distribution and Oil Prices




                                                                        100
             400




                                                                        80
                  350
    Number of firms




                                                                        Oil price (USD)
                                                                                60
     300




                                                                        40
             250




                                                                        20
                        2000   2005         2010     2015        2020
                                          Year

                                Number of firms      Oil price




 
               Table 1: COMPUSTAT Oil&Gas Firms Distribution by Country

The table presents summary statistics for oil producers from the COMPUSTAT
Industry Segment database for the period 1999 to 2018. In columns (2) to (6), book
assets, Tobin's Q, market leverage, capital expenditures and total proved oil reserves
are the average values for all firm-year observations in a given country. Column (7)
reports the sum of total proved reserves for all firms in a given country. Variable
definitions are in Appendix A1.

Country          Number of Firms   Book Assets     Tobin's Q   Leverage   CAPEX      Firm Reserves      Country Reserves
                                   (million US$)                                   (thousand barrels)   (thousand barrels)

                       (1)              (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)            (6)                  (7)

Argentina               3             11,781        0.7823     37.23%     11.93%        290,115              870,346
Australia               5             26,142        5.3352     33.40%     23.63%        111,009              555,043
Bermuda                 5             2,160         1.4415     41.17%     23.15%        68,281               341,405
Brazil                  1            222,068        0.9891     40.01%     14.42%       8,261,500            8,261,500
Canada                 398            1,562         1.3212     22.87%     36.52%        65,225             28,046,557
China                   2            292,576        0.9258     26.24%     13.84%       4,653,400            9,306,800
Columbia                1             38,380        1.4883     20.57%     12.75%       1,127,000            1,127,000
Cayman Islands          8              363          1.3088     44.28%     20.87%        22,812               182,495
Spain                   1             68,429        0.8103     40.24%     8.09%         584,000              584,000
France                  1            256,762        1.0381     21.11%     10.01%       6,049,000            6,049,000
Great Britain           7            125,243        1.3278     11.94%     17.97%       2,602,505           18,217,536
Hong Kong               1             98,691        1.5736     12.69%     17.11%       3,556,400            3,556,400
Italy                   1            135,525        0.8665     24.92%     8.78%        3,540,000            3,540,000
Jersey                  2              384          2.9259     10.09%     70.71%        28,654               57,308
Netherlands             1            115,687        1.4967      6.75%     7.84%        2,844,600            2,844,600
Norway                  2             75,039        0.8293     23.60%     10.73%       1,653,000            3,306,000
Russia                  3            108,932        0.5085     38.26%     9.58%        9,165,000           27,495,000
USA                    281            4,450         2.1143     30.31%     29.09%        139,166            45,785,524
South Africa            1             32,032        1.1196     17.38%     14.66%       1,228,200            1,228,200
                                     Table 2: Summary statistics

The table contains summary statistics for 600 North American oil producers for the
period 1999 to 2018. Panel A reports statistics for firm-level financial variables, and
oil reserves. Panel B compares the financial characteristics of firms with low (bottom
quartile) vs high (top quartile) total proved oil reserves and their growth. Variable
definitions are in Appendix A1. Diff is the p value from a t-test for differences in
means. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the
1% level.

Panel A: Summary Statistics

                            Mean           Std dev       Median       5%           95%

Assets (million USD)       $5,573           $24,258       $352         $9         $23,618
Tobin's Q                   2.63             59.16        1.08        0.42         3.29
Market leverage            26.64%            0.25        20.51%       0.00        80.15%
Capital expenditures       36.21%            1.21        21.20%      2.18%        95.06%
Profitability              6.57%             2.18        13.89%     -34.19%       45.11%
Dividends                  2.26%             0.28          0           0          10.36%

Oil Reserves (barrels per US$ of total assets)

Total reserves             0.0435           0.0923       0.0233      0.0008       0.1379
Developed reserves         0.0244           0.0614       0.0136      0.0005       0.0754

Panel B: Total Reserves, Growth and Financials

                        Low Reserves     High Reserves    Diff     Low Growth   High Growth    Diff

Assets (million $US)        1,495            5,913       0.00***     3,170         2,130       0.06*
                          (4,970 )         (22,551)                 (14,443)      (11,306)
Tobin's Q                  1.44712          1.7160       0.05**      1.5286       1.3260      0.00***
                          (2.9038)         (1.2211)                 (2.8544)      (1.0597)
Leverage                   24.46%           25.48%       0.3324      22.95%       32.80%      0.00***
                           (0.253)          (0.241)                 (0.2305)      (0.2899)
Capital expenditures       39.93%           35.51%       0.5399      22.41%       43.09%      0.00**
                           (1.675)          (1.573)                 (0.2268)      (0.3759)
                              Table 3: Oil Reserves and Firm Value

The table presents estimates from regression specification (1) for the period from 1999
to 2018. The dependent variable is the logarithm of Tobin's Q. Variable definitions
are in Table A1 in the Appendix. All specifications include firm-year fixed effects.
The p-values (in parentheses) are based on clustered standard errors across firms. *
indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.

                                 (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)

Total reserves                0.0260**                      0.0263*
                               (0.024)                      (0.073)
Growth total reserves                      -0.0000420**   -0.0000411**
                                             (0.021)        (0.024)
Developed reserves                                                        0.835*                      1.595***
                                                                          (0.065)                      (0.004)
Undeveloped reserves                                                       -0.112                      -0.234**
                                                                          (0.136)                      (0.011)
Growth developed reserves                                                               0.00346       0.00502**
                                                                                        (0.136)        (0.039)
Growth undeveloped reserves                                                           -0.000850***   -0.000928***
                                                                                        (0.001)        (0.000)


Size                          -0.115***     -0.0706***     -0.0698***     -0.111**     -0.0686***     -0.0580**
                               (0.007)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.016)       (0.005)        (0.017)


Leverage                      -0.613***     -0.701***      -0.700***     -0.591***     -0.733***      -0.727***
                               (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)


Capital expenditures           0.0356       0.0631**       0.0618**       0.0536       0.0994**       0.0964**
                               (0.253)       (0.026)        (0.030)       (0.113)       (0.014)        (0.021)


Profitability                 -0.0352***     -0.132*        -0.126*      -0.0353***     -0.173**       -0.177**
                               (0.000)       (0.074)        (0.098)       (0.000)       (0.012)        (0.011)


Dividends                      -0.00376       0.0611         0.0707        -0.116        0.357          0.240
                               (0.988)       (0.839)        (0.814)       (0.654)       (0.375)        (0.568)


Oil price                     0.773***      0.758***       0.760***      0.788***      0.833***       0.843***
                               (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)

Observations                    3,701         3,669          3,669         3,510         2,969          2,969
Adjusted R-squared              0.264         0.272          0.272         0.265         0.306          0.311
                   Table 4: Oil Reserves, Operating Costs and Firm Value

The table presents estimates from regression specification (2) for the period from 1999
to 2018. The dependent variable is log Tobin's Q. Cost is average annual operating costs
divided by the annual oil production. Variable definitions are in Table A1 in the Appendix.
All specifications include firm-year fixed effects. The p-values (in parentheses) are based
on clustered standard errors across firms. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at
the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.

                                       (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)

 Total reserves                     0.0437***                   0.0432***
                                     (0.000)                      (0.006)
 Total reserves*Cost                 -0.0608*                    -0.0592*
                                     (0.084)                      (0.098)
 Growth total reserves                           -0.0000625**   -0.0000275
                                                   (0.047)        (0.385)
 Growth total reserves*Cost                      0.000000970    -0.00000131
                                                   (0.542)        (0.414)
 Developed reserves                                                             0.685                       1.282**
                                                                               (0.206)                      (0.017)
 Developed reserves*Cost                                                      -0.0184***                     0.203
                                                                               (0.009)                      (0.266)
 Undeveloped reserves                                                          -0.0493                      -0.154*
                                                                               (0.577)                      (0.073)
 Undeveloped reserves*Cost                                                    -0.145***                    -0.159***
                                                                               (0.000)                      (0.000)
 Growth developed reserves                                                                   0.00221        0.00834
                                                                                             (0.728)        (0.141)
 Growth developed reserves*Cost                                                             0.000709       -0.000831
                                                                                             (0.623)        (0.426)
 Growth undeveloped reserves                                                               -0.00119***    -0.00146***
                                                                                             (0.001)        (0.000)
 Growth undeveloped reserves*Cost                                                          -0.000570***   -0.000529***
                                                                                             (0.005)        (0.003)
 Size                                -0.115**     -0.0643***    -0.0652***     -0.116**     -0.0658**      -0.0582**
                                     (0.020)       (0.008)        (0.007)      (0.029)       (0.012)        (0.029)
 Leverage                           -0.537***     -0.633***      -0.632***    -0.501***     -0.688***      -0.677***
                                     (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
 Capital Expenditures                0.0474       0.0770**       0.0738**      0.0550       0.0995**        0.0904*
                                     (0.223)       (0.040)        (0.048)      (0.204)       (0.037)        (0.063)
 Profitability                      -0.0340***     -0.149*        -0.139      -0.0339***    -0.216***      -0.218***
                                     (0.000)       (0.070)        (0.100)      (0.000)       (0.003)        (0.004)
 Dividends                           0.00506        0.0906         0.108       -0.0992        0.489          0.403
                                     (0.987)       (0.814)        (0.780)      (0.745)       (0.335)        (0.443)
 Oil price                          0.751***      0.778***       0.780***     0.763***      0.871***       0.878***
                                     (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)

 Observations                         2,859         2,834          2834         2,738         2,325          2,325
 Adjusted R-squared                   0.253         0.255          0.259        0.253         0.293          0.303
             Table 5: Firm Value, Oil Reserves Location and Climate Policy

The table presents estimates from regression specification (1) using the modified re-
serves measures. The estimation period is from 1999 to 2018. The dependent variable
is the logarithm of Tobin's Q. Variable definitions are in Table A1 in the Appendix.
All specifications include firm-year fixed effects. The p-values (in parentheses) are
based on clustered standard errors across firms. * indicates significance at the 10%
level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.

                                      (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)

 Total modified reserves           0.0910                        0.147
                                   (0.746)                      (0.600)
 Growth total modified reserves                -0.000368***   -0.000360**
                                                 (0.006)        (0.019)
 Developed modified reserves                                                   0.055                        0.056*
                                                                              (0.144)                      (0.057)
 Undeveloped modified reserves                                                 0.448                        0.759
                                                                              (0.307)                      (0.518)
 Growth developed modified reserves                                                         0.00138        0.00272
                                                                                            (0.654)        (0.358)
 Growth undeveloped modified reserves                                                     -0.000245***   -0.000453***
                                                                                            (0.007)        (0.001)


 Size                             -0.176***     -0.162***      -0.161***     -0.161***     -0.0987**      -0.0826**
                                   (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.015)        (0.036)


 Leverage                         -0.678***     -0.716***      -0.720***     -0.670***     -0.712***      -0.719***
                                   (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)


 Capital Expenditures              -0.0338       -0.0196        -0.0198       -0.0189        0.0476         0.0476
                                   (0.276)       (0.603)        (0.601)       (0.609)       (0.572)        (0.568)


 Profit                           -0.00542**     -0.0298        -0.0350     -0.00616***      0.0519         0.0333
                                   (0.019)       (0.789)        (0.753)       (0.003)       (0.732)        (0.802)


 Dividends                          0.137         0.180          0.174        -0.0388        0.336          0.200
                                   (0.605)       (0.594)        (0.606)       (0.882)       (0.382)        (0.595)


 Oil price                         0.366**       0.414**       0.413**       0.384**       0.482***       0.488***
                                   (0.016)       (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.000)        (0.000)

 Observations                       1,831         1,722          1,722         1,665         1,256          1,256
 Adjusted R-squared                 0.417         0.426          0.426         0.425         0.450          0.459
             Table 6: Firm Value, Oil Reserves and the 2015 Paris Agreement

The table presents estimates from regression specification (1). The estimation period
is from 1999 to 2018 and the oil reserves measures are interacted with a dummy
variable Paris equal to one for the period 2015-2018. The dependent variable is the
logarithm of Tobin's Q. Variable definitions are in Table A1 in the Appendix. All
specifications include firm-year fixed effects. The p-values (in parentheses) are based
on clustered standard errors across firms. * indicates significance at the 10% level,
** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.

                              (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)

 Total reserves            -1.193                        -0.820
                          (0.476)                       (0.599)
 Total reserves*Paris      1.220                         0.847
                          (0.466)                       (0.586)
 Growth total reserves                -0.0000541***   -0.0000580**
                                         (0.005)        (0.011)
 Growth total reserves*Paris            0.000172       0.000178
                                         (0.154)        (0.140)
 Developed reserves                                                   0.828*                      1.577***
                                                                      (0.066)                      (0.004)
 Undeveloped reserves                                                  -0.110                      -0.231**
                                                                      (0.141)                      (0.010)
 Undeveloped reserves*Paris                                            -1.440                       -2.006
                                                                      (0.553)                      (0.376)
 Growth developed reserves                                                          0.00341       0.00503**
                                                                                    (0.142)        (0.038)
 Growth undeveloped reserves                                                      -0.000771***   -0.000866***
                                                                                    (0.003)        (0.001)
 Growth undeveloped reserves*Paris                                                 -0.000700*    -0.000794**
                                                                                    (0.061)        (0.043)
 Size                    -0.115***     -0.0707***      -0.0704***     -0.111**     -0.0685***     -0.0591**
                          (0.007)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.016)       (0.005)        (0.015)
 Leverage                -0.614***      -0.702***      -0.701***     -0.590***     -0.732***      -0.726***
                          (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
 Capital expenditures     0.0348        0.0627**       0.0614**       0.0533       0.0998**       0.0989**
                          (0.264)        (0.027)        (0.031)       (0.114)       (0.014)        (0.019)
 Profitability           -0.0349***      -0.132*        -0.131*      -0.0353***     -0.173**       -0.200**
                          (0.000)        (0.075)        (0.097)       (0.000)       (0.012)        (0.012)
 Dividends                0.00467        0.0625          0.0732        -0.115        0.359          0.259
                          (0.986)        (0.835)        (0.811)       (0.658)       (0.373)        (0.535)
 Oil price               0.764***       0.756***       0.750***      0.787***      0.829***       0.832***
                          (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)

 Observations              3,701          3,669          3,669         3,510         2,969          2,969
 Adjusted R-squared        0.265          0.272          0.272         0.265         0.306          0.313
                  Table 7: Firm Value and Oil Reserves: US Oil Producers

The table presents estimates from regression specification (1) for US oil producers
for the period from 1999 to 2018. The dependent variable is the logarithm of Tobin's
Q. Variable definitions are in Table A1 in the Appendix. All specifications include
firm-year fixed effects. The p-values (in parentheses) are based on clustered standard
errors across firms. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and
*** at the 1% level.

                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)

 Total reserves          0.0297**                   0.0322*
                          (0.014)                   (0.059)
 Growth total reserves                -0.0000266   -0.0000253
                                       (0.152)      (0.176)
 Developed reserves                                               0.500                     0.989*
                                                                 (0.358)                    (0.072)
 Undeveloped reserves                                            -0.0512                    -0.131
                                                                 (0.559)                    (0.146)
 Growth developed reserves                                                    0.00359      0.00528
                                                                              (0.352)       (0.181)
 Growth undeveloped reserves                                                 -0.000639*   -0.000764**
                                                                              (0.070)       (0.030)
 Size                     -0.125**    -0.0557**    -0.0542**     -0.123*     -0.0702***    -0.0629**
                          (0.048)      (0.033)      (0.038)      (0.061)      (0.007)       (0.018)
 Leverage                -0.448***    -0.591***    -0.589***    -0.442***    -0.663***     -0.655***
                          (0.005)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.006)      (0.000)       (0.000)
 Capital Expenditures     0.0313       0.0523       0.0496       0.0274       0.0662        0.0612
                          (0.400)      (0.153)      (0.171)      (0.523)      (0.116)       (0.153)
 Profitability           -0.0319***     -0.143       -0.132     -0.0321***    -0.187**     -0.181**
                          (0.000)      (0.132)      (0.181)      (0.000)      (0.020)       (0.027)
 Dividends                 -0.128      -0.0246      -0.00117      -0.179      0.0954        0.0296
                          (0.687)      (0.948)      (0.998)      (0.576)      (0.889)       (0.968)
 Oil price               0.910***     0.916***     0.920***     0.924***     1.006***      1.014***
                          (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)

 Observations              2,136        2,112        2,112        2,102        1,816         1,816
 Adjusted R-squared        0.206        0.207        0.207        0.206        0.277         0.279
         Table 8: Institutional Ownership, Analysts Coverage and Liquidity

The table presents estimates from regression specification (1) for a sample of US oil
producers from 1999 to 2018. The regressions are estimated separately for high level
(above median) and low level (below median) firms. Difference represents t-test for
differences in coefficients. Panel A splits sample firms by their institutional ownership
(% of shares held by institutional investors); Panel B by analysts coverage (number
of analysts forecasts ); and Panel C by stock market liquidity (annual volume traded
divided by shares outstanding). The dependent variable is the logarithm of Tobin's
Q. Variable definitions are in Table A1 in the Appendix. For brevity, we do not
report the coefficients of the control variables. All specifications include firm-year
fixed effects. The p-statistics (in parenthesis) are based on clustered standard errors
across firms. * indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at
the 1% level.

                                                  (1)                                 (2)

                               High         Low          Difference     High          Low       Difference

Panel A: Institutional ownership

Total reserves                     0.0130    -0.0915       0.386
                               (0.367)       (0.711)


Growth total reserves          0.000430     -0.0000411     0.764
                               (0.823)       (0.114)


Developed reserves                                                     1.388*        1.271        0.648
                                                                       (0.095)      (0.274)


Undeveloped reserves                                                    -0.201       -0.273       0.304
                                                                       (0.156)      (0.469)


Growth developed reserves                                              0.00876     0.000832       0.519
                                                                       (0.136)      (0.919)


Growth undeveloped reserves                                           -0.00106**   -0.00138**     0.906
                                                                       (0.030)      (0.012)

Observations                       1,474      1,336                     1,366         982
Adjusted R-squared                 0.341      0.277                     0.350        0.337
Table 8: Institutional Ownership, Analysts Coverage and Liquidity (CONTINUED)

                                                 (1)                                      (2)

                              High             Low          Difference      High          Low        Difference

Panel B: Analysts coverage

Total reserves                      -0.124     0.0446**       0.751
                                   (0.726)      (0.015)
Growth total reserves         -0.000856***     -0.0000494    0.003**
                                   (0.001)      (0.687)
Developed reserves                                                          0.976       2.072***       0.588
                                                                           (0.338)       (0.000)
Undeveloped reserves                                                      -1.353***     -0.285***     0.031**
                                                                           (0.001)       (0.001)
Growth developed reserves                                                 -0.00428      0.0123*       0.054*
                                                                           (0.527)       (0.055)
Growth undeveloped reserves                                              -0.00118***   -0.00158***     0.838
                                                                           (0.001)       (0.004)

Observations                        1,489        1,312                      1,366         991
Adjusted R-squared                  0.466        0.231                      0.487         0.276



Panel C: Stock Market Liquidity

Total reserves                      -0.334      0.0357        0.985
                                   (0.526)      (0.123)
Growth total reserves             -0.0000568   -0.0000949     0.670
                                   (0.411)      (0.834)
Developed reserves                                                          1.437         1.129       0.046**
                                                                           (0.271)       (0.206)
Undeveloped reserves                                                       -0.903        -0.160        0.192
                                                                           (0.212)       (0.275)
Growth developed reserves                                                 0.0289*       0.00411        0.135
                                                                           (0.069)       (0.262)
Growth undeveloped reserves                                               -0.00206*     -0.00779*      0.128
                                                                           (0.098)       (0.062)

Observations                        1,082         935                       1,011         749
Adjusted R-squared                  0.295        0.209                      0.373         0.288
                                      Appendix A1: Variable definitions

       Variable                                                           Definition

Panel A: Firm characteristics

Tobin's Q                Market value of equity pus liquidation value of preferred equity plus book value of debt divided by assets.


Assets (million USD)     Book value of total assets; Size is the log of beginning-of-year assets.


CAPEX                    Capital expenditures divided by beginning-of-year (lagged) assets.


Leverage                 Market leverage is defined as total book debt divided by equity market cap plus debt.


Capital Expenditures     Capital expenditures divided by beginning-of-year (lagged) assets.


                         Profitability is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization scaled by beginning-of-year
Profitability
                         assets.


Dividends                Dividends are dividends paid divided by beginning-of-year assets.


Cost                     Average annual operating costs divided by annual oil production.


Inst. ownership          Percentage of shares outstanding held by institutional investors.


Analysts coverage        The average number of analysis forecasts for the year.


Stock market liquidity   Annual volume traded divided by number of shares outstanding.

Panel B: Industry specific

Total reserves           Total proved reserves/Assets (barrel per $ of total assets)


Developed reserves       Developed proved reserves/Assets (barrel per $ of total assets)


Undeveloped reserves     (Total reserves - developed reserves)/Assets (barrel per $ of total assets)


Modified reserves        Weighted average measure of reserves; weights are countries' climate index
             Appendix A2: Firm Value and Oil Reserves: US Oil Producers

The table presents estimates from regression specification (1) for 281 US firms for
the period from 1999 to 2018. The dependent variable is the logarithm of Tobin's
Q. Variable definitions are in Table A1 in the Appendix. We include institutional
ownership (% of shares held by institutional investors), analysts coverage (number
of analysts forecasts) and liquidity (annual volume traded divided by shares out-
standing) as additional controls. All specifications include firm-year fixed effects.
The p-values (in parentheses) are based on clustered standard errors across firms. *
indicates significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.

                                  (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)

 Total reserves                  0.764                   0.837
                                (0.179)                 (0.151)
 Growth total reserves                     -0.0156**   -0.0187***
                                            (0.031)     (0.007)
 Developed reserves                                                   0.738                   0.794
                                                                     (0.343)                 (0.322)
 Undeveloped reserves                                                 0.787                   0.285
                                                                     (0.387)                 (0.723)
 Growth developed reserves                                                       0.0113      0.0143
                                                                                 (0.321)     (0.231)
 Growth undeveloped reserves                                                    -0.000399* -0.000355*
                                                                                 (0.080)     (0.098)
 Inst. ownership                0.00117    -0.000831   0.000682      0.00104     -0.00434   -0.00331
                                (0.875)     (0.896)     (0.924)      (0.893)     (0.418)     (0.542)
 Analyst coverage              0.0159***   0.0162***   0.0158***    0.0155***   0.0161***   0.0158***
                                (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
 Stock liquidity                0.00220     0.00205     0.00203      0.00197     0.00189     0.00183
                                (0.261)     (0.296)     (0.299)      (0.306)     (0.242)     (0.251)
 Size                          -0.222***   -0.230***   -0.221***    -0.215***   -0.263***   -0.254***
                                (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
 Leverage                      -0.811***   -0.810***   -0.812***    -0.813***   -0.813***   -0.814***
                                (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
 Capital expenditures           -0.128*    -0.122**     -0.141**    -0.131**    -0.189***   -0.202***
                                (0.052)     (0.047)     (0.028)      (0.038)     (0.000)     (0.000)
 Profitability                  -0.177      -0.169       -0.181      -0.184       -0.163     -0.169
                                (0.198)     (0.223)     (0.185)      (0.178)     (0.333)     (0.312)
 Dividends                       1.635       1.821       1.689        1.651       1.519       1.412
                                (0.148)     (0.129)     (0.145)      (0.164)     (0.131)     (0.168)
 Oil price                     0.701***    0.672***    0.682***     0.701***    0.658***    0.665***
                                (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)

 Observations                    1,173       1,168       1,168        1,149       1,094       1,094
 Adjusted R-squared              0.442       0.439       0.443        0.437       0.457       0.458
