                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DOES STOCK MARKET LISTING IMPACT INVESTMENT IN JAPAN?

                                        Joseph J. French
                                        Ryosuke Fujitani
                                        Yukihiro Yasuda

                                      Working Paper 26495
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26495


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




A previous version of this paper is titled as "Stock Market Listing, Investment, and Business
Groups: How Firm Structure Impacts Investment?" We appreciate Kaoru Hosono (discussant at
TRIO conference), Demir Bekti a (discussant), Shin-ichi Fukuda, Takeo Hoshi , Hiromichi Iwaki,
William Megginson, Jun-yu Saito, Ken-ichi Ueda, Yishay Yafeh, and Wenrui Zhang (discussant).
We are also grateful for the insightful comments by workshop participants at Hitotsubashi
University and Monfort College of Business, and participants in Multinational Finance Society
and Global Finance Association. Ryosuke Fujitani greatly appreciates financial support from a
Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Research Fellow (No. JP17J03278) provided by Japan's Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports, and Culture. Yukihiro Yasuda greatly appreciates the financial
support from Mizuho Securities and from a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) (No.
JP17K03798) provided by Japan's Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture. Joseph
French acknowledges financial support from the Tointon Research Fund. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joseph J. French, Ryosuke Fujitani, and Yukihiro Yasuda. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Stock Market Listing Impact Investment in Japan?
Joseph J. French, Ryosuke Fujitani, and Yukihiro Yasuda
NBER Working Paper No. 26495
November 2019
JEL No. F3,G20,G31,G39

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide the first large sample comparison of investment by Japanese listed and unlisted
public firms. We show that listed firms invest more and have greater sensitivity to investment
opportunities than comparable unlisted companies. Our findings suggest that the role of listing in
alleviating financial constraints is more important than potential underinvestment due to myopic
behavior. However, the positive relationship between listing and investment is primarily driven
by standalone firms. Further analysis confirms that as the number of subsidiaries in a business
group increases the positive impact of listing on investment declines. Additionally, when a firm
faces financial constraints listing more positively impacts investment. We also document a
positive association between stock liquidity and investment for listed firms. Taken together, our
results suggest that stock markets play an important role in easing financial constraints and
preventing managerial shirking both of which increase investment. Finally, we show that higher
levels of owner-ship by financial institutions, board members, and foreign investors increases
corporate investment.

Joseph J. French                                Yukihiro Yasuda
University of Northern Colorado                 Hitotsubashi University
joseph.french@unco.edu                          Tokyo, Japan
                                                y.yasuda@r.hit-u.ac.jp
Ryosuke Fujitani
Hitotsubashi University
fujitani.ryosuke.hk@gmail.com
1. Introduction
         Does being listed on a stock exchange influence long-term investment? Existent literature

suggests it does. On one hand, listing may reduce long-term investment. It is often argued that

listing induces short-term pressures on management which leads to short-termism which may re-

duce long-term investment (Stein, 1989). On the other hand, listing reduces the cost of capital as

firms have access to public equity markets, which should increase investment of listed firms rela-

tive to unlisted ones. Recent empirical literature is mixed. Asker et al. (2015) show that short-term

market pressures cause lower investment levels for listed firms relative to unlisted firms. However,

Bakke, Jens, and Whited (2012) find that stock market listing increases investment. The authors

argue that the liquidity benefit for public companies induces them to invest more than private

companies. Gilje and Taillard (2016) show that private firms are less responsive to investment

opportunities compared to public firms. They suggest that access to capital is important in explain-

ing differences between investment of public and private firms.

         Building on this literature, we conduct a large sample comparison of investment behavior

by large Japanese listed and unlisted companies from 2001-2017. Existing research primarily fo-

cuses on differences between public and private firms. However, these comparisons are susceptible

to confounding effects due to different disclosure requirements. While listed firms are required to

comply with the listing criteria of the stock exchange and regulatory agencies, generally private

firms are required to disclose at a much lower level.

         We overcome this problem by taking advantage of institutional characteristics of the Fi-

nancial Instruments Exchange Act (J-FIEA, hereafter) of Japan. J-FIEA mandates all firms whose

equity satisfies several criteria to file financial statements that are the Japanese counterpart of 10-




                                                  2
K filing (J 10-K, hereafter).1 Interestingly, the firms that are required to file financial statements

include not only public listed firms but also many unlisted firms. This unique institutional feature

allows us to understand the role of short-termism and capital constraints on the investment levels

between listed and unlisted firms without confounding effects due to different disclosure require-

ments. Additionally, since our sample of unlisted firms are required to report consolidated finan-

cial statements and full format of J 10-K, we can collect the data on governance and ownership

structure that are at the same level as listed firms.

            We find that listed firms invest more and are more sensitive to investment opportunities

than their unlisted counterparts. This result suggests that listing status alleviates financial con-

straints and increases investment in Japan. Our findings contrast with the hypothesis that market

pressure exerted on listed firms induces myopic behavior by management and reduces investment

relative to unlisted firms (Asker et al., 2015). Thus, our results indicate that a simple comparison

between public and private firms might be misleading when examining the effects of listing status

on firm investment behavior. Further analysis reveals that the positive relationship between list-

ing and investment is not due to overinvestment by listed firms, but rather underinvestment by

unlisted firms.

            Next, we investigate how firm structure impacts investment behavior of listed and un-

listed firms. We divide our sample into two sub-samples: 1) Firms that are members of business

groups, and 2) standalone firms. Our results show that the positive relationship between listing and

investment is primarily driven by standalone firms. Additional analysis confirms that as the num-

ber of subsidiaries in a business group increases the positive impact of listing on investment de-

clines. In a series of additional tests, we show that the positive role of listing on investment is



1
    We describe the institutional details of the requirements in A1.

                                                          3
particularly important for financially constrained firms. Providing additional evidence that higher

levels of investment by listed firms is not due to overinvestment created by potential agency prob-

lems.

         In most cases, we show that higher ownership by financial institutions and foreign inves-

tors increases investment, potentially mitigating financial constraints in the case of financial insti-

tutions. Alternatively, these types shareholders may monitor management, which reduces mana-

gerial shirking and thereby increases investment. Indeed, we find that the positive impact of for-

eign investors on investment is greater for listed firms. Finally, we examine the role of stock li-

quidity on listed firm investment. We show that liquidity enhances the positive relationship be-

tween listing and investment, particularly in the business group subsample. This finding suggests

that liquid stocks act as a monitor of management reducing shirking and producing higher levels

of investment. Additionally, liquid stocks make raising additional capital easier, which also facil-

itates investment. Overall, our results have implication for understand corporate investment

throughout the world, give the prevalence of business groups in many developed and developing

economies.

         Our research contributes to two strains of existing literature. This first relates to differ-

ences between financial decisions of public and private firms (i.e., the counterparts of listed and

unlisted firms in our context). For example, Asker et al. (2015) find that compared with private

firms, public firms invest less and are less sensitive to changes in investment opportunities. Orihara

(2014) confirms the same qualitative results of Asker et al. (2015) in Japanese counterparts. Fo-

cusing in UK private companies, Brav (2009) finds that private firms rely on debt financing ex-

tensively, and thereby have higher leverage ratios and avoid external financing. Bigelli and

Sancez-Vidal (2012) investigate cash holdings of Italian private firms. They find higher cash



                                                  4
holdings for smaller private firms that are characterized as being younger, riskier and financially

constrained.

          The current paper is also related to the literature on the impact of market pressures on

investment. Public firms have better access to capital markets than private firms. However, short-

term market pressures, such as quarterly earnings announcements exert pressure on management,

which may distort investment. Many authors argue, that too much focus on short-term profits or

stock price by public firms distort investment decisions and cause firms to forego positive value

creating investments.2 These pressures cause public firms to invest less than comparable private

firms which are not subject to market pressure. However, using a sample of firms from the natural

gas industry, Gilje and Taillard (2016) show that access to external capital is most relevant for

explaining differences in investment between public and private firms. In a study focusing on Ja-

pan, Ikeda et al (2017) find evidence that managers of public firms avoid making difficult invest-

ment decisions when they are protected from the disciplinary effects of capital markets, which may

also lead public firms to underinvest.

          Empirical evidence in Orihara (2017) suggests that the liquidity market monitoring

tradeoff of listing has heterogeneous effects on a firm's investment, depending on the nature of the

firm. Furthermore, using private firms as a control group for the treatment group of listed firms,

Ueda et al. (2019) show that listing mitigates financial constraints.3

          The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews relevant institutional

background, in Section 3 our hypotheses are developed, Section 4 describes our sample and




2
   Morck et al. (1990) provided an excellent review of this research. See also Shleifer and Vishney (1990) and
Stein (1989) for examples.
3 Ueda et al. (2019) argues that listing status of a firm rarely changes over time in Japan. In this sense, using

Japanese data has another advantage for this type of study because the selection bias between listed and private
is always challenging topic in US studies.

                                                       5
presents our empirical methods, Section 5 discusses the empirical results, and Section 6 provides

a summary of observations and directions for further research.



2. Institutional Background
         Identifying the effects of listing status on investment is a challenging task for the follow-

ing reasons: 1) Unlisted firms are not contained in most databases,4 and 2) Disclosure require-

ments for listed and unlisted firm are different. Listed firms are required to comply with the dis-

closure and legal criteria of the stock exchange, while unlisted firms generally have softer disclo-

sure requirements. For instance, unlisted firms do not need to follow Regulation Fair Disclosure

in the U.S. (Farre-Mensa, 2017).5 Thus, even if the data were available, the differences in the

disclosure levels causes serious confounding effect problems.

         To address these issues, we take the advantage of the institutional features of the Japanese

Financial Instruments Exchange Act (J-FIEA, hereafter). Article 24 of the J-FIEA mandates firms

to report audited financial statements, if a firm (a) issues securities listed in a financial instruments

exchange, (b) issue securities publicly offered, or (c) issue unlisted securities held by more than

one thousand investors.6

         Figure 1 describes the definition of listed, quasi-private, and purely-private firms in the

context of existing literature. The X-axis represents the strictness of mandatory disclosure require-

ments. In general, the disclosure requirements for listed firms are stricter than those for purely

private firms. The reference point dividing purely-private, and listed and quasi-private firms


4
  One important exception is Sageworks, which follows approximately 40,000 U.S. unlisted firms, and several
studies use it to investigate unlisted firms (e.g., Asker et al., 2015; Farre-Mensa 2017).
5 Anecdotal discussion reports that required reporting for listed Japanese firms is more than 100 pages.

Whereas unlisted Japanese firms (Jigyou Houkokusho) only has approximately 15 pages of required reporting,
even if the firm is large (e.g., Hankyu Corporation whose total assets is more than approximately 1 trillion US
dollars).
6 We describe the details of the requirements in A1.


                                                      6
represents the minimum requirements of disclosure for listed firms. Quasi-private firms do not go

public, but the Japanese Financial Instrument Exchange Act requires that these firms disclose at

the same level as listed firms.

          We refer to these "quasi-private firms" as "unlisted firms" hereafter. Since these unlisted

firms must report consolidated financial statements and full format of J 10-K (Japanese equivalent

to U.S 10k), we are able to collect comparable financial, governance and ownership structure data

to those of listed firms. In addition, we can avoid the confounding effects caused by the different

disclosure requirement levels.

                                                Figure 1

          This definition of a listed firm in this study does not necessarily coincide with a "public

firm" in the previous literature.7 Thus, quasi-private firms could be regarded as public firms. In

our study, listed firms must be traded on public exchanges consistent with the definitions of Katz

(2009) and Farre-Mensa (2010).

          Several U.S. studies use quasi-private firms as the counterpart of unlisted firms, although

they call them private firms. For instance, Gao et al. (2013) find that listed firms hold more cash

reserves than quasi-private firms. They attribute the difference to the higher agency problems in

listed firms. Acharya and Xu (2017) show that the private firms perform more intense innovation

investment and see better innovation performance. Using quasi-private (unlisted) firms and listed

firms, other recent studies investigate the differences in CEO compensation (Gao and Li, 2015),

CEO turnover (Gao et al., 2017), and innovation strategy (Gao et al., 2018) between listed and

unlisted firms.



7  For example, Minnis and Shroff's (2017) define a private firm "as one with capital (e.g., debt or equity) that
is not traded in a secondary market (p. 475)". Their definition of public firm includes not only listed firms, but
also firms issuing equities and bonds that are traded in the over-the-counter market.

                                                        7
3. Hypothesis Development
         Does listing status impact investment? Do standalone firms invest differently than busi-

ness groups? There is a small but growing literature looking into these questions. Public ownership

has benefits and costs. A large literature exists and contents that markets monitor management and

ensure that pubic firms invest optimally. In addition to the direct effects of monitoring, stock mar-

ket monitoring also has indirect effects on corporate investment by providing listed firms with

easier access to capital. Several authors have shown that listing enhances corporate activities, such

as raising capital, payment of dividends, and investment (Brav, 2009; Michaely and Roberts, 2012;

Maksimovic et al., 2013). Stock market listing also increases sensitivity to investment opportuni-

ties (Mortal and Reisel, 2013; Gilje and Taillard, 2015; Phillips and Sertsios, 2016).

         Mangena and Tauringana (2007) find positive relationships between corporate govern-

ance, foreign ownership, and liquidity (a proxy for market monitoring) in Southern Africa. Tang

and Wang (2011) examine the cross-sectional relation between corporate governance and firm

liquidity in China. They find strong evidence of the positive governance-liquidity relationship.

Their findings imply that increased market monitoring improves governance and valuation. Given

this evidence, there are reasons to believe that the market monitoring of public firms may prod

managers' act in the best interests of shareholder. If these arguments are correct, we may uncover

a positive relationship between listed firms and investment levels. As market monitoring may en-

courage higher levels of investment. Furthermore, listing reduces the cost of obtaining funds by

broadening the investor base and reducing the cost of capital.

         Another stream of literature suggests there is the dark-side of stock market listing, ad

listing induces short-term market pressures, leading to myopic behavior by managers. Early theo-

retical work by Stein (1989) provides insights on why listed and unlisted firms invest differently.

                                                 8
According to Stein's model, managers attempt to mislead markets about the value of their firm.

To do so, they forsake some positive net present value (NPV) investments to increase current

earnings. Stein shows that even when facing efficient markets managers continue to act myopically.

Indeed, Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005) show that foregoing positive NPV projects can

boost current earnings and potentially the stock price by reducing depreciation expenses and other

project start-up costs. Since unlisted firms do not face market pressure to meet earnings targets,

we expect that unlisted firms will invest more than comparable listed firms as there would not no

incentive for them to forego value creating projects. Asker et al. (2015) show that in the United

States short-termism distorts investment behavior of public listed firms. They find that public firms

invest less and are less responsive to investment opportunities when compared to private firms.

          Agency theory also provides insights on the expected relationships between investments

by unlisted and listed firms. It is generally assumed that agency conflicts are lower for private

firms comparted to their public counterparts (Jensen, 1989). Bhide (1993) argues that highly con-

centrated ownership and illiquidity incentivizes owners of private firms to monitor management.

These arguments suggest that private firms are subject to less agency costs and therefore should

invest more in most situations.8 Additionally, Boot et al. (2008) argue that listing creates uncer-

tainty in ownership exposing management to uncertainty regarding shareholder intervention. This

uncertainty may also impact managerial investment behavior in listed firms.

          Based on these conflicting arguments, we construct the following hypothesis.



H1: Listed firms engage in more investment than unlisted firms.




8  Note that we isolate this effect in our experiment because we compare investment between listed and unlisted
firms. They are both public firms and we can control the different ownership structure. Nonetheless, these argu-
ments suggest that listed firms are subject to myopic pressures and therefore should invest less in most situations.

                                                         9
         The effects of listing status on corporate investment may depend on corporate structure,

(i.e. whether a firm has subsidiaries). Listed firms generally have more access to equity capital.

From this perspective, unlisted firms should generally invest less than listed firms. However, un-

listed firms can alleviate this financial constraint problem by constructing business groups. Busi-

ness groups provide both listed and unlisted firms with the internal capital market where the firms

can raise capital. If the positive relationship between listing status and investment level is driven

by the access to equity capital, then internal capital markets might partly substitute for listing. This

discussion leads to the expectation that the positive relationship between investment and listing

status will be stronger for standalone firms relative to business group firms.

         Agency theory again can provide some guidance. Like Ikeda et al (2017), we consider

Hicks' (1935) quiet life hypothesis as extended by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003). According

to the Bertrand and Mullainathan's model managers of firms who are protected from hostile take-

overs or pressure from unfriendly shareholders are subject to more agency conflicts. Hence man-

agers of these firms will prefer the `quiet life' and invest less than those firms which are subject to

takeover threats and/or market monitoring. We suspect that firms that are members of a business

group are more difficult to acquire than standalone firms, due to stable holdings by other members

of the business group. Therefore, we expect that publicly traded standalone firms are subject to a

greater probability of takeover, which should give managers an incentive to invest more to avoid

unfriendly takeovers. On the other hand, unlisted standalone firms do not face takeover threats and

hence may not invest as much as corresponding listed standalone firms.

         Based on these conflicting arguments, we construct the following hypothesis.



H2: The impact of listing status on investment behavior is more important for standalone firms

relative to business group firms.

                                                  10
4. Sample and Methodologies
4.1 Data and Sample Selection

         Our sample consists of listed and unlisted firms reporting their financial statements under

Japanese accounting standard from March 2000 through April 2017.9 Since several variables are

used in their lagged form, the observations from March 2000 through February 2001 are excluded

from the main analyses. We exclude financial firms and winsorize each variable falling in the top

or bottom 1%. All the data are obtained from Nikkei NEEDS Financial Quest 2.0 (FQ, hereafter).

         To identify unlisted firms, we use the following procedure. First, we collect the entire

financial statement data and the firm's security exchange ID from FQ. We identify firms without

a security exchange ID as unlisted firms. Second, we exclude the firms without information on

ownership and firms without cash flow statements. Several unlisted firms report financial state-

ment based on JCA, but not J FIEA. These unlisted firms neither disclose J 10-K form nor cashflow

statements. Another important difference is that firms are only required to report consolidated fi-

nancial statements even if a firm has subsidiaries. To control for these differences in disclosure

requirements, we specify firms reporting financial statement based on JCA and we exclude those

firms. We describe the details and legal framework on financial statement disclosure in Appendix

A. The final sample size is 50,416 firm-year observations, which contain 44,756 listed firm obser-

vations and 5,660 unlisted firm observations.



4.2 Empirical Methodologies



9
  The Japanese economy experienced a bubble economy in the late 1980s which resulted in a banking crisis in
the late 1990s. Due to the change of bank-firm relationships, Japanese firms tended to have more cash and focus
more on restructuring or cost-cut rather than investment after 2000 (Schaede, 2008; Fukuda, 2015). Taken to-
gether, the past twenty or thirty years are sometimes said as "lost two or three decades".

                                                      11
          To test the effects of being listed on investment behavior, we follow Asker et al (2015):



                                 investmentit=1 listedit +  z + fe + it                                     (1)



where the dependent variable is corporate investment (investment). We use the following four

measures of investment: 1) ppe computed as the growth of property plant and equipment plus

depreciation and impairment from the prior period, 2) capex is capital expenditure reported in

footnote of Form 10-K, 3) tang + int is the cash outflow from the purchase of tangible and intan-

gible assets, 4) capex + rd is the sum of capital expenditure and R&D expenditure, and 5) rd is

R&D expenditure. All investment variables are scaled by beginning-of year sum of tangible and

intangible assets.

          The key explanatory variable is an indicator taking a value of one for a listed firm (listed)

and zero otherwise. We include several control variables (z), industry and year fixed effects (fe).

The control variables include predicted q (pred_q), return on assets (roa) and firm age (age)10. We

also consider and include several ownership structure variables: shareholding of financial institu-

tions (sh_financial); of foreign investors (sh_foreign); of top 10 shareholders (sh_top10); and of

board members (sh_directors). We expect positive coefficients on roa as better performing firms

invest at greater levels (Fazzari et al. 1988).11 We predict the negative coefficients of age based

on business life-cycle hypothesis. Details on the variable definitions are summarized in Table A1.




10
   Following Campello and Graham (2013), predicted q is computed by the following regression: q = 0 + 1
sg + 2 roa + 3 net_income + 4 lev + fe + , where net_income is ordinary income, fe includes industry and
year fixed effects, and the other variables are defined in this table. After estimating the model, we then use the
regression coefficients to generate predicted q for each firm, both listed and unlisted firms.
11 Some prior works cast doubt on this interpretation on investment sensitivity to performance (e.g., Kaplan and

Zingales 1997). Also, Bushman, Smith and Zhang (2012) show that the positive relationship between investment
and performance is mechanically observed.

                                                       12
The subscripts i, t, and I depicts firm i, year t, and industry I, respectively. Standard errors are

clustered at the firm level.

         To investigate the differences in the effects of listing status between business groups and

standalone firms, we decompose the business group subsample into two components: 1) Firms that

are members of business groups (Business Group), and 2) standalone firms (Standalone) and re-

estimate Equation (1) for these two sub-sample with all controls.



5. Empirical Results

5.1 Descriptive Statistics

         Table 1 presents the summary statistics. Descriptive statistics are reported separately for

the entire sample, listed firms, and unlisted firms. These univariate results demonstrate significant

differences among listed and unlisted firms. Univariate comparisons of investment proxies show

that for all four measures of firm investment that firms with subsidiaries have higher levels of

investment. Mean and median values for listed firms demonstrate significantly greater level of

investment suggesting that unlisted firms are potentially capital constrained. Several firm charac-

teristics are significantly different among listed firms and unlisted firms. Listed firms have more

growth opportunities and are more profitable. Additionally, listed firms are younger and larger.

While, unlisted firms have less cash and have more leverage.

         Regarding ownership structure, listed firms have greater ownership percentages by finan-

cial institutions and foreign investors. Listed firms have higher ownership by top 10 shareholders

which could include financial institutions and foreign investors. Interestingly, listed firms also

have higher ownership levels by board members. In general, summary statistics demonstrate sig-

nificant differences between levels of investment and firm characteristics between listed and un-

listed firms.

                                                 13
                                            Table 1

         Table 2 presents summary statistics separately for business groups (i.e., firms with sub-

sidiaries) and standalone firms. Univariate comparisons of investment proxies show that for most

measures of firm investment (except ppe) firms with subsidiaries have lower levels of investment

than standalone firms. Standalone firms have more investment opportunities, are more profitable,

younger, and smaller. Business group firms have less cash and higher leverage. Lower leverage

for standalone firms might indicate face financial constraints due to limited borrowing capacity.

Regarding ownership structure, financial institutions tend to hold higher percentages of ownership

in business group firms, while director ownership appears to be more important in standalone firms.

                                            Table 2



5.2 Regression Results

         Columns 1-5 of Table 3 report the results of Equation (1) for various firm-level invest-

ment proxies. The coefficient on listed is positive and statistically significant across most invest-

ment measures (except for rd), indicating that listed firms invest more than unlisted firms. Asker

et al. (2015) show that short-term pressures cause public firms to invest less than comparable pri-

vate firms. Our findings suggest that the role of listing in alleviating financial constraints is more

important than potential underinvestment due to myopic managerial behavior in Japan. We note

that this result contrasts with Orihara (2014) who confirms the same qualitative results of Asker et

al. (2015) in Japanese counterparts. Our results indicate that simple comparisons between public

and private firms might be misleading when examining the effects of stock market listing on firm

investment behavior.




                                                 14
         The coefficients of pred_q and roa are positive, suggesting that firms with better invest-

ment opportunities (pred_q) and performance (roa) invest more. In contrast, the coefficients of

age and size are negative, indicating that both firm age and firm size have negative impact on

investment consistent with the business lifecycle theory of the firm. The coefficients that are re-

lated to cash holding (cash) and financial constraints (lev) show that firms with more cash or less

leverage engage in more investment. Taking advantage of our unique data on ownership structure,

we report the impact of ownership structure on firm level investment. Higher levels of financial

institution, foreign, and director ownership positively impacts investment.

         One potential concern of our analyses is the relatively small number of unlisted firms in

our sample. To mitigate this concern, we identify a matched listed firm for each unlisted firm using

propensity score matching based on firm size (size) in each industry and year. Caliper-based near-

est neighborhood matching without replacement is used to identify an unlisted firm for each listed

firm. We employ nearest-neighbor matching and drop observations with propensity scores outside

the common support levels to ensure high quality matches. In this procedure, we regard unlisted

firms as the treatment group and use listed firms as the control group due to data availability of

unlisted firms. Additionally, following Asker et al. (2015) and Acharya and Xu (2017), we identify

a matched unlisted firm for each listed firm. To cope with the small sample, we allow unlisted

firms to be selected repeatedly as a control firm, but we match each treatment listed firm to the

portfolio of four control unlisted firms.

         Column 6 of Table 3 reports the results of Equation (1) using the matched sample. The

coefficient on listed remains positive and significant, suggesting that the main results hold after

controlling the observable differences between listed and unlisted firms. To check the robustness

of our results, we estimate several additional matching procedures to find the control counterparts.

In Column 7, we use firm size, leverage, cash holding, and sales growth as additional matching

                                                15
variables. In Column 8 (Column 9), we match based on business group (investment proxies) in

addition to our baseline matching variables. Consistent results are found in all match samples,

verifying the positive impact of listing on corporate investment in Japan.



                                                  Table 3



          In the next phase of our analysis, we include interaction terms of the indicator variable of

listed firm (listed) with a proxy of investment opportunities (pred_q) and one proxy of financial

performance (roa) on the right had side of equation (1).12 This specification is based on Asker et

al. (2015). Equation (4) presents the empirical specification:



      investmentit=1 listedit + 2 listedit × pred_qit+ 3 listedit × roait +  z + fe + it                        (2)



          Panel A of Table 4 contains the results of Equation (2). The coefficient of cross-term of

listed with pred_q is positive and statistically significant except in column 5 suggesting that listed

firms have greater access to lower cost capital and hence can be nimbler in their investment deci-

sions. These results suggest that unlisted firms may face financing constraints and therefore cannot

increase investment in response to opportunities as much as their listed counterparts (i.e. underin-

vestment by unlisted firms). These results may also indicate that listed firms are overinvesting.




12
   We note that there are some debates on the appropriateness of the proxy of financial constraints. For example,
Asker argues that "prior work shows that standard proxies for investment opportunities are not, as neoclassical
theory predicts, a sufficient statistic for investment and that ROA correlates positively with investment. The latter
is often interpreted as a sign of financing constraints (Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen 1988), though some disa-
gree (Kaplan, and Zingales 1997)." Although we are uncertain of the debate on the interpretation, we follow the
previous literature by using in the interaction term.

                                                         16
                                       Table 4 Panel A

         To confirm whether these results are indicating overinvestment of listed firms or under-

investment of unlisted firms. We split our sample into quartiles based on pred_q, where quartile

four has the highest pred_q. Panel B of Table 4 contains the first and fourth quartile results.    For

the fourth quartile (Columns 1-4) there is a strong positive relationship between listed and all in-

vestment proxies (except rd). However, in the first quartile (Columns 6-10) the relationship be-

tween listed and most investment proxies (except tan+int) loses statistical significance. These re-

sults show that listed firms invest more when they have better investment opportunities, but do not

increase investment relative to unlisted firms when investment opportunities are not attractive (i.e.

low pred_q). Take together our results indicate that unlisted firms are underinvesting relative to

listed firms when they have good investment prospects (high pred_q).

                                       Table 4 Panel B

         Several prior studies find that listing distorts corporate investment by causing managers

to act myopically (e.g., Asker et al., 2015). To explore this possibility in the context of Japanese

listed and unlisted firms, we examine how market pressure impacts the relationship between listing

and investment. Based on theoretical work by Stein (1989), we estimate stock price sensitivity to

accounting earnings by regressing stock price on operating earnings:



                          pit=0 + 1 op_ incomeit +2 bvit + it                                (3)



where p is the value of total stock, k is the sum of tangible and intangible assets, op_income is

operating income, and bv is book value of equity. Estimating this model for each year-industry, we




                                                 17
define the coefficient  as the stock price sensitivity to accounting profit at the year-industry level

(price_sensitivity).

         Stein's (1989) documents that the magnitude of underinvestment driven by short-term

pressure depends on the relationship between expected future accounting earnings and lagged nat-

ural earnings. To measure the relationship, we assume that the stock price can be expressed as the

linear function of book value of equity and accounting earnings based on the residual income

model, which suggests that the stock price implies the stream of future accounting earnings. Thus,

estimating the relationship between stock price and accounting earnings after controlling for the

book value equity, we can compute price sensitivity analogous to Stein's 1.

         To examine how market pressure affects the relationship between listing status and cor-

porate investment, we include an interaction term between the listing indicator and the stock sen-

sitivity (listed×price_sensitivity). If the coefficient on the interaction is negative, then market pres-

sure exists and is distorting investment. Results contained in Panel C of Table 4 show that in gen-

eral listed×price_sensitivity is negatively related to corporate investment.13 The coefficients on

the listing indicator remain positively significant, suggesting that listing status increases corporate

investment if stock price is not sensitive to accounting earnings (price_sensitivity = 0). Further-

more, even if the sensitivity takes the mean value of the sample (i.e. price_sensitivity = 0.5796),

the net effects of listing status are still positively significant. Overall, our results indicate that mar-

ket pressure exists and distorts corporate investment behavior in Japan. However, the net effects

of stock listing are positive, since the positive effects exceed the negative effects of market pressure.

                                          Table 4 Panel B




13
   We note that while listed×price_sensitivity is negatively related to ppe and rd, although these results are
statistically insignificant.

                                                     18
5.3 Listing status and business group

         Next, we estimate Equation 1 separately for firms that a member of a business group and

standalone firms. Panel A of Table 5 presents these results. Columns 1-5 contain the results for the

subsample of standalone firms. The coefficients on listed are significant across all investment

proxies, suggesting that listed standalone firms invest at higher levels than their unlisted standalone

counterparts. We suspect that this result stems from financial constraints faced by unlisted

standalone firms. Unlisted standalone firms have limited access to capital, relative to listed firms.

Listing relaxes this financial constraint and allows for greater investment by listed standalone firms.

Additionally, shareholding of foreign investors has positive impact on investment although it is

marginally significant. The result may stem from external governance mechanisms encouraging

greater investment.

         Columns 6-10 show the results for business groups. The coefficients on listed are insig-

nificant, indicating that there is no significant difference in investment levels between listed and

unlisted firms which are members of business groups. We note that coefficients of firm character-

istics are consistent with our earlier analysis with the entire sample.



                                             Table 5

         To further investigate the structure of business groups on investment, we include ln_subs,

and an interaction term between listed and ln_subs, where ln_subs is the natural log of the number

of subsidiaries of each business group. Table 6 contains these estimations. The coefficients on

listed are positive and statistically significant, indicating that listing status has positive impact on

investment once the number of subsidiaries is controlled. Interestingly, we find that the interaction

terms of listed with ln_subs are negative and statistically significant. This may suggest that as


                                                  19
business groups get larger, management becomes more sheltered from market discipline and in-

vestment declines. In contrast, the coefficient on ln_subs is positive and significant, suggesting

that unlisted business groups invest more as the number of subsidiaries increases.

                                           Table 6

6. Extensions

6.1. Selection bias

         In this section, we conduct robustness checks of our main results. Since listing is a

choice by managers, our analyses might reflect selection bias (Pagano et al., 1998; Kutsuna et al.,

2002; Chemmanur et al., 2009; Hosono et al., 2013). In particular, Pagano et al. (1998) and Kim

and Weisbach (2008) argue that the multiple determinants of IPO might simultaneously affect the

decision to go public and corporate investment decisions. To ensure that our results are robust to

this type of selection bias, we use matching strategies and Heckman's Treatment Effect Model

(TEM).

         Following Asker et al. (2015) and Acharya and Xu (2017), we identify a matched unlisted

firm for each listed firm. We estimate a propensity score matching by using firm size (size) for

each industry and year. Caliper-based nearest neighborhood matching is used to identify an un-

listed firm for each listed firm. We employ nearest-neighbor matching and drop observations with

propensity scores outside the common support to ensure high match quality.

         We also conduct several alternative matching procedures. First, to control for other cor-

porate fundamentals, we use leverage (lev), cash holding (cash), and sales growth (sg). Second,

we consider whether a firm belongs to a business group. This choice stem from the idea that listing

status between business group firms and standalone firms may be driven by the choice to form a

business group. By identifying a corresponding matched sample for each industry-year-business


                                                 20
group, we control for the observable effects between business group firms and standalone firms.

In addition, by using the TEM approach, we control for unobservable difference between listed

and unlisted firms. Following Acharya and Xu (2017), we estimated inverse-mill's ratio which

corrects for selection bias and is estimated by the following equation14:



               Pr(listedit = 1)= F(1 ln_salesit-1 + 2 sgit-1 + 3 roait-1 + 4 levit-1 + it)                 (4)



We add the inverse Mill's ratio (mills) in the right-hand side of Equations (1) and (2). Table A3

represents the results of the first stage model (4). The regression model is estimated separately for

all firms, business group firms, and standalone firms.

          Table 7 presents the results using alternative matched samples with the inverse mills ratio

in Columns 1-4, and the matched sub-sample for standalone firms and business group firms in

Columns 5-7. The coefficients on listed are positive and significant, confirming that listing status

has a positive impact on investment.15 Column 7 shows that the business group size mitigates the

positive effects of listing status on corporate investment consistent with earlier results. These re-

sults confirm the results in Tables 5-6 are robust even when using matched samples. Overall, the

results do not change when the Mill's ratio is included in the estimations, suggesting that the main

findings in Section 5 are robust to the selection bias on being listed.16



                                                Table 7


14
   Industry q is another potentially important determinant of listing (Pagano et al. 1998). We estimated models
including industry q in the first stage model and note that results do not change.
15 We note that listed is not significant for business group firms when matched by year + industry + size +

business group (Column 6 of Table 7).
16 We also examine cases where firms are consistently listed or unlisted across our sample years and control for

IPO firms and delisted firms. We confirm that results are qualitatively unchanged. These results are available
upon request.

                                                      21
6.2 Financial Constraints

           Does listing mitigate financial constraints? We expect that listed firms invest more than

their unlisted counterparts when firms are faced with financial constraints. To test this prediction,

we add financial constraint proxies (constraint) and its interaction with the listing status indicator

(listed). Equation (5) presents the empirical specification:



           investmentit=1 listedit + 2 listedit × constraintit +  constraintit +  z + fe + it       (5)

where constraint is a proxy of financial constraint. Following existing literature on financial con-

straints, we use four proxies for financial constraints: no payout indicator (no_payout), no bond

access indicator (no_bacc), small firms (small), and Hadlock-Pierce index (hp).17 For firm size

(Hadlock-Pierce index), we consider the first (fifth) quintile of each measurement as a financial

constraint firms.

           Table 8 presents the results of the impact of financial constraints on investment. Except

in Column 2 (bond access), the coefficients on the cross-terms are positive and significant, con-

firming that listed firms invest more than unlisted firms even when they are financially constrained.

We conduct Chow-tests between financially constrained and unconstrained firms (see Appendix

A2). The results show that all the coefficients for financially constrained firms are positive and

significant. In contrast, all the coefficients for unconstrained firms are insignificant. These results

indicate that listing alleviates financial constraints and facilitates corporate investment in Japan.

                                                 Table 8

6.3. Ownership Structure



17
     See Fazzari et al. (1988), Hadlock and Pierce (2010), and Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist (2016).

                                                       22
         Taking advantage of our unique data on the ownership structure of unlisted firms, we

investigate the effects of ownership structure on the positive impacts of listing on investment.

Results contained in Table 8 show that higher percentage ownership by a financial institution or

top 10 shareholders (i.e., stable ownership) reduce the positive impact of listing on investment. In

contrast, higher levels of ownership by foreign investors has a more positive impact on investment.

These results suggest that foreign ownership intensify the market pressure while financial institu-

tions or large stable ownership tends to protect management from the discipline of financial mar-

kets.

                                           Table 9

6.4. Listing Status and Stock Liquidity

        Finally, we estimate Equation (1) replacing the listing dummy variable with proxies of

stock liquidity. Maug (1998) derives and model that suggest that more liquid equity markets sup-

port better corporate governance in equilibrium. Support for Maug's argument is provided in sev-

eral empirical studies. Using a sample of U.S. firms, Chung, Elder, and Kim (2010) construct a

corporate governance index and examine the impact of corporate governance on share liquidity.

Their results indicate that time-varying liquidity, measured by spreads and price impact is ex-

plained by their time-varying corporate governance index. They argue more market monitoring

helps reduce information asymmetry between insiders and outside investors. Admati and Pflei-

derer (2009) maintain that liquidity may help discipline management, mitigate agency problems,

and thus improve firm performance. Khanna and Sonti (2004) assert that liquidity simulates the

entry of informed traders who make prices more informative to other shareholders, thereby im-

proving firms' operating performance and stock prices. Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009) find empirical




                                                23
support for this argument. Amihud and Levi (2019) show that stock liquidity enhances corporate

investment through decreasing cost of equity.

         We use liquidity as a proxy of each firm's stock liquidity that proportionally reflects the

impacts of listing status. Where liquidity is the negative value of Amihud's (2002) illiquidity meas-

ure and is defined in Appendix A1. The Amihud illiquidity measure can only be calculated for

listed firms.   Column 1 of Table 10 presents the positively significant relationship between li-

quidity and corporate investment. In Columns 2 and 3, we decompose the sample into two sub-

samples, business group firms and standalone firms. The coefficient on liquidity is positively sig-

nificant only for business group firms. Our results imply that stock liquidity encourages more ef-

ficient investment by increasing the market monitoring of management, which helps to overcome

managerial shirking in business group firms. Furthermore, higher levels of liquidity make more it

easier to raise additional capital which may also help to reduce financial constraints.

                                            Table 10

7. Conclusions

         What is the impact of listing on corporate investment? Using an extensive database on

Japanese listed and unlisted firms over various market cycles (2001-2017), we contribute to a small

but bourgeoning literature on public vs. private investment patterns. Our unique approach allows

for a nuanced understanding of listed and unlisted firm investment without confounding effects

due to different disclosure requirements.

         We find that listed firms invest more and are more sensitive to investment opportunities

than their unlisted counterparts. Our findings suggest that the role of listing in alleviating financial

constraints is more important than potential underinvestment due to short-term market pressure in

Japan.    Our analysis reveals that the positive relationship between listing and investment is


                                                  24
primarily driven by standalone firms. Furthermore, as the number of subsidiaries in a business

group increases the positive impact of listing on investment declines.      We also show that the

positive relationship between listing and investment is greater for financially constrained firms

using several proxies of financial constraints. Finally, we examine the role of stock liquidity on

listed firm investment behavior. We confirm that liquidity enhances the positive relationship be-

tween listing and investment, particularly in the business group subsample. This finding suggests

that liquid stocks act as a monitor of management reducing shirking and producing higher levels

of investment. Additionally, liquid stocks make raising additional capital easier, which also facil-

itates investment. In most cases, we show that higher ownership by financial institutions and for-

eign investors increases investment, potentially mitigating the financial constraints (in the case of

financial institutions) or acting as monitors of management (in the case of foreign investors), which

reduces shirking and thereby increases investment. Overall, our results have implications for un-

derstanding corporate investment throughout the world, give the prevalence of business groups in

many developed and developing economies.

         Our findings have several important implications. First, we demonstrate that the invest-

ment decision between listed and unlisted firms is a tradeoff between the benefits of lower cost

capital from public financing and short-term market pressures that can induce myopic behavior.

Second, we show that business structure matters for understanding corporate investment patterns.

Future research may explore the role of internal capital markets on investment in business groups.

For example, an alternative interpretation of our results is that unlisted firms that are parents of

business groups are not capital constrained as they can access internal capital markets. In the

context of Japan, it would be productive to understand the impacts on investment of various types

of business group formations. For example, many business groups have listed and unlisted subsid-

iaries and these different structures may influence the effectiveness of internal capital markets and

                                                 25
therefore investment. This direction may be an important next step in understanding the investment

behavior of business groups.




                                               26
References
Acharya, V., and Xu, Z. (2017). Financial dependence and innovation: The case of public versus
private firms. Journal of Financial Economics, 124(2), 223-243.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2016.02.010
Admati, A. R., and Pfleiderer, P. (2009). The `Wall Street walk" and shareholder activism: Exit
as a form of voice. Review of Financial Studies, 22(7), 2645--2 685.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhp037
Amihud, Y. (2002). Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. Journal of
Financial Markets, 5(1), 31-56. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1386-4181(01)00024-6
Amihud, Y., and Levi, S. (2019). The Effect of Stock Liquidity on the Firm's Investment and Pro-
duction. Working Paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3183091
Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J., and Ljungqvist, A. (2015). Corporate investment and stock market
listing: A puzzle? The Review of Financial Studies, 28(2), 342-390.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhu077
Bakke, T. E., Jens, C. E., and Whited, T. M. (2012). The real effects of delisting: Evidence from a
regression discontinuity design. Finance Research Letters, 9(4), 183-193.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2012.08.002
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Laeven, L., and Maksimovic, V. (2006). The determinants of fi-
nancing obstacles. Journal of International Money and Finance, 25(6), 932-952.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jimonfin.2006.07.005
Bertrand, M., and Mullainathan, S. (2003). Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate governance and
managerial preferences. Journal of Political Economy 111, 1043-1075.
https://doi.org/10.1086/376950
Bhide, A. (1993). The hidden costs of stock market liquidity. Journal of Financial Economics 34,
31­51. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(93)90039-E
Boot, W.A., Gopalan, R., and Takor, A. (2008). Market Liquidity, Investor Participation, and
Managerial Autonomy: Why do firms go private? Journal of Finance, 63 (4), 2013-2059.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2008.01380.x
Brav, O. (2009). Access to capital, capital structure, and the funding of the firm. The Journal of
Finance, 64(1), 263-308. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2008.01434.x
Bushman, R. M., Smith, A. J., and Zhang, F. (2011). Investment cash flow sensitivities really re-
flect related investment decisions. Working paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.842085
Chemmanur, T. J., He, S., and Nandy, D. K. (2009). The going-public decision and the product
market. The Review of Financial Studies, 23(5), 1855-1908. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhp098




                                                27
Chung, K. H., Elder, J., and Kim, J. C. (2010). Corporate governance and liquidity. Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 45(2), 265-291.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022109010000104
Fang, V. W., Noe, T. H., and Tice, S. (2009). Stock market liquidity and firm value. Journal of
Financial Economics, 94(1), 150­169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2008.08.007
Farre-Mensa, J. (2011). Why are most firms privately held? Working Paper.
10.2139/ssrn.1719204
Farre-Mensa, J. (2017). The benefits of selective disclosure: Evidence from private firms. Work-
ing Paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1719204
Farre-Mensa, J., and Ljungqvist, A. (2016). Do measures of financial constraints measure finan-
cial constraints? The Review of Financial Studies, 29(2), 271-308.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhv052
Fazzari, S., Hubbard, R., Petersen, B., Blinder, A., and Poterba, J. (1988). Financing Constraints
and Corporate Investment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(1), 141-206.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2534426
Fukuda, S. (2015). Beyond "lost decades". NHK Publishing. (in Japanese).
Gao, H., Harford, J., and Li, K. (2013). Determinants of corporate cash policy: Insights from pri-
vate firms. Journal of Financial Economics, 109(3), 623-639.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.04.008
Gao, H., Harford, J., and Li, K. (2017). CEO turnover­performance sensitivity in private firms.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 52(2), 583-611.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022109017000126
Gao, H., Hsu, P. H., and Li, K. (2018). Innovation strategy of private firms. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 53(1), 1-32. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022109017001119
Gao, H., and Li, K. (2015). A comparison of CEO pay­performance sensitivity in privately-held
and public firms. Journal of Corporate Finance, 35, 370-388.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2015.10.005
Gilje, E. P., and Taillard, J. P. (2016). Do private firms invest differently than public firms? Tak-
ing cues from the natural gas industry. The Journal of Finance, 71(4), 1733-1778.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12417
Graham, J., C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal. 2005. The economic implications of corporate financial
reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 40:3­73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jac-
ceco.2005.01.002
Hadlock, C. J., and Pierce, J. R. (2010). New evidence on measuring financial constraints: Mov-
ing beyond the KZ index. The Review of Financial Studies, 23(5), 1909-1940.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhq009

                                                 28
Hicks, J. R. (1935). Annual survey of economic theory: the theory of monopoly. Econometrica,
3(1), 1-20. https://doi.org/10.2307/1907343
Holod, D., and Peek, J. (2007). Asymmetric information and liquidity constraints: a new test.
Journal of Banking & Finance, 31(8), 2425-2451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2006.11.012
Hosono, K., Takizawa, M., Uchimoto, K., and Hachisuka, K. (2013). The Funding through Capi-
tal Market and Firm Behavior-Decision-making on IPOs, SEOs and Bond Issues and the Post-
funding Investments and R&D Activities. Public Policy Review, 9(2), 315-364.
Ikeda, N., Inoue, K., and Watanabe, S. (2018). Enjoying the quiet life: Corporate decision-mak-
ing by entrenched managers. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 47, 55-69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjie.2017.12.003
Jensen, M. C. (1989). Eclipse of the public corporation. Harvard Business Review (Sept.-Oct.),
61-74.
Kaplan, S. N., and Zingales, L. (1997). Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful
measures of financing constraints? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 169-215.
https://doi.org/10.1162/003355397555163
Katz, S. P. (2009). Earnings quality and ownership structure: The role of private equity sponsors.
The Accounting Review, 84(3), 623-658. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr.2009.84.3.623
Khanna, N., and Sonti, R. (2004). Value creating stock manipulation: Feedback effect of stock
prices on firm value. Journal of Financial Markets, 7(3), 237­270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fin-
mar.2003.11.004
Kim, W., and Weisbach, M. S. (2008). Motivations for public equity offers: An international per-
spective. Journal of Financial Economics, 87(2), 281-307.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2006.09.010
Kutsuna, K., Okamura, H., and Cowling, M. (2002). Ownership structure pre-and post-IPOs and
the operating performance of JASDAQ companies. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 10(2), 163-
181. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-538X(01)00041-5
Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G., and Yang, L. (2013). Private and public merger waves. The Journal
of Finance, 68(5), 2177-2217. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12055
Mangena, M., and Tauringana, V. (2007). Disclosure, corporate governance and foreign share
ownership on the Zimbabwe stock exchange. Journal of International Financial Management
and Accounting, 18(2), 53-85. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-646X.2007.01008.x
Maug, E. (1998). Large shareholders as monitors: is there a tradeoff between liquidity and con-
trol? The Journal of Finance, 53(1), 65-98. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.35053
Michaely, R., and Roberts, M. R. (2011). Corporate dividend policies: Lessons from private
firms. The Review of Financial Studies, 25(3), 711-746. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr108


                                                29
Minnis, M., and Shroff, N. (2017). Why regulate private firm disclosure and auditing? Account-
ing and Business Research, 47(5), 473-502. https://doi.org/10.1080/00014788.2017.1303962
Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. W., Shapiro, M., and Poterba, J. M. (1990). The stock market
and investment: is the market a sideshow? Brookings papers on economic Activity, 1990(2), 157-
215. https://doi.org/10.2307/2534506
Mortal, S., and Reisel, N. (2013). Capital allocation by public and private firms. Journal of Fi-
nancial and Quantitative Analysis, 48(1), 77-103. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022109013000057
Orihara, M. (2014). Capital expenditure of public and private firms: Evidence from Hojin-Kigyo-
Toukei. Finance, 50(6), 80-86, Japanese Ministry of Finance (In Japanese).
https://www.mof.go.jp/pri/research/special_report/f01_2014_04.pdf
Orihara, M. (2017). Stock market listing and corporate policy: Evidence from reforms to Japa-
nese corporate law. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 43, 15-36.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pacfin.2017.01.002
Pagano, M., Panetta, F., and Zingales, L. (1998). Why do companies go public? An empirical
analysis. The Journal of Finance, 53(1), 27-64. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.25448
Peters, R. H., and Taylor, L. A. (2017). Intangible capital and the investment-q relation. Journal
of Financial Economics, 123(2), 251-272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2016.03.011
Phillips, G. M., & Sertsios, G. (2016). Financing and new product decisions of private and pub-
licly traded firms. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(5), 1744-1789.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw106
Saunders, A., and Steffen, S. (2011). The costs of being private: Evidence from the loan market.
The Review of Financial Studies, 24(12), 4091-4122. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr083
Schaede, U. (2008). Choose and Focus: Japanese Business Strategies for the 21st Centuries, Cor-
nell University Press. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7591/j.ctt7zfbt
Stein, J C. (1989). Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model of Myopic Corporate
Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104 (4): 655­69. https://doi.org/10.2307/2937861
Tang, K., and Wang, C. (2011). Corporate governance and firm liquidity: evidence from the Chi-
nese stock market. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 47(sup1), 47-60.
https://doi.org/10.2753/REE1540-496X4701S105
Ueda, K., Ishide, A., and Goto, Y. (2019). Listing and financial constraints. Japan and the World
Economy, 49, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.japwor.2018.05.001




                                                30
Figures and Tables



                           Private Firms                         Public Firms




                                                    Unlisted Firms
                      Purely-Private Firms                                      Listed Firms
                                                 (Quasi-Private Firms)




                                                                                                   Strictness of
                                                                                                    Disclosure
                                     Minimum requirement
                                         of disclosure
                                        for listed firms



 Figure 1 Japanese legal framework on financial reporting:
 This diagram describes the classification across listed, unlisted (quasi-private), and purely private firms. X
 axis presents the strictness of mandatory disclosure required by laws. In general, the disclosure requirements
 for listed firms are stricter than those for purely private firms. The reference point dividing purely-private,
 and listed and quasi-private firms represents the minimum requirements of disclosure for listed firms. Quasi-
 private firms do not go public, but Japanese Financial Instrument Exchange Act requires these firms the same
 disclosure as listed firms (i.e. they are required to disclose information at the same strict level as the listed
 firms).




                                                        31
Table 1 Descriptive Statistics (Listed v.s. Unlisted):
This table presents the descriptive statistics on all variables used in main analyses. Columns (1) and (2) report the descriptive statistics of listed and unlisted
firms, respectively. Columns (3) report the difference in each variable between listed and unlisted firms. *** indicates significance at the 1% level using a
two-tailed test. All observations falling in the top or bottom 1 % with respect to each variable are winsorized. All variables are defined in Table A1.
                                                                      (2) Unlisted
                   (1) Listed firms                                                                                    (3) Listed -
                                                                      firms
                   (n=44,756)                                                                                          Unlisted
                                                                      (n=5,660)
                        mean           median           sd                 mean         median           sd                mean                 median
 ppe                       0.1515        0.0941          0.2405               0.0953      0.0354          0.2269             0.0562   ***         0.0587   ***
 capex                     0.1558        0.0959          0.2094               0.0869      0.0290          0.1842             0.0690   ***         0.0669   ***
 tan+int                   0.1698        0.1015          0.2444               0.1118      0.0419          0.2425             0.0580   ***         0.0596   ***
 capex+rd                  0.2315        0.1383          0.3485               0.1223      0.0336          0.3088             0.1092   ***         0.1047   ***
 pred_q                    1.1043        0.9921          0.4926               1.0622      0.9473          0.4236             0.0422   ***         0.0448   ***
 roa                       0.5030        0.2411          1.2423               0.1823      0.0964          0.8342             0.3208   ***         0.1447   ***
 age                       3.7858        3.9703          0.6101               3.7894      3.9890          0.6557            -0.0036              -0.0187   ***
 size                     10.3496       10.2264          1.5192               9.4059      9.3766          1.8526             0.9436   ***         0.8498   ***
 cash                      1.7183        0.4954          4.5342               1.0454      0.2083          3.7964             0.6729   ***         0.2871   ***
 lev                       0.2062        0.1685          0.1866               0.2845      0.2485          0.2498            -0.0783   ***        -0.0800   ***
 sh_financial              0.1760        0.1509          0.1295               0.0653      0.0271          0.0912             0.1106   ***         0.1239   ***
 sh_foreign                0.0732        0.0284          0.0998               0.0067      0.0000          0.0443             0.0665   ***         0.0284   ***
 sh_top10                  0.5294        0.5266          0.1693               0.5857      0.6190          0.2785            -0.0563   ***        -0.0924   ***
 sh_directors              0.0901        0.0227          0.1333               0.0299      0.0001          0.0820             0.0602   ***         0.0226   ***




                                                                                32
Table 2 Descriptive Statistics (Business group firms vs. Standalone firms):
This table presents the descriptive statistics on all variables in main analysis, comparing the statistics between business group firms and standalone firms.
Columns (1) and (2) report the descriptive statistics of business group firms and standalone firms, respectively. Columns (3) report the difference in each
variable between group and standalone firms. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels using a two-tailed test, respectively. All observations
falling in the top or bottom 1 % with respect to each variable are winsorized. All variables are defined in Table A1.
 All
                (1) Business                                                                                     (3) Business
                Group                                            (2) Standalone                                  Group -
                (n=35,819)                                       (n=6,310)                                       Standalone
                           mean        median             sd                mean       median              sd               mean              median
 ppe                     0.1425        0.0939         0.2135              0.1371       0.0607          0.2437              0.0054   *          0.0332   ***
 capex                   0.1449        0.0951         0.1833              0.1596       0.0674          0.2506             -0.0148   ***        0.0277   ***
 tan+int                 0.1557        0.0994         0.2094              0.1786       0.0761          0.2886             -0.0230   ***        0.0233   ***
 capex+rd                0.2128        0.1366         0.2978              0.2529       0.0974          0.4698             -0.0401   ***        0.0392   ***
 pred_q                  1.0784        0.9768         0.4517              1.1144       0.9951          0.5196             -0.0360   ***       -0.0183   ***
 roa                     0.4236        0.2323         0.9825              0.6175       0.2064          1.6141             -0.1939   ***        0.0259   ***
 age                     3.8440        4.0254         0.5903              3.6317       3.7612          0.5796              0.2123   ***        0.2642   ***
 size                   10.5677       10.4514         1.4906              9.0278       9.0491          1.0959              1.5399   ***        1.4023   ***
 cash                    1.3927        0.4687         3.6064              2.6935       0.5809          6.3035             -1.3008   ***       -0.1122   ***
 lev                     0.2212        0.1910         0.1869              0.1830       0.1091          0.2019              0.0382   ***        0.0819   ***
 sh_financial            0.1955        0.1746         0.1323              0.0941       0.0780          0.0826              0.1013   ***        0.0967   ***
 sh_foreign              0.0795        0.0334         0.1039              0.0376       0.0046          0.0825              0.0420   ***        0.0288   ***
 sh_top10                0.4973        0.4899         0.1615              0.5521       0.5685          0.2035             -0.0548   ***       -0.0786   ***
 sh_directors            0.0873        0.0245         0.1286              0.1436       0.0762          0.1605             -0.0563   ***       -0.0517   ***




                                                                               33
Table 3 Investment level: Listed firms vs. Unlisted firms
Columns 1-5 of the table presents the results of regression model (1) by regressing investment on listed status dummy (listed) and other control variables.
Columns 6-9 present results for the matched sample based on several alternative specifications. Control variables include predicted q (pred_q), return on
assets (roa), firm age (age), firm size (size), cash holding (cash), leverage (lev), and shareholding of financial institutions (sh_financial), foreign investors
(sh_foreign), top 10 investors (sh_top10), and board members (sh_directors). We also control for year and industry fixed effects. Standard errors in paren-
theses are calculated clustered by the firm level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-tailed test. All variables
are defined in Table A1.
                          Full                                                                         Matched
                          Sample                                                                       Sample
                                                                                                          capex
                                                                                                           year         (6)+lev                       (1 : 4
                                                                                                        +industry        +cash      (6)+Business     matching)
                              ppe            capex        tan+int       capex+rd          rd              +size           +sg          Group          of (6)
                              (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)

 listed                    0.0241***      0.0400***      0.0292***     0.0358***         0.0028         0.0472***      0.0281***     0.0345***      0.0869***
                              (4.30)         (7.13)         (4.66)        (3.39)         (0.52)            (5.43)         (3.78)        (4.63)         (8.37)
 pred_q                    0.0778***      0.0784***      0.0796***     0.0850***        -0.0002         0.0810***      0.0623***     0.0992***      0.0854***
                             (13.06)        (15.00)        (12.72)        (9.96)         (-0.05)           (6.67)         (5.00)        (7.97)        (13.50)
 roa                       0.0165***      0.0108***      0.0115***       -0.0026        -0.0065            0.0044         0.0123        0.0061       0.0100**
                              (4.59)         (3.19)         (2.90)        (-0.32)        (-1.63)           (0.67)         (1.61)        (0.84)         (2.51)
 age                       -0.0500***     -0.0547***     -0.0619***    -0.0912***     -0.0239***        -0.0536***     -0.0455***    -0.0434***     -0.0519***
                             (-12.68)       (-13.48)       (-13.85)      (-11.19)        (-5.74)           (-7.55)        (-6.54)       (-6.73)       (-11.68)
 size                      -0.0102***     -0.0108***     -0.0177***    -0.0128***        0.0002          -0.0066**       -0.0040      -0.0043*      -0.0142***
                              (-6.75)        (-6.94)        (-9.45)       (-4.46)        (0.13)            (-2.47)        (-1.54)       (-1.83)        (-7.71)
 cash                      0.0101***      0.0053***      0.0158***     0.0282***      0.0122***         0.0069***         0.0016     0.0058***      0.0050***
                             (10.26)         (5.07)        (13.97)       (10.08)         (8.99)            (3.86)         (0.91)        (3.13)         (3.99)
 lev                       -0.0466***     -0.0646***     -0.0645***    -0.0971***     -0.0426***        -0.0588***     -0.0695***    -0.0832***     -0.0662***
                              (-5.60)        (-7.65)        (-6.89)       (-6.61)        (-5.62)           (-3.75)        (-4.71)       (-6.08)        (-7.12)
 sh_financial              0.0739***      0.1030***      0.1146***     0.1081***        -0.0005            0.0677         0.0618      0.0940**      0.1199***
                              (4.93)         (6.03)         (6.44)        (3.76)         (-0.03)           (1.30)         (1.28)        (2.45)         (7.46)
 sh_foreign                0.1070***      0.0843***      0.1224***     0.1118***       0.0467**            0.0562         0.0435       -0.0314      0.0999***
                              (5.41)         (4.47)         (5.74)        (3.00)         (1.97)            (1.27)         (1.17)        (-0.87)        (4.70)
 sh_top10                  0.0311***      0.0290***      0.0282***       -0.0019       -0.0183**         0.0322**      0.0391***      0.0300**       0.0245**
                              (3.51)         (3.28)         (2.88)        (-0.11)        (-2.02)           (2.24)         (2.79)        (2.30)         (2.35)
 sh_directors                 0.0153       0.0436**         0.0260       0.0633*         0.0107          0.0776**      0.0931***     0.0914***       0.0380**
                              (0.95)         (2.46)         (1.42)        (1.87)         (0.58)            (2.43)         (3.35)        (3.07)         (1.99)
 Observations                50,416         50,416         50,416         50,416        50,416            10,004         8,858          8,208         36,420
 Year fixed effects            yes            yes            yes            yes           yes               yes            yes            yes           yes
 Industry fixed effects        yes            yes            yes            yes           yes               yes            yes            yes           yes
 clustered by                 firm           firm           firm           firm          firm              firm           firm           firm          firm
 Adj. R2                     0.189          0.189          0.285          0.313         0.309             0.197          0.122          0.206         0.198


                                                                               34
Table 4 Investment sensitivity to investment opportunity
Panel A presents the results of the estimation where the variable in interest is the interaction term between listing
indicator and predicted q (listed×pred_q). Panel B compares the effects of listing status across quartiles of in-
vestment opportunity (pred_q). Columns 1-5 present the results of the 4th quartile of predicted q, and Columns
6-10 present the results of the 4th quartile of predicted q. Panel C presents the results of market pressure test,
where the variable in interest is the interaction term between stock price sensitivity to accounting earnings (listed
×price_sensitivity). Control variables include: predicted q (pred_q), return on assets (roa), firm age (age), firm
size (size), cash holding (cash), leverage (lev), and shareholding of financial institutions (sh_financial), foreign
investors (sh_foreign), top 10 investors (sh_top10), and board members (sh_directors). We also control for year
and industry fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated clustered by the firm level. *, **, ***
indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-tailed test. All variables are defined in
Table A1.
Panel A. Investment sensitivity to predicted q:
                                    ppe              capex            tan+int         capex+rd            rd
                                    (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)

 listed                            -0.0222*        -0.0480***       -0.0570***        -0.0448**           0.0070
                                    (-1.70)           (-4.65)          (-3.95)          (-2.29)            (0.74)
 listed×pred_q                    0.0463***         0.0803***        0.0836***        0.0726***          -0.0044
                                     (3.73)            (7.97)           (6.27)           (3.51)           (-0.43)
 listed×roa                         -0.0147           0.0094          -0.0149           0.0134            0.0025
                                    (-0.96)            (0.87)          (-1.06)           (0.44)            (0.17)
 pred_q                           0.0363***           0.0059           0.0045           0.0193            0.0037
                                     (2.92)            (0.60)           (0.34)           (0.95)            (0.37)
 roa                               0.0297**           0.0012          0.0246*          -0.0159           -0.0088
                                     (1.99)            (0.12)           (1.81)          (-0.54)           (-0.61)
 age                             -0.0502***        -0.0546***       -0.0622***       -0.0910***        -0.0238***
                                   (-12.65)          (-13.49)         (-13.96)         (-11.19)           (-5.76)
 size                            -0.0103***        -0.0106***       -0.0177***       -0.0126***           0.0002
                                    (-6.71)           (-6.86)          (-9.40)          (-4.36)            (0.14)
 cash                             0.0102***         0.0052***        0.0158***        0.0282***         0.0122***
                                    (10.31)            (5.10)          (14.05)          (10.10)            (8.98)
 lev                             -0.0467***        -0.0638***       -0.0643***       -0.0963***        -0.0426***
                                    (-5.60)           (-7.72)          (-6.93)          (-6.65)           (-5.69)
 sh_financial                     0.0739***         0.1050***        0.1152***        0.1102***          -0.0004
                                     (4.94)            (6.32)           (6.52)           (3.99)           (-0.03)
 sh_foreign                       0.1028***         0.0737***        0.1137***        0.1018***          0.0470*
                                     (5.19)            (3.89)           (5.29)           (2.68)            (1.95)
 sh_top10                         0.0298***         0.0280***        0.0262***         -0.0025          -0.0181**
                                     (3.36)            (3.22)           (2.70)          (-0.15)           (-1.99)
 sh_directors                       0.0126           0.0382**          0.0209          0.0582*            0.0109
                                     (0.79)            (2.16)           (1.14)           (1.72)            (0.59)
 Observations                       50,416            50,416           50,416           50,416            50,416
 Year fixed effects                    yes               yes              yes              yes               yes
 Industry fixed effects                yes               yes              yes              yes               yes
 clustered by                         firm              firm             firm             firm              firm
 Adj. R2                             0.189             0.192            0.287            0.314             0.309




                                                         35
Panel B. Comparison between the 4th quartile and 1st quartile based on predicted q
                          4th quartile                                                       1st quartile
                               of                                                                 of
                          predicted q                                                        predicted q
                             ppe           capex       tan+int     capex+rd          rd         ppe           capex       tan+int     capex+rd         rd
                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)

 listed                   0.0549***      0.0880***    0.0727***    0.0697***      -0.0017       0.0045        0.0129**      0.0027       0.0081       0.0023
                             (4.34)         (7.22)       (5.52)       (2.72)       (-0.13)      (0.56)          (2.00)       (0.31)       (0.71)       (0.44)
 pred_q                   0.0762***      0.0788***    0.0907***    0.1067***       0.0038       0.0067         -0.0048    -0.0440**     -0.0523      -0.0241
                             (7.08)         (7.51)       (7.49)       (6.29)       (0.51)       (0.33)         (-0.28)      (-2.07)      (-1.33)      (-1.31)
 roa                      0.0144***      0.0122***    0.0154***      0.0028       -0.0042    0.0310***         0.0091      -0.0037      -0.0129      -0.0093
                             (3.27)         (3.01)       (3.14)       (0.34)       (-1.02)      (2.79)          (1.06)      (-0.32)      (-0.72)      (-1.20)
 age                      -0.0874***     -0.0820***   -0.0960***   -0.1203***   -0.0245***   -0.0235***     -0.0290***   -0.0332***   -0.0666***   -0.0255***
                            (-11.28)       (-10.60)     (-12.28)     (-8.24)       (-3.30)      (-4.27)        (-5.47)      (-4.61)      (-7.41)      (-5.83)
 size                     -0.0150***     -0.0169***   -0.0242***   -0.0214***     -0.0020    -0.0094***       -0.0043*   -0.0150***     -0.0046       0.0024
                             (-4.55)        (-5.53)      (-6.99)     (-3.28)       (-0.56)      (-3.89)        (-1.89)      (-5.03)      (-1.27)       (1.48)
 cash                     0.0078***        0.0022*    0.0109***    0.0226***    0.0105***    0.0161***       0.0092***    0.0215***    0.0314***    0.0118***
                             (5.74)         (1.71)       (7.31)       (7.45)       (7.15)       (8.37)          (5.40)       (9.66)       (7.00)       (5.64)
 lev                       -0.0399**     -0.0772***   -0.0893***   -0.1357***   -0.0729***   -0.0453***     -0.0580***   -0.0602***   -0.0950***   -0.0350***
                             (-2.05)        (-3.77)      (-4.25)     (-3.58)       (-3.92)      (-3.30)        (-5.62)      (-4.44)      (-5.41)      (-4.42)
 sh_financial             0.0944***      0.1362***    0.1342***      0.0863       -0.0376    0.0723***       0.0715***    0.1238***    0.1126***      0.0157
                             (2.66)         (3.51)       (3.56)       (1.21)       (-1.12)      (3.55)          (2.99)       (4.23)       (3.04)       (0.93)
 sh_foreign                0.1181***        0.0570     0.0978**      0.0836        0.0592       0.0551         0.0222     0.0893***     -0.0005       0.0080
                             (3.22)         (1.59)       (2.57)       (1.15)       (1.41)       (1.50)          (0.86)       (2.69)      (-0.01)       (0.24)
 sh_top10                 0.0567***      0.0542***     0.0414**      0.0095      -0.0303*     0.0276**         0.0024       0.0154      -0.0130      -0.0106
                             (2.95)         (2.98)       (2.08)       (0.28)       (-1.67)      (1.98)          (0.20)       (0.93)      (-0.58)      (-0.98)
 sh_directors                0.0250        0.0597*     0.0688**      0.1021        0.0184      -0.0070         0.0132      -0.0335       0.0368       0.0347
                             (0.80)         (1.79)       (2.02)       (1.64)       (0.57)       (-0.28)         (0.56)      (-1.25)       (0.77)       (1.34)
 Observations               12,411         12,411       12,411       12,411       12,411       12,715         12,715       12,715       12,715       12,715
 Year fixed effects           yes            yes          yes          yes          yes          yes             yes          yes          yes          yes
 Industry fixed effects       yes            yes          yes          yes          yes          yes             yes          yes          yes          yes
 clustered by                firm           firm         firm         firm         firm         firm            firm         firm         firm         firm
 Adj. R2                    0.205          0.180        0.294        0.292        0.282         0.118          0.117        0.230        0.317        0.346




                                                                                36
Panel C. Stock price sensitivity to accounting earnings
                                   Full
                                  Sample
                                   ppe            capex       tan+int     capex+rd        rd
                                    (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)

 listed                           0.0286***      0.0492***    0.0382***    0.0444***      0.0021
                                     (4.64)         (8.02)       (5.64)       (3.73)       (0.34)
 listed×price _sensitivity         -0.0038      -0.0109***   -0.0087***   -0.0108***      -0.0002
                                    (-1.53)        (-4.19)      (-2.78)      (-2.88)      (-0.16)
 price _sensitivity                0.0024*        0.0049**      0.0041      0.0044*       -0.0008
                                     (1.73)         (2.50)       (1.61)       (1.73)      (-1.20)
 pred_q                           0.0762***      0.0775***    0.0786***    0.0838***      -0.0003
                                    (12.72)        (14.70)      (12.46)       (9.72)      (-0.08)
 roa                              0.0165***      0.0110***    0.0114***     -0.0025       -0.0066
                                     (4.57)         (3.23)       (2.88)      (-0.31)      (-1.63)
 age                             -0.0499***     -0.0546***   -0.0619***   -0.0924***   -0.0249***
                                   (-12.47)       (-13.29)     (-13.69)     (-11.10)      (-5.85)
 size                            -0.0096***     -0.0105***   -0.0173***   -0.0124***      0.0003
                                    (-6.32)        (-6.72)      (-9.19)      (-4.27)       (0.16)
 cash                             0.0101***      0.0052***    0.0158***    0.0282***    0.0122***
                                    (10.25)         (5.02)      (13.95)      (10.05)       (8.98)
 lev                             -0.0446***     -0.0636***   -0.0624***   -0.0953***   -0.0424***
                                    (-5.31)        (-7.49)      (-6.64)      (-6.41)      (-5.51)
 sh_financial                     0.0665***      0.1031***    0.1116***    0.1091***      0.0007
                                     (4.54)         (5.91)       (6.16)       (3.72)       (0.05)
 sh_foreign                       0.1069***      0.0803***    0.1200***    0.1083***     0.0475**
                                     (5.32)         (4.21)       (5.56)       (2.86)       (1.96)
 sh_top10                         0.0281***      0.0265***    0.0263***     -0.0043     -0.0181**
                                     (3.17)         (3.00)       (2.69)      (-0.25)      (-1.96)
 sh_directors                       0.0150        0.0411**      0.0226      0.0612*        0.0110
                                     (0.93)         (2.32)       (1.23)       (1.79)       (0.59)
 Observations                      49,691         49,691       49,691       49,691       49,691
 Year fixed effects                   yes           Yes           yes          yes          yes
 Industry fixed effects               yes           Yes           yes          yes          yes
 clustered by                        firm          Firm          firm         firm         firm
 Adj. R2                            0.188          0.188        0.284        0.314        0.309




                                                   37
Table 5 Investment level: Business group firms vs. Standalone firms
This table presents the sub-sample results for business group firms and standalone firms by regressing investment proxies on the listing indicator (listed)
and other control variables (model (1)). Columns (1) ­ (4) contain the results using subsample of standalone firms, Columns (5) ­ (8) contain the results
using subsample of business group firms. Control variables include: predicted q (pred_q), return on assets (roa), firm age (age), firm size (size), cash
holding (cash), leverage (lev), and shareholding of financial institutions (sh_financial), foreign investors (sh_foreign), top 10 investors (sh_top10), and
board members (sh_directors). We also control for year and industry fixed effects. t-statistics in parentheses are calculated based on standard errors obtained
by clustering at the firm level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-tailed test. All variables are defined in Table
A1.
Panel A. Business group subsample:
                                                    Standalone                                                              Business Group
                            ppe          capex        tan+int      capex+rd          rd             ppe          capex         tan+int     capex+rd         rd
                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)         (9)          (10)

 listed                    0.0341***    0.1037***    0.0861***     0.1047***      0.0159           -0.0020       -0.0009       -0.0069      -0.0051       -0.0011
                              (3.01)       (8.09)       (6.14)        (3.95)      (1.17)            (-0.33)       (-0.15)       (-1.19)      (-0.56)       (-0.22)
 pred_q                    0.0898***    0.0853***    0.0795***     0.0836***     -0.0062          0.0747***    0.0775***      0.0794***    0.0862***       0.0010
                              (6.68)       (7.02)       (5.17)        (3.84)      (-0.63)           (10.96)      (13.28)        (11.79)       (9.29)       (0.25)
 roa                         0.0035      0.0095*       0.0072        -0.0047     -0.0067          0.0222***     0.0103**      0.0139***     -0.0009       -0.0055
                              (0.61)       (1.86)       (1.14)       (-0.33)      (-0.90)            (4.94)        (2.44)        (2.89)      (-0.09)       (-1.27)
 age                      -0.0677***   -0.0830***   -0.0945***    -0.1176***    -0.0226**        -0.0431***   -0.0461***     -0.0503***   -0.0837***   -0.0251***
                             (-6.46)      (-8.32)      (-7.92)       (-5.92)      (-2.24)          (-10.65)      (-11.09)      (-11.76)      (-9.89)       (-5.81)
 size                       -0.0072*   -0.0168***   -0.0334***    -0.0259***     -0.0064         -0.0154***   -0.0124***     -0.0181***   -0.0144***       0.0004
                             (-1.77)      (-3.65)      (-5.55)       (-2.68)      (-1.23)           (-9.15)       (-7.60)       (-9.93)      (-5.32)       (0.30)
 cash                      0.0080***     0.0028**    0.0126***     0.0286***    0.0134***         0.0118***    0.0062***      0.0174***    0.0269***    0.0113***
                              (5.76)       (2.18)       (7.52)        (6.36)      (6.04)             (8.82)        (4.35)       (11.76)       (8.11)       (7.28)
 lev                       -0.0356**   -0.0726***   -0.0884***      -0.0635*     -0.0049         -0.0580***   -0.0687***     -0.0645***   -0.1185***   -0.0568***
                             (-2.23)      (-4.10)      (-4.27)       (-1.88)      (-0.27)           (-5.99)       (-7.41)       (-6.46)      (-7.62)       (-7.51)
 sh_financial                0.0390       0.1051       0.1144*       -0.0041    -0.0921**         0.0822***    0.1036***      0.0975***    0.1147***       0.0074
                              (0.80)       (1.39)       (1.84)       (-0.03)      (-2.17)            (5.62)        (7.21)        (6.72)       (4.80)       (0.53)
 sh_foreign                  0.0836      0.1466**     0.1540**        0.1187     -0.0151          0.1134***    0.0843***      0.1159***    0.1151***     0.0511**
                              (1.40)       (2.52)       (2.39)        (1.03)      (-0.24)            (5.45)        (4.27)        (5.25)       (2.92)       (2.00)
 sh_top10                   0.0343**     0.0400**    0.0624***       -0.0048     -0.0316           0.0187*        0.0091        0.0021      -0.0118       -0.0086
                              (1.99)       (2.31)       (3.34)       (-0.13)      (-1.58)            (1.84)        (0.95)        (0.20)      (-0.68)       (-0.88)
 sh_directors                -0.0278      -0.0270      -0.0398       0.0981      0.0680*            0.0142     0.0574***       0.0374*       0.0380       -0.0126
                             (-0.96)      (-0.82)       (-1.11)       (1.31)      (1.65)             (0.77)        (2.85)        (1.86)       (1.07)       (-0.67)

 Observations               9,143        9,143         9,143         9,143        9,143            41,273       41,273         41,273       41,273        41,273
 Year fixed effects           yes          yes           yes           yes          yes               yes          yes           Yes           yes          yes
 Industry fixed effects       yes          yes           yes           yes          yes               yes          yes           Yes           yes          yes
 clustered by                firm         firm          firm          firm         firm              firm         firm          Firm          firm         firm
 Adj. R2                    0.197        0.216         0.294         0.351        0.313             0.202        0.190          0.295        0.302        0.317




                                                                                38
Table 6 Business group structure and the size effects of listing status
This table presents the results with an interaction term between listing indicator (listed) and the size of business
group (ln_subs) by using business group subsample. We regress investment on listed firm indicator (listed), its
interaction with the logarithm of the number of subsidiaries (listed×ln_subs) and other control variables. Control
variables include the number of subsidiaries (ln_subs), predicted q (pred_q), return on assets (roa), firm age
(age), firm size (size), cash holding (cash), leverage (lev), and shareholding of financial institutions (sh.financial),
foreign investors (sh.foreign), top 10 investors (sh.top10), and board members (sh.directors). We also control
for year and industry fixed effects. t-statistics in parentheses are calculated based on standard errors obtained by
clustering at the firm level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-
tailed test. All variables are defined in Table A1.

                                      Business
                                       Group
                                       ppe               capex           tan+int         capex+rd            rd
                                        (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)

 listed                                  0.0180         0.0214*           0.0129           0.0283           0.0112
                                         (1.29)          (1.72)            (0.99)           (1.50)          (1.16)
 listed×ln_subs                        -0.0104*        -0.0116**        -0.0102*         -0.0174**         -0.0064
                                         (-1.74)         (-2.20)          (-1.87)          (-2.00)          (-1.49)
 ln_subs                              0.0150**        0.0149***        0.0218***         0.0242***        0.0097**
                                         (2.46)          (2.68)            (3.79)           (2.59)          (2.13)
 pred_q                              0.0741***        0.0771***        0.0782***         0.0854***          0.0006
                                        (10.84)         (13.18)           (11.55)           (9.17)          (0.16)
 roa                                 0.0224***         0.0105**        0.0145***          -0.0005          -0.0053
                                         (5.00)          (2.48)            (3.04)          (-0.05)          (-1.23)
 age                                 -0.0428***       -0.0459***       -0.0496***       -0.0833***       -0.0249***
                                        (-10.59)        (-11.06)         (-11.63)          (-9.86)          (-5.76)
 size                                -0.0182***       -0.0147***       -0.0242***       -0.0187***         -0.0015
                                         (-8.26)         (-6.82)         (-10.07)          (-5.17)          (-0.75)
 cash                                 0.0118***       0.0062***        0.0173***         0.0268***        0.0112***
                                         (8.82)          (4.33)           (11.81)           (8.09)          (7.25)
 lev                                 -0.0606***       -0.0707***       -0.0710***       -0.1225***       -0.0587***
                                         (-6.24)         (-7.65)          (-7.13)          (-7.88)          (-7.77)
 sh_financial                        0.0829***        0.1055***        0.0946***         0.1165***          0.0077
                                         (5.59)          (7.22)            (6.46)           (4.82)          (0.54)
 sh_foreign                           0.1124***       0.0848***        0.1087***         0.1142***        0.0500**
                                         (5.34)          (4.25)            (4.93)           (2.90)          (1.98)
 sh_top10                             0.0205**           0.0104           0.0064          -0.0091          -0.0073
                                         (2.02)          (1.09)            (0.62)          (-0.53)          (-0.74)
 sh_directors                            0.0120       0.0553***          0.0337*           0.0345          -0.0141
                                         (0.65)          (2.74)            (1.67)           (0.97)          (-0.75)

 Observations                          41,273           41,273           41,273           41,273           41,273
 Year fixed effects                      yes              yes              yes               yes             yes
 Industry fixed effects                  yes              yes              yes               yes             yes
 clustered by                           firm             firm             firm              firm            firm
 Adj. R2                               0.202            0.190            0.297             0.302           0.318




                                                          39
Table 7 Robustness tests
This table reports the matching results for the treatment effect model (TEM). In all the regressions, control variables include return on assets (roa), firm
age (age), firm size (ln.tast), cash holding (cash), and shareholding of financial institutions (sh.financial), foreign investors (sh.foreign), top 10 investors
(sh.top10), and board members (sh.directors). We also control for industry and year fixed effects in all the models. t-statistics in parentheses are calculated
based on standard errors obtained by clustering at the firm level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-tailed
test. All variables are defined in Table A1.
                                   capex
                               Matching                                                                    Matching
                               +TEM                                                                        +Subsample
                                                                         Year                                    Year
                                                      Year          +industry +size   (1:4 matching)        +industry +size
                                    Year         +industry +size      +Business            Year               +Business
                                +industry+size   +lev+cash+sg           Group         +industry +size            Group
                                                                                                              Standalone      Business Group    Business Group
                                     (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                   (5)               (6)               (7)

 listed                           0.0824***         0.0564***         0.0719***         0.0583***             0.1085***           0.0079           0.0362**
                                    (7.05)            (5.32)            (6.74)            (4.95)                (6.46)            (1.05)             (2.45)
 listed×ln_subs                                                                                                                                   -0.0154**
                                                                                                                                                    (-2.55)
 ln_subs                                                                                                                                            0.0065
                                                                                                                                                     (1.11)
 pred_q                          0.0820***          0.0625***          0.0995***         0.0852***             0.0861***         0.1060***        0.1061***
                                    (6.72)             (5.00)             (7.95)           (13.49)                (3.86)            (6.73)           (6.69)
 roa                                0.0067            0.0126             0.0078             0.0047               0.0057            0.0029           0.0027
                                    (1.01)             (1.63)             (1.06)             (1.11)               (0.60)            (0.28)           (0.26)
 age                             -0.0526***        -0.0483***         -0.0429***        -0.0519***            -0.0721***        -0.0294***       -0.0293***
                                    (-7.44)           (-6.97)            (-6.68)           (-11.68)              (-4.75)           (-4.82)          (-4.82)
 size                            -0.0098***         -0.0063**         -0.0076***        -0.0219***              -0.0109          -0.0057**         -0.0058*
                                    (-3.44)           (-2.28)            (-3.09)            (-8.86)              (-1.52)           (-2.20)          (-1.82)
 cash                            0.0063***            0.0014           0.0053***         0.0057***               0.0021          0.0093***        0.0092***
                                    (3.53)             (0.79)             (2.85)             (4.49)               (0.98)            (3.06)           (3.01)
 lev                             -0.0530***        -0.0753***         -0.0785***         -0.0261**            -0.0985***        -0.0900***       -0.0891***
                                    (-3.33)           (-5.03)            (-5.70)            (-2.06)              (-3.94)           (-5.27)          (-5.35)
 sh_financial                      0.0999*           0.0870*           0.1215***         0.1138***               0.1461          0.0770***        0.0952***
                                    (1.90)             (1.77)             (3.13)             (7.05)               (1.18)            (2.64)           (3.15)
 sh_foreign                       0.0963**           0.0741*             0.0093          0.1144***               0.0858            -0.0255          -0.0047
                                    (2.08)             (1.89)             (0.25)             (5.40)               (0.84)           (-0.70)          (-0.13)
 sh_top10                          0.0264*           0.0340**           0.0259**          0.0244**               0.0315            0.0153           0.0141
                                    (1.85)             (2.43)             (2.00)             (2.34)               (1.43)            (1.01)           (0.93)
 sh_directors                      0.0620*          0.0786***           0.0756**          0.0382**               0.0437           0.0783**         0.0716**
                                    (1.91)             (2.79)             (2.53)             (2.01)               (0.82)            (2.30)           (2.10)
 mills                           0.0916***          0.0723***          0.0848***        -0.1261***


                                                                                40
                         (4.66)   (3.51)   (4.85)        (-4.53)
Observations             10,004   8,858    8,208         36,420    2,244   5,886   5,886
Year fixed effects         yes      yes      yes            yes      yes     yes     yes
Industry fixed effects     yes      yes      yes            yes      yes     yes     yes
clustered by              firm     firm     firm           firm     firm    firm    firm
Adj. R2                  0.203    0.126    0.211          0.200    0.242   0.206   0.208




                                                    41
Table 8 Financial constraints: Standalone firms
This table presents the presents the results of model (4) with the interaction term between listing indicator (listed)
and several financial constraint proxies. Following prior studies, we use four financial constraint proxies. The
first proxy is no payout indicator (no_payout). The second is no bond access indicator (no_bacc). The third is
the first quintile of firm size (small). The final proxy is the 5th quintile of Hadlock-Pierce index (hp). In both
panel, the control variables include return on assets (roa), firm age (age), firm size (ln.tast), cash holding (cash),
and shareholding of financial institutions (sh.financial), foreign investors (sh.foreign), top 10 investors
(sh.top10), and board members (sh.directors). We also control for year and industry fixed effects in all the mod-
els. t-statistics in parentheses are calculated based on standard errors obtained by clustering at the firm level. *,
**, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-tailed test. All variables are defined
in Table A1.
                                         Standalone
                                               capex
                                                (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)

 listed                                     0.0758***           0.0706***           0.0833***           0.0791***
                                               (4.18)             (2.86)              (5.25)              (6.20)
 listed×no_payout                            0.0465**
                                               (2.10)
 no_payout                                  -0.0364**
                                              (-2.35)
 listed×no_bond                                                   0.0333
                                                                  (1.25)
 no_bond                                                        -0.0511**
                                                                  (-2.17)
 listed×small                                                                        0.0338*
                                                                                      (1.67)
 small                                                                              -0.0400**
                                                                                      (-2.16)
 listed×hp                                                                                              0.1090***
                                                                                                           (4.06)
 hp                                                                                                     -0.0576**
                                                                                                          (-2.23)
 pred_q                                     0.0858***           0.0856***           0.0860***           0.0830***
                                               (7.01)              (7.06)              (7.05)              (6.88)
 roa                                          0.0096*             0.0097*             0.0094*            0.0087*
                                               (1.88)              (1.90)              (1.83)              (1.74)
 age                                        -0.0844***          -0.0825***          -0.0820***         -0.0822***
                                               (-8.48)             (-8.27)             (-8.31)            (-6.29)
 size                                       -0.0161***          -0.0177***          -0.0219***         -0.0153***
                                               (-3.45)             (-3.77)             (-3.96)            (-3.26)
 cash                                        0.0028**            0.0028**            0.0028**            0.0028**
                                                (2.11)             (2.18)              (2.17)              (2.24)
 lev                                        -0.0703***          -0.0818***          -0.0735***         -0.0728***
                                               (-3.81)             (-4.50)             (-4.18)            (-4.10)
 sh_financial                                  0.1041              0.1087              0.1065            0.1451*
                                               (1.41)              (1.44)              (1.44)              (1.94)
 sh_foreign                                  0.1450**            0.1493**           0.1596***            0.1033*
                                               (2.49)              (2.57)              (2.74)              (1.68)
 sh_top10                                    0.0351**            0.0415**             0.0317*           0.0537***
                                               (2.03)              (2.38)              (1.72)              (3.18)
 sh_directors                                 -0.0286             -0.0304             -0.0235            -0.0611*
                                               (-0.87)             (-0.93)             (-0.71)            (-1.82)
 Observations                                  9,143              9,143               9,143               9,143
 Year fixed effects                              yes                yes                 yes                 yes
 Industry fixed effects                          yes                yes                 yes                 yes
 clustered by                                   firm               firm                firm                firm
 Adj. R2                                       0.217              0.217               0.217               0.221



                                                          42
Table 9 Effects of ownership structure
This table presents the results of model (1) by regressing capital expenditure (capex) on the interaction terms
between listing status and several ownership variables. Control variables include return on assets (roa), firm age
(age), firm size (ln.tast), cash holding (cash), and shareholding of financial institutions (sh.financial), foreign
investors (sh.foreign), top 10 investors (sh.top10), and board members (sh.directors). We also control for year
and industry fixed effects in all the models. t-statistics in parentheses are calculated based on standard errors
obtained by clustering at the firm level. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively,
using a two-tailed test. All variables are defined in Table A1.
                                 capex
                                  (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)
 listed                        0.0518***         0.0387***        0.0667***         0.0396***         0.0785***
                                 (7.31)            (6.84)           (5.74)            (6.52)             (6.09)
 listed×sh_financial           -0.1609**                                                              -0.1576**
                                 (-2.21)                                                                (-2.15)
 listed×sh_foreign                               0.1519**                                              0.1589**
                                                   (2.29)                                                (2.43)
 listed×sh_top10                                                  -0.0457**                          -0.0492***
                                                                    (-2.58)                             (-2.76)
 listed×sh_directors                                                                  0.0104            0.0154
                                                                                       (0.19)            (0.29)
 pred_q                        0.0786***        0.0783***          0.0785***        0.0784***         0.0786***
                                 (15.04)          (14.96)            (15.03)          (15.00)           (15.01)
 roa                           0.0107***        0.0108***          0.0109***        0.0108***         0.0109***
                                  (3.17)           (3.19)             (3.23)           (3.19)            (3.22)
 age                           -0.0542***       -0.0548***        -0.0542***       -0.0547***        -0.0537***
                                 (-13.39)         (-13.51)          (-13.37)         (-13.44)          (-13.24)
 size                          -0.0107***       -0.0108***        -0.0110***       -0.0108***        -0.0109***
                                  (-6.91)          (-6.96)           (-7.00)          (-6.94)           (-7.02)
 cash                          0.0052***        0.0053***          0.0052***        0.0053***         0.0051***
                                  (5.04)           (5.09)             (5.00)           (5.07)            (4.99)
 lev                           -0.0655***       -0.0642***        -0.0664***       -0.0645***        -0.0670***
                                  (-7.76)          (-7.62)           (-7.82)          (-7.65)           (-7.92)
 sh_financial                  0.2488***        0.1022***          0.0979***        0.1031***         0.2396***
                                  (3.36)           (5.99)             (5.79)           (6.02)            (3.23)
 sh_foreign                    0.0891***          -0.0630          0.0847***        0.0844***           -0.0645
                                  (4.73)           (-0.97)            (4.50)           (4.48)           (-1.01)
 sh_top10                      0.0256***        0.0296***          0.0608***        0.0290***         0.0606***
                                  (2.96)           (3.35)             (4.14)           (3.28)            (4.18)
 sh_directors                   0.0426**         0.0434**          0.0464***          0.0339            0.0308
                                  (2.40)           (2.45)             (2.62)           (0.66)            (0.62)
 Observations                    50,416           50,416            50,416           50,416            50,416
 Year fixed effects                yes              yes                yes              yes               yes
 Industry fixed effects            yes              yes                yes              yes               yes
 clustered by                     firm             firm               firm             firm              firm
 Adj. R2                         0.189            0.189              0.189            0.189             0.190




                                                          43
Table 10 Liquidity
This table presents the results of the extended model (1) by regressing capital expenditure (capex) on the inter-
action between listing indicator and the stock liquidity variables. Liquidity is the negative of the Amihud illiquid-
ity measure. Control variables include return on assets (roa), firm age (age), firm size (ln.tast), cash holding
(cash), and shareholding of financial institutions (sh.financial), foreign investors (sh.foreign), top 10 investors
(sh.top10), and board members (sh.directors). We also control for year and firm fixed effects in all the models.
t-statistics in parentheses are calculated based on standard errors obtained by clustering at the firm level. *, **,
*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-tailed test. All variables are defined
in Table A1.
                                              capex
                                             All Firms               Business Group               Standalone
                                                (1)                        (2)                        (3)

 liquidity                                  2.1809***                  2.9366***                     0.7906
                                               (2.94)                     (3.30)                     (0.47)
 pred_q                                     0.0463***                  0.0440***                  0.0442***
                                               (8.73)                     (7.38)                     (3.27)
 roa                                        0.0146***                  0.0157***                   0.0156**
                                               (3.34)                     (3.20)                     (2.17)
 age                                         -0.0467**                  -0.0502**                    0.0572
                                               (-2.03)                    (-2.26)                    (0.88)
 size                                       -0.0474***                 -0.0434***                  -0.0412**
                                               (-6.90)                    (-6.01)                    (-2.05)
 cash                                       0.0140***                  0.0168***                  0.0078***
                                               (8.89)                     (9.36)                     (3.10)
 lev                                        -0.1773***                 -0.1810***                 -0.1825***
                                              (-10.32)                    (-9.72)                    (-3.57)
 sh_financial                               0.1810***                  0.1837***                     0.1192
                                               (6.76)                     (7.47)                     (0.94)
 sh_foreign                                 0.0840***                  0.0823***                    -0.1243
                                               (2.85)                     (2.75)                     (-0.97)
 sh_top10                                     -0.0023                    -0.0128                     0.0019
                                               (-0.16)                    (-0.83)                    (0.07)
 sh_directors                                0.0571**                   0.0755**                     0.0062
                                                (2.11)                    (2.57)                     (0.10)
 Observations                                 40,363                     33,241                     7,122
 Year fixed effects                             yes                        yes                        yes
 Industry fixed effects                         yes                        yes                        yes
 clustered by                                  firm                       firm                       firm
 Adj. R2                                      0.432                      0.447                      0.459




                                                         44
                              Appendix on

"Stock Market Listing, Investment, and Business Groups: How Firm Struc-
                        ture Impacts Investment?"

                              Joseph J. French
                       University of Northern Colorado


                              Ryosuke Fujitani
                           Hitotsubashi University


                                    and
                              Yukihiro Yasuda
                           Hitotsubashi University




                                     45
A1. Disclosure requirement in Japan

         The requirements on financial reporting in Japan are unique. Institutional requirements

are enforced for not only listed firm but also for unlisted ones that satisfy the specified conditions.

This enables us to observe the effects of being listed with firms that disclose at the same levels.

Figure A1 is the matrix showing the relationship across the requirements of the two acts on the

disclosure, firm size, and firm condition (public or private). The X axis distinguishes listed firms

and unlisted firms, and Y axis depicts firm classification of Corporate Act (J-CA, hereafter).

                                           Figure A1

         J-CA and J-FIEA are the legal background on financial reporting in Japan. Required dis-

closure is different between J-CA and J-FIEA. J-CA requires Large Company to report annual

audited financial statements, which do not include cash flow statement (Article 435 and 444). In

addition, Large Companies which are not mandated to report consolidated financial statements do

not need to report consolidated financial statements. Upper area of the matrix depicts Large Com-

panies, and firms belonging to the area that need to report audited financial statements but unnec-

essarily consolidated one. Small and Medium Companies are required to comply SME accounting

standard, which is less strict and complex.

         J-FIEA mandates firms satisfying conditions prescribed in Item 1 of Article 24: i.e. if the

firm issues:

(i) Securities listed in a Financial Instruments Exchange (excluding Specified Listed Securities);

(ii) Securities specified by a Cabinet Order as those of which the state of distribution can be re-

garded as being equivalent to Securities referred to in the preceding item (excluding Securities

specified by Cabinet Order as having equivalent distribution statuses to Specified Listed Securi-

ties);


                                                  46
(iii) Securities to whose Public Offering or Secondary Distribution the main clause of Article 4,

paragraph (1), the main clause of Article 4, paragraph (2), the main clause of Article 4, paragraph

(3), or the main clause of Article 23-8, paragraph (1) or (2) ap-plies (excluding those specified in

the preceding two items); or

(iv) Securities (limited to share certificates, Rights in a Securities Investment Business, etc. that

are deemed to be Securities pursuant to Article 2, paragraph (2), and other Securities specified by

Cabinet Order) that are issued by the company, for which the number of holders on the last day

of the relevant business year or on the last day of any of the business years that began within four

years before the day on which the relevant business year began is at least the number specified

by Cabinet Order (or, for Rights in a Securities Investment Business, etc. that are deemed to be

Securities pursuant to Article 2, paragraph (2), if the number of holders on the last day of the rel-

evant business year is at least the number specified by Cabinet Order) (excluding Securities spec-

ified in the preceding three items).

         The "number" mentioned in Item (iv) is specifies in article 3-6 of Order for Enforcement

of the Financial Instruments and Exchange Act as:

(4) The number specified by a Cabinet Order, referred to in Article 24 (1)(iv) of the Act, is 1000

(in cases where the Securities are Securities for Professional Investors, the number obtained by

adding the number of Professional Investors calculated pursuant to the provisions of a Cabinet

Office Ordinance to 1000).




                                                  47
A2. Variable definitions

        All variables are defined in Table A1.




                                                 48
Appendix Figures and Tables




                                      Listed firms                     Unlisted firms
                                                                                                 X
                                                                           Required to dis-
                                                                            close by J-CA
           Large companies




                                                                          a. Need to be au-
                                                                             dited
                                                                          b. Unconsolidated
                                    Required to disclose                     financial state-
                                         by J-FIEA                           ments
                                 a. Consolidated financial
                                    statements
                                 b. (Consolidated) Cash                      SME GAAP
     Small and Medium




                                    flow statement
        Enterprises




                                                                          a. No need to be
                                                                             audited
                                                                          b. Unconsolidated
                                                                             financial state-
                                                                             ments


                             Y

                                                             c. No requirement on cash flow statement


Figure A1 Japanese legal framework on financial reporting:
This diagram describes the classification across firms required to report financial statements by
Japanese legal provisions on financial reporting. For simplicity, this diagram shows disclosure re-
quirements of J-FIEA stricter and more specific than J-CA, and Large and Public firms need to
report financial statements required by J-FIEA. X axis separates firms into listed and unlisted firms,
and Y axis separates them into Large and Small and Medium Enterprises. J-CA requires Large Com-
panies to report a) audited but b) unconsolidated financial statements and does Small and Medium
Companies to report a) non-audited b) unconsolidated financial statements. J-CA does not prescribe
any requirement on cash flow statement. J-FIEA requires firms satisfying conditions prescribed in
Article 24 to report a) audited b) consolidated financial statements, including c) cash flow statement.
UDFs are the firms included in the blue shaded area: i.e., unlisted firms required to report financial
statements by J-FIEA.




                                                              49
Table A1 Variable definitions:
This table describes the definition of variables used in analysis. All the data are collected from Nikkei NEEDS
Financial Quest 2.0.

 Variables                      Definition

 Dependent variables
 ppe                            The changes in plant, property, and equipment from the previous period plus depre-
                                ciation and impairments scaled by the sum of tangible and intangible assets.
 capex                          Capital expenditure reported in footnote of Form J 10-K scaled by the sum of tan-
                                gible and intangible assets.
 capex+rd                       Capital expenditure reported in footnote of Form J 10-K (capex) plus R&D expendi-
                                ture scaled by the sum of tangible and intangible assets.
 tan+int                        Cash outflow to purchase both tangible and intangible assets scaled by the sum of
                                tangible and intangible assets.

 Independent variables and other variables
 listed                       Indicator which equals one if firm i is listed firm, zero otherwise.
 roa                          Operating income sum of tangible and intangible assets.
 pred_q                       Following Campello and Graham (2013), predicted q is computed by the following
                              regression:
                              q = 0 + 1 sg + 2 roa + 3 net_income + 4 lev + fe + ,
                              net_income is ordinary income, fe includes industry and year fixed effects, and the
                              other variables are defined in this table. After estimating the model, we then use the
                              regression coefficients to generate predicted q for each firm, both listed and unlisted
                              firms.
 age                          Natural logarithm of firm age plus one.
 size                         Natural logarithm of total assets.
 cash                         Sum of cash, cash equivalent and short-term investment securities divided by sum
                              of tangible and intangible assets.
 lev                          Sum of short-term debt and long-term debt divided by total assets.
 ln_sales                     Natural logarithm of sales.
 sh_financial                 Common stock ownership percentage of financial intermediaries.
 sh.foreign                   Common stock ownership of foreign investors.
 sh_top10                     Common stock ownership of top 10 shareholders.
 sh_director                  Common stock ownership percentage of board members.

 price _sensitivity             The coefficient on accounting earnings in the estimation model below:
                                p/k = 0 1/k + 1 op_income/k + 2 bv / k + ,
                                where p is the value of total stock, k is the sum of tangible and intangible assets,
                                op_income is operating income, and bv is book value of shareholder capital. Esti-
                                mating this model for each year-industry, we define the coefficient 1 as the stock
                                price sensitivity to accounting profit at the year-industry level.
 no_payout                      An indicator taking one if the firm did not pay dividend or execute stock repurchase
                                for three years before.
 no_bacc                        An indicator taking one if the firm did not issue bond for three years before.
 small                          An indicator taking one if the firm belongs to the first quartile of firm size, zero
                                otherwise.
 hp                             An indicator taking one if the firm belongs to the 5 th quintile of Hadlock-Pierce
                                index, zero otherwise. Hadlock-Pierce index is defined as:
                                Hadlock-Pierce index: = (-0.737 × total_asset) + (0.043 ×total_asset2) - (0.040 ×
                                Age),
                                where total_asset is total assets in the previous period, and Age is firm age.

 liquid                         Amihud illiquidity (illiq) taking negative. Amihud illiquidity is computed as:

                                                         50
illiq = (1/d)   | ret | / (vol × price)]
ret represents daily stock returns, vol represents daily trading volume, price repre-
sents the stock price, and d represents the number of the dates of fiscal year. Thus,
liquidity is:
liquid = (-1) (1/d)   | ret | / (vol × price)]




                         51
Table A2 Descriptive Statistics (Business group firms vs. Standalone firms):
This table presents the descriptive statistics on all variables in main analysis. Panel A and B compares the statistics of all firms (listed firms and unlisted
firms) between bisiness group firms and standalone firms. Columns (1) and (2) report the descriptive statistics of listed and unlisted firms, respectively.
Columns (3) report the difference in each variable between listed and unlisted firms. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels using a two-
tailed test. Left hand side in each panel reports the statistics of firms with subsidiaries, and right-hand side reports those of standalone firms. All observations
falling in the top or bottom 1 % with respect to each variable are winsorized. All variables are defined in Table A1.
 Panel A: Business Group sub-sample
                   (1) Listed firms                                 (2) Unlisted                                       (3) Listed - Un-
                   (n=34,433)                                       Firms (n=1,386)                                    listed
                               mean      median              sd                mean         median              sd                 mean              median
 ppe                         0.1445      0.0956          0.2153               0.0917        0.0604          0.1538               0.0528   ***         0.0352   ***
 capex                       0.1471      0.0967          0.1851               0.0901        0.0617          0.1157               0.0569   ***         0.0350   ***
 tan+int                     0.1578      0.1007          0.2113               0.1016        0.0660          0.1441               0.0562   ***         0.0346   ***
 capex+rd                    0.2166      0.1396          0.3007               0.1184        0.0708          0.1910               0.0982   ***         0.0688   ***
 pred_q                      1.0828      0.9812          0.4557               0.9675        0.9013          0.3173               0.1153   ***         0.0799   ***
 roa                         0.4327      0.2368          0.9966               0.1990        0.1353          0.4711               0.2337   ***         0.1015   ***
 age                         3.8346      4.0073          0.5926               4.0781        4.1744          0.4732              -0.2435   ***        -0.1671   ***
 size                       10.5723     10.4599          1.4983              10.4520       10.2651          1.2803               0.1203   ***         0.1948   **
 cash                        1.4188      0.4794          3.6461               0.7446        0.2776          2.3266               0.6742   ***         0.2018   ***
 lev                         0.2163      0.1854          0.1837               0.3435        0.3333          0.2221              -0.1272   ***        -0.1479   ***
 sh_financial                0.1992      0.1785          0.1323               0.1030        0.0785          0.0923               0.0961   ***         0.1000   ***
 sh_foreign                  0.0823      0.0370          0.1044               0.0109             0          0.0579               0.0714   ***         0.0370   ***
 sh_top10                    0.4981      0.4894          0.1564               0.4767        0.4972          0.2561               0.0214   ***        -0.0078
 sh_directors                0.0884      0.0245          0.1297               0.0612        0.0250          0.0925               0.0272   ***        -0.0005   ***

 Panel B: Standalone sub-sample
                  (1) Listed firms                                  (2) Unlisted                                       (3) Listed - Un-
                  (n=5,513)                                         Firms (n=797)                                      listed
                              mean      median               sd                mean         median              sd                 mean              median
 ppe                        0.1463      0.0695           0.2459               0.0735        0.0150          0.2177               0.0728   ***         0.0545   ***
 capex                      0.1743      0.0803           0.2567               0.0585        0.0071          0.1723               0.1158   ***         0.0731   ***
 tan+int                    0.1914      0.0879           0.2927               0.0903        0.0157          0.2407               0.1011   ***         0.0721   ***
 capex+rd                   0.2736      0.1126           0.4784               0.1094        0.0087          0.3750               0.1642   ***         0.1039   ***
 pred_q                     1.1105      0.9837           0.5318               1.1415        1.0893          0.4251              -0.0310              -0.1056   ***
 roa                        0.6797      0.2314           1.6755               0.1871        0.0394          0.9995               0.4926   ***         0.1919   ***
 age                        3.6151      3.7377           0.5758               3.7465        3.9318          0.5933              -0.1314   ***        -0.1942   ***
 size                       9.1682      9.1517           1.0242               8.0569        7.8610          1.0843               1.1113   ***         1.2907   ***
 cash                       2.8982      0.6690           6.5033               1.2777        0.2067          4.4471               1.6205   ***         0.4623   ***
 lev                        0.1813      0.1131           0.1951               0.1951        0.0512          0.2435              -0.0137   *           0.0619   *
 sh_financial               0.1043      0.0904           0.0818               0.0235        0.0060          0.0453               0.0809   ***         0.0844   ***
 sh_foreign                 0.0411      0.0073           0.0837               0.0129             0          0.0687               0.0282   ***         0.0073   ***
 sh_top10                   0.5707      0.5765           0.1719               0.4238        0.3913          0.3236               0.1468   ***         0.1853   ***
 sh_directors               0.1541      0.0949           0.1607               0.0710        0.0060          0.1395               0.0831   ***         0.0890   ***




                                                                                  52
Table A3 Treatment effect model first step:
This table reports the first-step regression results of treatment effect model for results of regression model (1):
*, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respectively, using a two-tailed test. All variables are
defined in Table A1.
                                                  The first stage model of treatment effect model
                                                                   Probit Model
                                                            Dependent variable = Listed

 ln_sales                                                           0.2189***
                                                                     (0.0221)
 gr.sales                                                           0.2400***
                                                                     (0.0573)
 Roa                                                                0.1173***
                                                                     (0.0265)
 Lev                                                                -1.0100***
                                                                     (0.1393)
 Constant                                                            -0.3867*
                                                                     (0.2044)
 Observations                                                          52,038
 Pseudo R2                                                              0.101




                                                        53
Table A4 Listing status and financial constraints
This table presents the results of financial constraint analyses. We estimate Model (1) using subsamples. The
subsamples are divided according to the variables of financial constraints. We report the difference in the coef-
ficients between financial constrained and unconstrained subsample, and their F-value using Chow test.
All the models include the control variables: assets (roa), firm age (age), firm size (ln.tast), cash holding (cash),
and shareholding of financial institutions (sh.financial), foreign investors (sh.foreign), top 10 investors
(sh.top10), and board members (sh.directors). *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, 1% levels, respec-
tively, using a two-tailed test. All variables are defined in Table A1.
                         All
                                 Payout              Bond Access                 Size                   HP
 Constrained                   0.0932***              0.0478***              0.1009***              0.1156***
                                 (7.73)                 (7.07)                  (6.51)                (5.77)
 Unconstrained                   0.0090                 0.0011                -0.0014                 0.0066
                                 (1.43)                 (0.13)                 (-0.13)                (1.00)
 Difference                    0.0842***              0.0467***              0.1023***              0.1090***
 Chow test 2 value              3151.45                 468.05                1879.57                 270.43




                                                         54
