                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INFLATION DYNAMICS:
                     DEAD, DORMANT, OR DETERMINED ABROAD?

                                        Kristin Forbes

                                     Working Paper 26496
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26496


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




This paper was prepared for the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity held in Washington, DC
on Sept 6, 2019. Special thanks to Javier Cravino, Ayhan Kose, and Jim Stock for detailed
comments and suggestions, to Kostas Theodoridis for joint work on the trend-cycle analysis used
in this paper, to Gee Hee Hong, Zsóka Kóczán, Weicheng Lian and Malhar Nabar for kindly
sharing their labor market data, and to Zhi Wang for sharing his data on global value chains.
Additional thanks to Simon Gilchrist, Carlos Viana de Carvalho, and other participants at the
17th BIS Annual Research Conference held in Zurich on June 22, 2018 for comments on initial
work on this topic. The author has received honoraria related to research on inflation dynamics
from the the Brookings Institution and BIS. Author contact information: kjforbes@mit.edu The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Kristin Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Dynamics: Dead, Dormant, or Determined Abroad?
Kristin Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 26496
November 2019
JEL No. E30,E52,E58,F62

                                          ABSTRACT

Inflation dynamics have been difficult to explain over the last decade. This paper explores if a
more comprehensive treatment of globalization can help. CPI inflation has become more
synchronized around the world since the 2008 crisis, but core and wage inflation have become
less synchronized. Global factors (including commodity prices, world slack, exchange rates, and
global value chains) are significant drivers of CPI inflation in a cross-section of countries, and
their role has increased over the last decade, particularly the role of non-fuel commodity prices.
These global factors, however, do less to improve our understanding of core and wage inflation.
Key results are robust to using a less-structured trend-cycle decomposition instead of a Phillips
curve framework, with the set of global variables more important for understanding the cyclical
component of inflation over the last decade, but not the underlying slow-moving inflation trend.
Domestic slack still plays a role for all the inflation measures, although globalization has caused
some "flattening" of this relationship, especially for CPI inflation. Although CPI inflation is
increasingly "determined abroad", core and wage inflation is still largely a domestic process.


Kristin Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and CEPR
and also NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu
I.      Introduction

Over the last decade, the performance of standard models used to understand and forecast inflation has
deteriorated. When growth collapsed during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC), inflation in most
countries fell less than expected. Since then, as economies have largely recovered and unemployment
fallen--even to record lows in some countries--inflation has not picked up as expected. A burgeoning
literature has proposed a range of possible explanations for these puzzles--ranging from claims that the
key frameworks are "dead", to arguments that the models are alive and well but inflation has been
"dormant" due to temporary factors or a long healing process after the GFC. This paper explores an
explanation between these extremes: whether inflation is increasingly determined abroad. The results
suggest that globalization has meaningfully affected the dynamics of CPI inflation over the last decade--
but had a more moderate effect on core inflation and wages. A more comprehensive treatment of
globalization can meaningfully improve CPI inflation models, but the dynamics of wages and core
inflation are still largely "domestic" rather than "determined abroad".

        This question of whether globalization is affecting inflation dynamics is taking on increased
urgency as central banks evaluate their ability to continue (or expand) loose monetary policies in the
presence of extremely tight labor markets. If inflation is largely determined abroad, a central bank could
be less concerned about inflation exceeding its target and more able to pursue a "high-pressure"
economy that prioritizes job creation (Yellen, 2016). If inflation is largely determined globally and less
responsive to domestic conditions, central banks may also need to make larger adjustments to interest
rates to stabilize inflation (even ignoring the challenges around starting from lower rates). In the
extreme, if inflation has increasingly been determined abroad and the global factors that have
dampened inflationary pressures over the last few years reverse (such as movement away from global
supply chains), then countries could suddenly experience a sharp increase in domestic inflation and face
a difficult tradeoff between supporting growth and stabilizing prices.

        The debate on how globalization--defined broadly as increased integration between individual
countries and the rest of the world--affects inflation dynamics is not new. Soon after the Phillips-curve
relationship between domestic unemployment and wage inflation gained prominence in the late 1960's,
the oil shocks of the 1970's highlighted the need to supplement this framework to account for changes
in global oil prices (Gordon, 1977 and 1985). In the mid-2000's, several prominent policymakers
questioned whether globalization, especially increased imports from low-wage economies, was
moderating inflationary pressures at that time (Bean, 2006, Kohn, 2006, and Yellen, 2006). Research at

                                                                                                             1
the BIS suggested that global slack was becoming more important than domestic slack in determining
inflation (Borio and Filardo, 2007). The corresponding discussion and analysis, however, generally
concluded that although globalization was an important phenomenon, and may have acted as a
temporary supply shock reducing inflation, it had only had limited effects on the underlying inflation
process. Ball (2006) surveyed the evidence at that time on whether the "globalization of the U.S.
economy has changed the behavior of inflation" and summarized the results as "no, no, and no."

         The impact of globalization on inflation received less attention during and after the GFC as most
work attempting to explain the "missing disinflation" in this period focused on domestic variables, such
as financial frictions (Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2015 and Gilchrist et al., 2017). As the recovery progressed,
attention shifted to why inflation was slow to recover, and the majority of papers continued to highlight
domestic factors. Some prominent explanations are: challenges in measuring slack (Albuquerque and
Baumann, 2017 and Hong et al., 2018), nonlinearities in the relationship between slack and inflation
(Hooper, Mishkin and Sufi, 2019 and Gagnon and Collins, 2019), the large component of inflation indices
which are not "cyclically-sensitive" (Stock and Watson, 2018), and the stabilizing role of inflation
expectations and central bank credibility (Coilbion and Gorodnichenko, 2015 and Bernanke, 2007).
Closely related, if a central bank targets inflation, then inflation should remain around target and be less
sensitive to economic slack, as highlighted in McLeay and Tenreyro (2019) and Jordà and Nechio (2018). 1

         Only recently, as inflation has remained muted in many countries, attention has shifted to how
globalization may be affecting inflation dynamics (discussed in more detail in Section II). One line of
research highlights the growing importance of a shared global common factor in inflation dynamics--but
does not explain what is behind this increased inflation synchronization. Other research highlights
specific aspects of globalization, such as structural changes (including increased trade and global supply
chains) or larger global shocks (particularly in oil and commodity prices). Ha, Kose and Ohnsorge (2019)
and Obstfeld (2019) provide excellent reviews of this large literature, with the former focusing on
emerging markets and developing economies and the later on the US. Obstfeld (2019) concludes that
there are important interactions between the global economy and US inflation (such as through the
global neutral interest rate and role of the dollar), but the evidence on whether globalization has
affected US inflation dynamics is inconclusive.



1This long-standing challenge for estimating Phillips curves has been known since at least Goldfeld and Blinder (1972) and can
be addressed through instrumental variables (i.e., Jordà and Nechio, 2018) or more disaggregated data (i.e., state data in
McLeay and Tenreyro, 2019). These issues are attenuated in this paper through its focus on changes over time within countries.

                                                                                                                            2
            Most prominent papers modelling inflation in advanced economies, however, continue to place
minimal emphasis on global factors. A generally accepted strategy for modelling inflation in the U.S. is to
control for domestic variables (domestic slack, inflation expectations and often lagged inflation) and add
a control for import prices to capture any international supply or demand shocks. This is perceived to be
a "sufficient statistic" to capture any influences of the global economy on domestic inflation, with no
additional benefit from more comprehensive global controls or explicitly modelling global interactions. 2
Also, although there is prominent discussion of how globalization could be "flattening" the Phillips
curve, there have only been limited attempts to test if global variables are directly affecting the
relationship with domestic slack (with Ihrig et al., 2010, one exception).

            This paper assesses whether globalization should play more than this ancillary role in the basic
framework for understanding and forecasting inflation. It concludes that a more comprehensive
treatment of global variables can meaningfully improve our ability to understand CPI inflation over the
last decade, but only marginally improve our ability to understand core and wage inflation. More
specifically, higher commodity and oil prices, exchange rate depreciations, less world slack, and weaker
global value chains are all associated with higher CPI inflation, and the role of these variables
(particularly non-oil commodity prices) has increased. Commodity and oil prices and world slack have
also been important for understanding the cyclical component of CPI inflation--which has also
increased. In fact, when global variables are added to simple models of CPI inflation, the explanatory
power of these models recovers to pre-crisis levels. In contrast, core inflation, wage growth, and the
trend component of inflation continue to be predominantly driven by domestic variables. Adding global
variables provides minimal boost to the ability of simple models to explain these measures, although
commodity prices have played a greater role for core inflation over the last decade. Domestic slack plays
a role in explaining all measures of inflation, although its role has generally weakened over time,
especially for CPI inflation. This "flattening" of the Phillips curve for CPI inflation can largely (but not
entirely) be explained by increased import exposure, while globalization has had less impact on the
relationship between domestic slack and other measures of inflation--particularly wage inflation.

            This paper provides new insights on inflation dynamics due to five key elements of the
analysis--some of which have been used in other research--but not combined simultaneously. First, this
paper focuses on multiple channels by which globalization could affect the inflation process, a more
granular approach that is important as many global trends are correlated and thereby require multiple

2   For a recent prominent example, see Hooper, Mishkin and Sufi (2019).

                                                                                                               3
controls to identify effects. Second, it not only tests if adding global variables to different models can
improve our understanding of inflation, but also if interactions between domestic slack and globalization
can explain the "flattening" of the Phillips curve. Third, this paper explores the dynamics of several
inflation measures: the CPI, core CPI, wages, and the short-term cyclical and slow-moving trend
components. The results provide a more comprehensive picture of how globalization has had different
effects on different price dynamics. Fourth, the paper uses three different empirical frameworks (a
trend-cycle decomposition, as well as the more common Phillips curve and principal components
models), each of which provides information on different aspects of the inflation process. The
combination of approaches ensures results are not driven by the theoretical construct of a specific
model, and several consistent findings across methodologies help build a more convincing picture of the
role of globalization--especially given well-known issues with the popular Phillips curve framework.
Finally, the paper analyzes a large cross-section of countries, instead of most work that focuses on an
individual country, and the combination of the cross-section and time-series dimension of the data can
better identify the role of global factors for inflation dynamics over time. 3

         The analysis begins by discussing changes in the world economy that could cause global factors
to have a greater role in inflation dynamics and briefly summarizes the limited literature evaluating any
such effects. Increased trade flows, the greater heft of emerging markets and their impact on
commodity prices, the greater ease of using supply chains to shift parts of production to cheaper
locations, and a corresponding reduction in local worker bargaining power could all affect different
inflation measures. These changes may not be sufficiently captured in inflation models that only control
for global influences through a single measure of import prices or ignore the interaction of globalization
with domestic slack. Instead, controlling for variables such as world slack, prices of non-fuel
commodities (as well as of oil), exchange rates, and global supply chains, as well as interacting domestic
slack with a measure of globalization, could all go some way towards better capturing changes in the
global economy--even in fairly simple frameworks.

         The paper then tests these various channels through which global factors may affect inflation
dynamics using three different approaches: principal components, a Phillips-curve framework, and a
trend-cycle decomposition. Each approach has advantages and disadvantages and encapsulates
different aspects of inflation. The principal component analysis focuses on the variance in inflation and


3New work by Ha et al. (2019) and Jasová et al. (2018) also use large cross-sections of countries to explore how inflation
dynamics have changed over time.

                                                                                                                             4
finds an important shared global component--but a striking divergence in how this component has
evolved over time for different inflation measures. Over the last 25 years the shared global component
of CPI inflation in advanced economies has more than doubled (from 27% in 1990-94 to almost 57% in
2015-17), but for core and wage inflation has fallen to about half that for the CPI. These patterns are
consistent with global factors (such as commodity price volatility) playing a large and increasingly
important role for CPI inflation, while having less impact on core and wage inflation. There are other
possible explanations, however, and this framework does not address what is driving these patterns.

          To better understand this divergence and what these patterns imply for the level of inflation in
different countries, the main body of the paper shifts to the most common approach for analyzing
inflation--a Phillips curve model. It augments a standard New Keynesian model with a set of global
factors: exchange rates, world slack, oil prices, commodity prices, and global value chains. It also
interacts domestic slack with a country's import share. When the model is estimated using fixed effects
for CPI inflation for a cross-section of countries from 1996 to 2017, all of the domestic and global
variables have the expected sign and are significant. 4 This long period, however, masks important
changes in these relationships over time. The "Phillips curve" relationship between CPI inflation and
domestic slack is significant throughout the sample, but weakens in the last decade, with much (but not
all) of this "flattening" explained by increased import exposure. The role of the individual global
variables in explaining inflation also increases in the last decade, especially for commodity prices (which
are insignificant in the pre-crisis window). The increased role of the global variables partially reflects
sharp movements during the GFC, as well as greater volatility in commodity prices and a greater
elasticity of commodity prices on CPI inflation, but this is only part of the story. The other global
variables are also important since the GFC, including world slack and global value chains.

          In order to better understand if this more comprehensive treatment of globalization
meaningfully improves the ability of basic models to explain inflation dynamics, the paper next
estimates a series of rolling regressions for CPI inflation in order to allow the relationships between
inflation and the different variables to fluctuate over time. The resulting rolling estimates are then used
to calculate the "error" between actual inflation and inflation explained by models incorporating
different controls for globalization. The results suggest that CPI inflation has become harder to explain in
domestic-focused models, but that adding the more comprehensive global controls meaningfully


4 Results when the model is estimated for individual countries vary, often reflecting different country characteristics. Forbes
(2019) provides more information on country-specific estimates using a similar Phillips curve model.

                                                                                                                                  5
improves our understanding of inflation dynamics over the last decade--by so much that the model
"errors" fall to pre-crisis levels. More specifically, including the full set of global variables reduces the
median prediction error for CPI inflation by about 0.34 percentage points (or 12% of median inflation)
over the last decade. Including these global variables, however, does much less to improve our
understanding of inflation dynamics before 2008, possibly explaining why global variables received less
attention in inflation models in the past.

        Given the instability in the role of different variables for inflation dynamics over time, and
especially given shortcomings of the Phillips-curve framework, it is also useful to model inflation
dynamics using a less structured approach. The next section of the paper shifts to an atheoretical
framework that decomposes inflation into two components: a slow-moving trend and shorter-term
cyclical movements. It uses the "ARSV" approach developed in Forbes, Kirkham and Theodoridis (2019),
which is grounded in the unobserved component stochastic volatility model (UCSV) developed by Stock
and Watson (2007), but allows the deviations in trend inflation to have an autoregressive component.
The results suggest that CPI inflation is partially determined by a slow-moving trend, but the cyclical
component of inflation has become more volatile and more correlated with global developments--
especially world slack, oil and commodity prices. The role of different variables also changes over time,
with a more prominent role for commodity prices in cyclical inflation over the last decade, but weaker
role for domestic slack--supporting the conclusions from the Phillips-curve analysis of CPI inflation.

        Next, the paper explores if these results for CPI inflation and its cyclical component also apply
for other inflation measures--core CPI and wage inflation and the slow-moving trend in core inflation
(estimated using the ARSV framework described above). Some of the key results are similar across
measures, such as a significant negative relationship between each inflation measure and domestic
slack, and evidence that the relationship has weakened over the last decade for core inflation and the
slow-moving trend (even after controlling for interactions with increased import exposure or for the full
set of global variables). A few of the global variables are consistently significant--such as the role of
commodity prices for core inflation over the last decade--but most of the global variables have
fluctuating significance and play a less important role. In fact, including the more comprehensive global
variables only provides a minimal improvement in the fit of rolling-regression models attempting to
explain core and wage inflation, even over the last decade.

        This series of results, obtained using very different approaches, helps form a more
comprehensive understanding of the role of globalization for different aspects of inflation. The large and

                                                                                                                6
growing shared global principal component in CPI inflation supports the increased variance in the
cyclical component of CPI inflation, as well as the larger role for global factors in CPI inflation (in the
Phillips curve model) and in the cyclical component of inflation (in the trend-cycle decomposition). In
sharp contrast, the much smaller and declining shared principal component in core and wage inflation
supports the greater role of the trend in core inflation, as well as the more muted role for global factors
in core and wage inflation (in the Phillips curve model), and in the slow-moving component of inflation
(in the trend-cycle decomposition). Linking these results, the global variables could therefore help
explain the growing wedge between CPI inflation and wage inflation, which roughly corresponds to firm
margins and profitability, and could therefore help explain the well-documented trend of increased
profits and declining labor share in many advanced economies.

        The results in this paper suggest that the changing relationship between prices and the world
economy cannot be fully captured by a single variable (such as import prices). There is an important role
for world slack, exchange rates, oil prices, non-fuel commodity prices, and global value chains for at
least some of the different measures and aspects of inflation. One consistent finding across
methodologies is also the greater role of commodity prices over the last decade--for CPI inflation, core
inflation, and the cyclical component of inflation. This appears to reflect more volatility in commodity
prices combined with nonlinear effects on inflation. This could also result from a greater willingness of
central banks to look through inflation driven by commodity prices, or that commodity prices
increasingly commove with other variables that influence inflation (such as growth in emerging markets
or the spread of global supply chains). Whichever channels of globalization are most important,
however, they do not appear to fully explain the weaker relationship between domestic slack and
inflation. This paper confirms previous evidence of the "flattening" of the Phillips curve (albeit less so for
wages than other inflation measures), and finds that although increased import exposure can explain
much of this flattening for CPI inflation, it has had a more moderate effect on the slope of the Phillips
curve for other inflation measures. Although globalization can make the Phillips curve seem "dormant",
especially for CPI inflation, this key relationship is not "dead".

        Finally, while these patterns apply across the sample of advanced economies and several
emerging markets, it is important to highlight that the results vary when estimated for individual
countries. For some economies, global factors play a dominant role in explaining the variation in
inflation, while in other countries domestic variables are more important. Even in the countries for
which the global variables are jointly significant, different global factors can drive the joint significance.


                                                                                                                 7
Exactly what global measures are most important varies based on the period and country characteristics
and is an important area for future work.5 These varied results for different countries could also be one
reason why past research, which often focused on an individual country or small set of advanced
economies over a shorter period, often found seemingly contradictory results for global variables.

          The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II discusses how globalization could affect
inflation dynamics, including a brief literature review. Section III estimates the shared global principal
components of different inflation measures and how they have evolved over time. Section IV uses a
Phillips curve framework augmented with global variables and rolling regressions to evaluate the role of
different factors, if their role has changed over time, and if they meaningfully improve our
understanding of inflation dynamics. Section V breaks inflation into a cyclical component and slow-
moving trend and then evaluates the role of the global factors in the cyclical component. Section VI
repeats key parts of the analysis for core CPI inflation, wage inflation, and the slow-moving trend
component of inflation. Section VIII concludes.




II.       Globalization and Inflation Dynamics: The Arguments and Previous Evidence

The academic literature modelling inflation--and the many proposals to improve on these frameworks
to solve new puzzles--is lengthy. 6 At the core of most models, from the simplest Phillips curve equations
to the most complicated DSGE models, is a central role for domestic slack and inflation expectations.
Although many papers and frameworks partially incorporate the rest of the world by adding a control
for import prices (and in a few cases adding a control for global slack, or adjusting for import
competition in firm markups), domestic variables remain central. 7 Global interactions play a minor,
ancillary role--and in some simple models are completely ignored (albeit less so in the DSGE models
used by central banks that include a fuller treatment of the international economy). 8 A common
justification is that any changes in the global economy should be captured in measures of domestic slack
and import prices (if the latter is included), so that these variables are sufficient statistics to control for



5 For recent work, see Forbes (2019) and Ha et al. (2019).
6 For excellent overviews that capture the key issues, see Stock and Watson (2010), Gordon (2013), Ball and Mazumder (2015),
Berganza et al., (2016), Miles et al. (2017), Blanchard (2018), and Ha et al. (2019).
7 Papers studying the role of globalization in inflation include: Ball (2006), Borio and Filardo (2007), Ihrig et al. (2010), Berganza

et al. (2016), Mikolajun and Lodge (2016), Auer et al. (2016, 2017), and Borio (2017).
8 One noteworthy exception is Jordà and Nechio (2018), which uses the "trilemma" and how different types of countries were

affected by the GFC as an instrument to estimate changes in the Phillips curve during this period.

                                                                                                                                     8
changes in the global economy. 9 This secondary role for global effects and global interactions is
surprising given the extensive literature on globalization and evidence how increased integration
through trade and capital flows has affected an array of economic variables.

         There are, however, a range of channels by which globalization could affect inflation dynamics.
This paper focuses on four changes in the global economy that could be relevant: increased trade
integration, increased role of emerging markets, increased use of global value chains to divide
production across borders, and reduced worker bargaining power. There are other ways in which
globalization could affect the inflation process, and many of these changes are related and could
interact in important ways, but the channels in this paper provide a useful starting point. 10

         The first of these changes in the global economy, increased trade integration, is well
documented. As the share of exports to GDP increases for a given economy, demand in global markets
will likely have a greater impact on national income and price setting by domestic firms. Similarly, as
shown in Cravino (2019), as the share of imports to GDP increases, domestic inflation will be more
affected by import prices (simply due to their higher share in the price basket)--and these import prices
will at least partially be determined by foreign demand conditions, foreign markups, and foreign
marginal costs (assuming incomplete pricing-to-market). Closely related, as the share of traded goods to
GDP increases, a given exchange rate movement could have a larger impact on prices--both through the
effect on the imported component of any domestic inflation index, as well as on exporters'
competitiveness, margins and pricing decisions. 11

         A second change in the global economy since the early 1990's has been the increased role of
emerging markets. Emerging markets have accounted for over 75% of global growth since the GFC and
been the key source of demand for commodities. 12 As a result, global commodity prices have become
more tightly linked to growth in emerging markets (particularly China) and become more volatile. This
could cause more volatility in inflation in advanced economies due simply to the larger price
movements, volatility that could be magnified if the effects of commodity price movements on inflation
are nonlinear (as in Hamilton, 2010). This would occur in sticky-price models in which firms are more



9 See Eickmeier and Pijnenbrug (2013) for an example of this line of reasoning.
10 See Ha et al. (2019) for a detailed discussion, including other channels, such as a more common framework for inflation
targeting or greater synchronization of financial conditions around the world due to greater financial market integration.
11
   Obstfeld (2019), however, highlights that the effect of trade on the Phillips curve relationship is not straightforward; if
increased import competition drives out smaller domestic firms and thereby increases the market power for remaining firms.
12 See World Bank (2018) and Miles et al., 2017.



                                                                                                                                 9
likely to adjust prices after larger shocks (Ball and Mankiw, 1995). Working in the other direction,
however, the reduced reliance of most advanced economies on natural resources as they shift to less
commodity-intensive forms of production could lessen the impact of commodity price movements on
inflation in these economies.

          A third global development that could affect inflation dynamics is greater price competition and
pressure on firm markups, resulting from greater ease purchasing final goods from their cheapest
locations and/or using global supply chains to shift production to where it can be done at the lowest
cost. 13 As a result, companies that export or compete with imports must make decisions on markups
that take greater account of prices from foreign competitors. Even holding trade flows constant, greater
"contestability" from global markets reduces the pricing power of companies and lowers markups,
especially in sectors with less differentiated goods (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008). 14 As it
becomes easier to shift activities abroad--even just small stages of the production process--domestic
costs will be more closely aligned with foreign costs. 15 A greater use of supply chains could also reduce
the sensitivity of prices to exchange rate movements, as more integrated supply chains better allow
firms to absorb exchange rate movements at various stages of production without adjusting final prices
(Bank of International Settlements, 2015).

          Finally, each of these changes in the global economy could simultaneously reduce the labor
share and bargaining power of workers, dampening the key Phillips curve relationship between
domestic slack and wage (and price) inflation. 16 This possibility is clearly modelled in Cravino (2019),
which shows that an increase in the import share of GDP could reduce the sensitivity of inflation to
domestic slack. There are also other ways in which globalization could affect this Phillips curve
relationship. For example, if there is some substitution between labor and energy costs as firms attempt
to keep margins constant, the greater volatility in commodity prices could weaken the relationship
between wage growth and slack (Bean, 2006). Increased trade competition could make it more difficult
for domestic firms to raise prices in response to tight labor markets and worker demands for higher pay
(Auer et al., 2013) and the increased ease of shifting parts of production to cheaper locations could



13 Potentially counteracting some of however, is the trend toward greater concentration in some markets, especially in the U.S.
See Guilloux-Nefussi (2018) and Autor et al. (2017) for a discussion of how greater concentration may have increased firm
pricing power.
14 Also see Sbordone (2010), which models how an increase in traded goods reduces the slope of the Phillips curve.
15 See Auer, Levchenko and Sauré (2016) and Wei and Xie (2018) for models of these effects of global supply chains on inflation.
16 Blanchard (2016), Ha et al. (2019) and Jasová et al. (2018) provide evidence of the flattening of the Phillips curve for different

groups of countries. Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) provide evidence on the decline in the labor share since the 1980s.

                                                                                                                                  10
further reduce the ability of domestic workers to bargain for higher wages (Auer et al. 2017). Moreover,
increased mobility of some workers (such as in the euro zone), or even just the possibility of increased
immigration to fill vacancies, could further reduce worker bargaining power. Although there are many
other domestic developments which are also likely affecting wage growth and worker bargaining power
(such as the increased role of flexible jobs in the "sharing economy" and greater employer concentration
in some industries 17), these multifaceted changes in the global economy could further weaken the link
between domestic slack and inflation.

            This range of channels through which globalization could be affecting firm pricing decisions
suggests that a more complete treatment of global factors could improve our understanding of inflation
dynamics. Simply controlling for domestic slack and import prices does not seem to be a "sufficient
statistic" to capture these multifaceted ways in which the global economy affects price setting. For
example, the price of foreign goods and ability to shift production through supply chains may affect
pricing even if not incorporated in import prices, as foreign prices may act as a counterweight on
domestic pricing decisions even if goods are not traded. Measures of slack in the domestic economy
may not capture the expected evolution of slack in other major economies, expectations that could
affect firm price setting and therefore inflation. The price of imported oil may fluctuate due to
geopolitical events and provide little information about the changes in global demand or other input
costs relevant for firm pricing decisions.

            Several papers have drawn attention to the increased role of globalization on inflation
dynamics, using two very different approaches. This extensive literature is well summarized in Ha et al.
(2019). One approach estimates a global common factor or principal component for inflation in a set of
countries. Examples of this approach include: Hakkio (2009), Ciccarelli and Mojon (2010), and Neely and
Rapach (2011). These papers generally find a significant common global factor in inflation, but mixed
evidence on whether the role of the global factor has increased over time. The major shortcoming of
this approach, however, is that it does not identify what drives this common component in inflation
across countries. For example, it could reflect a greater role of common shocks (such as from more
volatile commodity prices), structural changes (such as increased trade or financial integration), or more
similar reaction functions in central banks. Each of these influences would have different implications for
forecasting inflation and inflation models.



17   For evidence on the role of increased employer bargaining power on wage growth, see Benmelech, Bergman and Kim (2017).

                                                                                                                        11
         The other approach for evaluating the role of globalization in inflation dynamics is to add a
variable to standard models to capture a specific aspect of globalization. For example, Borio and Filardo
(2007) suggests adding global slack and finds evidence that it has had a greater effect on inflation over
time, even supplementing domestic slack in some cases. This result is supported in some work, but
disputed in others. 18 Jordà and Nechio (2018) focus on how the 2008 financial crisis may have had global
effects on inflation dynamics in different countries for an extended period. Other papers, usually using
industry data, have focused on supply chains (such as Auer et al., 2016 and 2017). Analyses of UK
inflation suggest incorporating exchange rates and commodity prices in a Phillips curve framework
(Forbes, 2015) as well as in a trend-cycle model (Forbes et al., 2019). Ihrig et al. (2010) interacts key
terms with measures of openness to capture how globalization could change relationships between
different variables. Mikolajun and Lodge (2016) studies the role of globalization in a Phillips curve
framework and is similar to parts of Section IV below. 19

         Rather than focusing on one channel by which globalization could affect inflation, or one
framework, this paper takes a more comprehensive approach. It borrows from three methodologies to
assess different aspects of globalization and if their roles have changed in the last decade. While this
approach is broad, it is not inclusive and does not address a number of issues that could also influence
inflation dynamics--such as the increased commoditization of many goods, changes in market
concentration, or improved anchoring of inflation expectations. These topics are important, but have
received prominent attention elsewhere.




III.     First Look: The Global Principal Component of Different Inflation Measures

As an initial look at the role of global factors in inflation, this section estimates the global principal
component for inflation based on four price indices: the consumer price index (CPI), core CPI (excluding
food and energy prices), the producer price index (PPI), and private sector hourly earnings (wages). How
important is this global component to countries' inflation rates? Has its role changed over time?

         The original price indices for each series are from the OECD and IMF for as many countries as
available from 1990 through 2017, with more information in Appendix A. Each inflation measure is on a



 Ha et al. (2019) provides an excellent overview of the evidence for and against a role for global slack in Annex 3.1.
18

 Mikolajun and Lodge (2016) does not use the other modelling approaches (such as trend-cycle decomposition) or control for
19

GVCs, but adds a "global inflation" variable, which may capture other effects (such as from global pricing competition).

                                                                                                                        12
quarterly basis, annualized and seasonally adjusted. 20 There are up to 43 countries for each series, listed
in Appendix B and divided into advanced economies and emerging markets based on IMF definitions.
Data is more limited for some price series--especially for wages and early in the sample. Table 1 reports
the first principal component (and first five) for each inflation measure, for the full sample, and then
divided into advanced and emerging economies. 21 There is a noteworthy shared global component in
CPI and PPI inflation. More specifically, 40% of the variance in CPI inflation, and 52% for PPI inflation, are
explained by a single, common principal component for all countries in the sample. The role of this
shared principal component, however, is substantially smaller for core and wage inflation--where the
first principal component explains only about 21-26% of the inflation variation for the different samples.

         As discussed above, however, there have been significant changes in the global economy that
could affect inflation dynamics. To test if the role of this shared global component has changed over
time, Figure 1a graphs the first principal component for each inflation measure over 5-year windows
since 1990. The graph only includes advanced economies in order to have a more stable sample (as most
emerging markets only have data for the later years). While the global component of the PPI has been
large and relatively stable over the full period, there is a sharp divergence over time in the role of the
shared component for the other inflation measures. This global component of CPI inflation has
increased sharply over the sample period--more than doubling from 27% in the 1990-94 window to 57%
in the 2015-2017 window. In contrast, the shared global component of core inflation has steadily fallen,
from 43% at the start of the sample to 26% at the end--a pattern mirrored for wage inflation.

         One challenge with this principal component analysis, however, is that it does not provide
information on what drives these patterns across time and inflation measures. An increase in the
principal component could be caused by: larger common global shocks (i.e., greater commodity price
volatility), a greater sensitivity of countries to common global shocks (i.e., from greater trade or financial
integration), or tighter direct linkages between economies (i.e., through greater reliance on global
supply chains). An increase in the first principal component could also be explained by factors that are
not typically included as "globalization", such as more central banks adopting inflation targeting and
therefore sharing similar reaction functions. This paper will not be able to differentiate between all of



20 Seasonal adjustment is performed with the X-13ARIMA-SEATS program at: https://www.census.gov/srd/www/x13as/. Data
are also adjusted for well-known VAT increases that caused a one-quarter spike in inflation. The final inflation series is
winsorized at the 0.1% level for each tail to remove several periods of extreme inflation (largely in emerging markets).
21
   To ensure that differences across inflation measures are not driven by sample changes, the second section of the table
repeats the estimates for the smaller sample for which wage data is available.

                                                                                                                         13
these channels, but focuses on the more easily quantifiable measures of globalization discussed in
Section II.

            As a preliminary look at one factor that could be contributing to this increased comovement in
CPI inflation (and which is highlighted in the results below), Figure 1b adds the standard deviation of
commodity prices to the first principal components of CPI and core inflation. 22 Commodity price
volatility moves closely with the shared global component of CPI inflation--with an 89% correlation for
the advanced economies. This high correlation does not appear to be driven by oil prices, as the
correlation between oil price volatility and the first principal component of CPI inflation is only 8%. 23
This high correlation between CPI inflation and commodity prices could reflect greater volatility in
commodity prices, or a greater sensitivity of the CPI to this volatility (such as through shared responses
or technological change that increases sensitivity to global developments). It could also reflect omitted
factors that simultaneously affect the volatility of CPI inflation and commodity prices--such as global
slack and growth in global supply chains (both shown in Appendix Figure 1 and showing similar trends
over time). A more formal empirical analysis that can jointly control for these variables is necessary to
better identify the role of at least some of these different global factors.



IV.         The Role of Globalization in CPI Inflation
            A.        The Framework and Variables

            To better understand what is driving these different patterns, this section focuses on the most
common (albeit also regularly criticized and highly imperfect) framework for analyzing inflation: the
Phillips curve. It uses a hybrid version developed in Galí and Gertler (1999) and Galí and Lopez-Salido
(2005), which includes domestic slack, inflation expectations, and lagged inflation. This framework is
used frequently by central bankers (see Yellen, 2017 and Powell, 2018) and has become a standard
starting point for research on monetary policy (see Eberly et al., 2019 and Hooper et al., 2019). This
analysis compares: domestic versions of the model; standard extensions with controls for import or oil
prices; the "baseline" version for this paper with more comprehensive global controls; and an extension
that also allows the Phillips curve relationship with domestic slack to vary with a country's global
exposure.



22   Commodity prices are measured using the IMF's index of global commodity prices, including fuel.
23   Oil prices are measured using Datastream's index of Brent, crude spot world oil prices in US$.

                                                                                                             14
          More specifically, I begin with the standard New Keynesian Phillips curve for CPI inflation, which
includes inflation expectations in order to allow for forward-looking behavior: 24

                          = 1  + 2      
                                    + 3  +  + .                                                                             (1)

Variables are defined for each country i in quarter t as:

·       is quarterly CPI inflation, annualized and seasonally adjusted and described in Section III;
       
·       is inflation expectations, measured by the five-year ahead forecast for CPI inflation from the
       
       IMF's World Economic Outlook;
       
·       is lagged inflation over the previous four quarters (before quarter t);
       
·       is domestic slack, measured as a principal component of seven variables: the output gap,

       participation gap, and unemployment gap, and the percent deviation of hours worked, share of
       self-employed, share of involuntary part-time employed, and share of temporary employment
       from the relevant average over the sample. (More details below.)

The baseline model is estimated using fixed effects (with robust standard errors clustered by country) in
order to focus on the within-country relationships. The baseline model does not constrain the
coefficients on inflation expectations and lagged inflation to equal one, following recent work
supporting a more flexible framework (i.e., Jordà and Nechio, 2018 and McLeay and Tenreyro, 2019).
Sensitivity tests show the key results are robust to random effects and constraining the inflation
coefficients to equal one.

           Then I estimate the triangular variant (Gordon, 1977 and 2013) with supply shocks:

                = 1  + 2      
                          + 3  + 1  +  + .                                                                                  (2)

All variables are defined as in equation (1), except  , which is measured as quarterly inflation
in the country's import price index from the IMF, relative to quarterly CPI inflation. This variable is only
reported for a subset of countries in the sample. Therefore, to compare results with a consistent
                                                                   
sample, equation (2) is also estimated replacing world oil prices ( ) with import prices.
                                                                                          25




24 Although some papers only control for inflation expectations or lagged inflation (or use lagged inflation to proxy for inflation
expectations), controlling for both has become standard, such as in Blanchard et al. (2015), Eberly et al. (2019), Hooper et al.
(2019), Jordà and Nechio (2018), and McLeay and Tenreyro (2019). Albuquerque and Baumann (2017) derive a model showing
the importance of controlling for lagged inflation and inflation expectations simultaneously if some firms are forward-looking
and set prices to maximize profits, while others are backward-looking and set prices according to past values.
25 Also measured as quarterly inflation in the oil price index relative to quarterly CPI inflation. The oil price index is Datastream's

index of Brent, crude, spot world oil prices in US$.

                                                                                                                                    15
            Next, for the baseline specification, I add a more comprehensive set of global variables to this
standard domestic model to better control for changes in the global economy that could affect inflation:



      = 1  + 2                               
                + 3  + 1  + 2  + 3  + 4  + 5  +  +                                                                          (3)

 Definitions for each additional variable are:

          
·          is defined above;
          
          
·          is quarterly inflation in an index of world commodity prices (excluding fuel) from
          
          Datastream relative to quarterly CPI price inflation, lagged one quarter;
·          is the percent change in the trade-weighted, real effective exchange rate index based on
          consumer prices (from the IMF) relative to two years earlier 26;
·          is world slack, measured as a weighted combination of the output gap in advanced
          economies and China. (See discussion below.)
          
·          is global value chains, measured as a principal component of four variables: the relative
          growth in merchandise trade (to global GDP growth), the volume of intermediate trade, the
          complexity of intermediate trade, and the average change in the dispersion in PPI prices for all
          countries in the sample. (See discussion below.)

          Finally, I estimate an extension that allows the key Phillips curve relationship between domestic
slack and inflation to vary based on a country's exposure to the rest of the world.

              = 1  + 2                     
                        + 3 (   ) + 1  + 2  + 3  + 4 
                                                     



                                +5  +  +                                                                              (4)

Equation (4) is the same as equation (3), except  is interacted with the import share to GDP.
                                                                                              27



            Each of these specifications in (1) ­ (4) is estimated with the sample for which all the domestic
and global variables for the baseline in equation (3) are available. This yields a sample of 31 countries
from 1996 through 2017. Appendix A provides detail on definitions and sources, and Section IV. E.
examines robustness. The first three control variables (with coefficients denoted with a ) are the
"domestic" variables, and the last five, (with coefficients denoted with a ) are the "global" variables.




26   Relative to two years earlier due to the longer lags by which exchange rate movements pass-through to prices.
27   Results using different interactions between openness and slack (or other variables) are also discussed below.

                                                                                                                            16
Although the real exchange rate captures both domestic and global influences, it is usually not explicitly
included in Phillips curve regressions (only implicitly in measures of import prices in foreign currency).

         These variables are measured using standard conventions in this literature, with three
exceptions: domestic slack, world slack, and global value chains. 28 Beginning with domestic slack, papers
such as Albuquerque and Baumann (2017) and Hong et al. (2018) have convincingly demonstrated the
importance of measuring slack more broadly than simply the deviation of unemployment from a hard-
to-estimate NAIRU. This unemployment gap may not capture the "discouraged workers" who are no
longer recorded as looking for work, or people who are working part-time, fewer hours, or self-
employed, but would prefer to be working full-time and/or more hours at a company. Data on these
other aspects of slack, however, are not widely available on a comparable basis across countries.
Therefore, I follow the approach suggested by Albuquerque and Baumann (2017) for the United States
and estimate a principal component of labor market slack for each country, building on the set of cross-
country variables in Hong et al. (2018). More specifically, I calculate the principal component using
seven measures of slack. The first three are from the OECD: the output gap, unemployment gap, and
participation gap. I also include a calculated percent "gap" from the "normal" level (with "normal"
defined as the relevant mean for each country over the sample period) for four measures: hours worked
per person employed, the share of involuntary part-time workers, the share of temporary workers, and
the share of self-employed workers (with the last three as a share of total employed). 29 Many of these
variables are not available for all countries in the sample, in which case I calculate the principal
component using as many as are available for each country, ensuring that a consistent set of variables is
included throughout the sample period.

         Next, in order to measure slack in the global economy, I begin with a measure of the output gap
for advanced economies reported by the IMF in the World Economic Outlook Database. Corresponding
estimates of the output gap for other economies are not reported, and the principal components for
domestic slack calculated for this paper do not include data on most major emerging and developing
economies (including China). Therefore, as a proxy for slack outside the advanced economies, I estimate
slack in China based on the deviation in its GDP growth from recent averages. 30 "World slack" is then



28 Many of the variables used to create the measures of slack (domestic and global) and global value chains are only available
annually, so they are interpolated to quarterly frequency.
29 The hours data is from the OECD and involuntary workers, temporary workers, and self-employed were all shared by Hong et

al. (2018). Many are only available annually and are interpolated to quarterly to calculate the principal component.
30 The difference between average GDP growth in China over the previous two years less GDP growth in the current quarter.



                                                                                                                           17
estimated as the weighted average of slack in advanced economies and non-advanced economies
(proxied by slack in China), with weights varying over time based on IMF estimates of the advanced
economy share of world GDP. The resulting measure of world slack is shown in Appendix Figure 1a,
along with the IMF's measure of slack in advanced economies and the OECD's measure of slack in OECD
economies. 31 The different series largely move together, but the constructed measure of world slack
used in this paper shows more slack during the GFC, and a faster reduction after the crisis, as expected
given the faster recovery in the emerging markets that are not included in the IMF and OECD measures.

          The final variable meriting further explanation is global value chains (GVCs). A range of different
statistics on GVCs are available, but many show very different trends over time and are only available for
fairly short periods. Therefore, I calculate a principal component of four different statistics. The first
three are: the relative growth of merchandise trade volumes relative to global GDP; traded intermediate
goods as a share of global GDP; and the share of these traded intermediate goods that are "complex" in
the sense that they cross country borders at least twice. All three measures are from Li, Meng and Wang
(2019). 32 The fourth variable in the principal component is the dispersion of PPI inflation across the
countries in the sample for which data is available. 33 This measure is used in Auer, Levchenko and Sauré
(2016) and Wei and Xie (2018) to capture how global supply chains have affected PPI indices by
increasing the synchronization of producer prices across countries. Appendix Figure 1b graphs the
resulting measure of global value chains, with the principal component suggesting that the role of global
value chains increased quickly during the 2000s, collapsed during the 2008 crisis, largely recovered from
2009-2011, and then was fairly stable before declining slightly at the end of the sample.

          B. CPI Inflation, Domestic and Global Variables: First Tests with Fixed Coefficient Estimates

          Table 2 reports results for the different variants of equations (1) ­ (4) for CPI inflation, using
fixed effects with robust standard errors clustered by country over the full period (from 1996-2017).
These estimates assume that the relationships between CPI inflation and the explanatory variables are
stable over time (an assumption revisited below). Columns (2) and (3) report variants augmented for
supply shocks--with either import or oil prices. The more limited data on import prices reduces the
sample by about half, but the other coefficient estimates are very similar when oil prices are used to
expand the sample. Column (4) includes the full set of global variables, and then column (5) interacts


31 The IMF and OECD measures are both of the output gap, which I convert to "slack" by reversing the sign.
32 These measures were kindly shared by Zhi Wang from Li, Meng and Wang (2019).
33 Measured as the standard deviation in quarterly PPI inflation, with inflation relative to 4Q earlier to avoid seasonal issues.



                                                                                                                                    18
domestic slack with the import share. Columns (6)-(8) use several different specifications for the
baseline in column (4). Column 6 drops inflation expectations and only includes lagged inflation (which
often proxies for inflation expectations, as in Ball and Mazumder, 2011 and Gordon, 2013). Columns 7
and 8 use random effects (instead of fixed effects), with column 8 constraining the sum of the
coefficients on inflation expectations and lagged inflation to equal one.

          In each specification in Table 2 the domestic variables central to the Phillips curve model have
the expected sign and are significant over the full period. Higher CPI inflation is associated with higher
inflation expectations, higher lagged inflation, and less domestic slack. The estimated coefficients on
import prices and oil prices also have the expected positive signs (although the coefficient on import
prices fluctuates in significance). In the specifications with the full set of global variables in columns (4) ­
(8), each of the global variables also has the expected sign and are usually significant at the 1% level.
More specifically, higher CPI inflation is associated with higher oil prices, higher commodity prices,
larger exchange rate depreciations, lower levels of global slack and weaker global value chains. The
magnitudes of the coefficient estimates on the global variables are also fairly stable across specifications
(with the only exception the coefficient on global value chains). This suggests that augmenting the
standard Phillips curve model with more comprehensive controls for global factors could improve our
ability to explain CPI inflation dynamics. 34

          The magnitudes of the estimated coefficients also provide a sense of which variables have a
more meaningful impact on inflation in this cross-section of countries. For example, focusing on the
baseline results in column 4, the 0.654 coefficient on inflation expectations implies that a 1 percentage
point (pp) increase in five-year ahead inflation expectations (i.e., from 2% to 3%) is associated with an
increase in annual CPI inflation of 0.65pp. A 10% increase in oil or commodity prices in one quarter is
associated with an increase in CPI inflation of about 0.30pp. A 10% depreciation of the real exchange
rate relative to two years ago corresponds to an increase in CPI inflation of 0.29pp per quarter--which if
accumulated over 8 quarters would imply an increase in the level of the CPI of about 2.3pp after two
years. The coefficients on the different measures of slack are more difficult to interpret given the
construction of the underlying variables, but a concrete example helps put them in context. A reduction
in domestic slack by 1 percent of GDP (equivalent to the reduction in US slack from 2015q3 to 2017q4) 35
is associated with inflation 0.09pp higher in each year. Similarly, a decrease in world slack by 1 percent

34 The higher R2 in column (2) relative to columns (3) or (4) reflects the more limited sample size. With a consistent sample, the
R2 is similar when either oil or import prices are included, and increases with the full set of global variables.
35 To further put this in context, this measure of domestic slack increased by 5.05 in the US from 2008q1 through 2009q4.



                                                                                                                                19
of global GDP (which occurred from 2014q2 to 2017q4) 36 is associated with inflation higher by 0.15pp.
These estimates agree with other work suggesting that the relationship between slack and inflation is
very "flat", but also suggests that world slack, and not just domestic slack, my affect CPI inflation.

          It is also worth noting that the coefficient on domestic slack remains highly significant and
increases in column (5) when domestic slack is interacted with the country's import share, supporting
the hypothesis that globalization contributes to a flattening of the key Phillips curve relationship
between domestic slack and inflation. 37 To put these estimates in context, consider a country with the
mean import share in this sample of 41%. Combining this import share with the estimated 3 implies
that the corresponding "Phillips curve" slope for just domestic slack is -0.56. If the country's import
share was one standard deviation higher (rising to 58%), the corresponding Phillips curve coefficient falls
to -0.40. This supports the hypothesis that more globalization (at least in the form of more imports to
GDP) corresponds to a weaker relationship between domestic slack and inflation (as in Cravino, 2019).

          These results in columns 1 through 6 capture the relationship between inflation and the other
variables within countries over time. Even though these are country fixed effects, using the pooled
sample of countries is an important advantage of this paper as it helps identify the different variables.
The results when estimated for individual countries, however, are more often insignificant and can vary
widely, often reflecting country characteristics and different forms of exposure to the global economy. 38
For example, consider two very different European nations: Germany and Iceland. World slack is
negatively and significantly associated with CPI inflation for Germany, but not Iceland. Exchange rate
movements are significantly associated with CPI inflation for Iceland--but not for Germany. Better
understanding these different sensitivities of inflation to global factors in different countries is an
important topic for research, 39 and could be one reason why studies which focus on individual countries
or smaller samples can find contradicting results (such as for global slack); the composition of countries
in the sample can significantly affect results (as well as other differences in methodology, time periods,
and specification).



36 To further put this in context, this measure of world slack increased by 4.65 from 2008q1 through 2009q4.
37 I have also estimated several variants of this interaction. First, when domestic slack is interacted with trade openness
(exports plus imports relative to GDP) the 3 remains significant and increases, but to a smaller extent (to -0.108 for column 5).
Second, when an interaction between domestic slack and the import share is added to equation (3) (as suggested in Ihrig et al.,
2010), the interaction term is usually negative and significant, but the coefficient on domestic slack is insignificant. Third, when
domestic slack is interacted with global value chains, the interaction term is often insignificant. Finally, when all the global
variables are interacted with trade openness, most coefficients become insignificant and many have counterintuitive signs.
38 See Forbes (2018, 2019) for results for individual countries of Phillips curve models.
39 This is beyond the scope of this paper, but see Ha et al. (2019).



                                                                                                                                 20
          C.        CPI Inflation, Domestic and Global Variables: Have the Relationships Changed?

          The role of different variables in the Phillips curve framework could vary not only across
countries, but also over time. 40 This could occur due to the changes in the global economy discussed in
Section II, as well as due to many other factors--such as changes in domestic labor markets or the
credibility of central banks. To test if the role of the domestic and global variables in these Phillips-curve
based regressions have changed, I re-estimate the basic Phillips curve models in equations (1) ­ (4) for a
"pre-crisis" window (from 1996-2007) and over the "last decade" (from 2008-2017). 41

          Table 3 reports results. Beginning with the domestic variables, inflation expectations and lagged
inflation both continue to be positively associated with inflation in both periods. 42 Domestic slack
continues to be negatively associated with CPI inflation, and although this relationship is significant in
both periods, it becomes weaker over the last decade. More specifically, the magnitude of this "Phillips
curve" association between domestic slack and CPI inflation falls by about 20% -45% across periods for
the specifications in columns (1)-(4). The estimates in column 5, when domestic slack is interacted with
the import share, however, provide information on whether this apparent flattening of the Phillips curve
reflects a higher import share or a weaker underlying relationship between slack and inflation (after
controlling for this form of globalization). The magnitude of the coefficient on this interaction term
declines over the last period by a large 58%, but when the coefficient is evaluated using the mean
import share in each period, the underlying Phillips curve elasticity between just domestic slack and CPI
inflation only falls by 10%. 43 This suggests that globalization has caused much--but not all--of the
flattening of the Phillips curve for CPI inflation, and that this key Phillips curve relationship is not
"dead"--especially after controlling for globalization.

          The global variables are also independently important in both windows, and more tightly linked
to CPI inflation over the last decade. More specifically, higher oil prices, higher commodity prices,
exchange rate depreciations, less world slack, and weaker global value chains all correspond to higher
inflation in both periods. The magnitudes of the coefficients on most of the global variables also increase
(in absolute value) over the last decade. All the global coefficients are significant, except on commodity


40 For evidence, see Albuquerque and Baumann (2017), Blanchard et al. (2015), IMF (2016), and Mikolajun and Lodge (2016).
41 The sensitivity analysis shows that excluding the period around the GFC has minimal impact on the key results.
42 The coefficient on inflation expectations is insignificant over the last decade, reflecting the lack of variation in most countries.

When estimated using random effects, the coefficient on inflation expectations is consistently positive and significant.
43 The mean import share for the pre-crisis sample is 39%, and for the last decade is 43%. This suggests that the elasticity

between domestic slack and CPI inflation (after controlling for the import share) is -1.05 in the earlier window and -0.95 in the
later period.

                                                                                                                                    21
prices, which are only significant over the last decade. The result that this coefficient is insignificant in
the pre-crisis window, and becomes highly significant (and much larger in magnitude) in the post crisis
window is robust across different specifications (see Section E). This higher elasticity between
commodity prices and CPI inflation implies that a given movement in commodity prices had a greater
effect on CPI inflation over the last decade. Section III (and Figure 1b), however, also showed that
commodity price volatility has increased over time and closely mirrors the increased comovement of CPI
inflation rates around the world. This combination of results would be consistent with standard models
with menu costs and sticky-prices, in which firms adjust prices more quickly in response to larger cost
shocks (i.e. Hamilton, 2010 or Ball and Mankiw, 1995).

          Finally, F-tests of the joint significance of the five global variables (bottom of Table 3) suggest
the global variables are jointly highly significant in both periods. The value of this F-statistic, however,
roughly doubles in the more recent period. Part of this increase captures the greater role of commodity
prices, but an F-test of the four other global variables (excluding commodity prices) is still highly
significant (at 30.1 in the last decade for column 4), suggesting that the importance of the global
variables does not just reflect the impact of commodity prices. Also, including the global variables leads
to a meaningful improvement in the explanatory power of the regressions in the last decade. More
specifically, in the baseline specification in column 4, adding the global variables increases the R2 by only
0.05 in the pre-crisis window, but by 0.17 over the last decade (relative to the corresponding estimates
with just the domestic variables in column 1). 44 Controlling for commodity prices is about two-thirds of
this improvement in the R2 over the last decade--although given the high correlation between
commodity prices and other global developments (such as slack/growth in emerging markets), it is hard
to isolate this effect. 45 This series of results supports the hypothesis that global developments are more
important for understanding inflation dynamics over the last decade than before the GFC, and that
commodity prices are an important part of this, but not the full story.

          D.        How much do Global Variables Improve our Understanding of CPI Inflation Dynamics?

          But can the global variables meaningfully improve our ability to understand inflation dynamics--
especially some of the puzzles over the last decade? And does the greater role of the global variables
simply reflect extreme movements in certain variables and/or during certain years (such as in

44 No single global variable accounts for the majority of the improved fit in the last decade, and many of the global variables are
correlated, so simply adding one variable at a time to equation (1) could bias estimates.
45 Estimating the regression with the domestic variables and only commodity prices for the global variables improves the

within-R2 from 0.25 to 0.33 in the last decade, compared to 0.42 with the full set of global variables.

                                                                                                                                22
commodity prices and/or during the GFC)? To better understand the evolving relationship between
globalization and inflation, I next calculate rolling regressions for CPI inflation over eight-year windows
with three model variants: with just the domestic variables (equation 1), the "triangle" model with
import prices (equation 2), and the full set of domestic and global variables (equation 3). The regression
windows are rolled forward one quarter at a time so that the number of observations remains constant,
and in order to maintain a consistent sample across models, I only include observations with the more
limited data on import prices. Many of coefficient estimates fluctuate sharply, suggesting that the role
of these different variables can also change over time.

         Figure 2a graphs the resulting "error" between actual inflation and inflation explained using the
rolling estimates. The "error" is calculated as the median absolute value of the deviations of actual from
predicted inflation for each country in each quarter, so that a lower value indicates a better model fit
(and estimates that are too high or low are equal misses). The graph shows the superior performance of
the model with the global variables (in red) relative to that with only the domestic variables (in grey) and
with the domestic variables plus import prices (dashed black). Although the errors are similar in some
quarters, especially in the first part of the sample, the errors are meaningfully smaller in the global
model during most quarters over the last decade. The biggest improvements are during the GFC--when
the errors of the domestic models spike--but there are also noteworthy improvements from including
the global variables over much of the window from 2011-2015.

         Figure 2b attempts to better quantify this visual improvement in the global model's
performance. It graphs the same "errors" in predicted inflation for the same three models, averaged
over the full period, pre-crisis window and last decade. Over the pre-crisis window, the median absolute
error is 0.90pp for the model with just the domestic variables, and falls to only 0.82pp with the addition
of the five global variables. In contrast, over the last decade, the median error jumps to 1.11pp for the
model with just the domestic variables, but falls more meaningfully to 0.77pp with the addition of the
global variables. (Including just import prices instead of the full set of global variables only yields a minor
improvement, with the median error falling to 1.05pp.) The improvement is also meaningful when
assessed relative to median inflation rates--with the reduction in errors from adding the global
variables equal to 12% of median inflation over the last decade (and 5% in the pre-crisis window). 46




46Calculated as the reduction in median errors from adding the global variables relative to median inflation in that window. For
example, over the last decade median inflation was 2.87%, so the corresponding calculation is: (1.11-0.77)/2.87=12%.

                                                                                                                             23
            These results confirm that Phillips curve models were less successful at explaining inflation over
the last decade if they only included domestic variables or limited global controls. They also show,
however, that adding more comprehensive controls for global factors can reduce the model's errors
over the last decade such that the overall explanatory power slightly improves--instead of deteriorating
(relative to pre-crisis performance). But how much of this improvement over the last decade occurs
during the GFC--when the global model outperforms the other variants by the largest margins in Figure
2a? To test this, Figure 2c breaks down the median errors over the last decade into three periods:
around the crisis (2008-2010) and then from 2011-2014 and 2015-2017 (for comparison with Figure 1). 47
Including the global variables generates a particularly large improvement in the model's fit during the
crisis window (reducing the errors from 1.51pp to 0.90pp), but continues to meaningfully reduce the
errors outside the crisis window (from 1.07pp to 0.82pp over 2010-14 and 0.84pp to 0.68pp over 2015-
17). When these improvements are assessed relative to median inflation rates for each window, they
correspond to an improvement of 27% during the crisis window, 17% over 2011-14, and 18% over 2015-
2017 (when median inflation was only 0.86%).

            How much of this improved fit from including the five global variables over the last decade
reflects the influence of commodity prices? Commodity price volatility has increased sharply (Section III
and Figure 1b) and the elasticity of a changes in commodity prices to CPI inflation has increased over the
last decade (Section IV. C). Both of these changes could cause commodity prices to explain a larger share
of the variation in CPI inflation. To test if the increased role of the global factors is primarily capturing
the effects of commodity prices, I reestimate the rolling regressions for CPI inflation using two variants:
only include commodity prices as a global variable, or include all four global variables except commodity
prices. Figure 2d shows the resulting median errors. Including commodity prices improves the model fit
from that with just the domestic variables, but only yields part of the error reduction compared to for
the full set of global variables. Including the other four global variables (but not commodity prices),
yields a larger improvement in each window. This further supports the hypothesis that a more
comprehensive treatment of global variables is important--and the key changes in the global economy
cannot be captured with single measure (including just commodity prices).

            As a final test, and to better understand the role of these global variables to inflation puzzles
over the last decade, Figure 3 shows the impact of each of the global variables and domestic slack on US
CPI inflation from combining the coefficient estimates from the full global model (used for Figure 2) and

47   Breaking out results for the earlier 5-year windows in Figure 1 show errors similar to the pre-crisis window.

                                                                                                                     24
US data. The global variables have had a meaningful effect on US inflation over some windows. In the
period immediately after the peak of the GFC, when US inflation was higher than expected, oil prices,
commodity prices, and the dollar's depreciation all contributed to higher inflation. In contrast, over the
window from 2012-2016, global variables such as dollar appreciation, the increased use of global value
chains, high levels of world slack, and periods of lower oil and commodity process, all contributed to
keeping CPI inflation lower than would have been expected given the decline in US slack. The
magnitudes shown in the chart suggest that the contribution of the global factors changes over time,
and that although the contributions of individual global variables can be small, their combined effect can
be larger than that of domestic slack. The global variables can be important for understanding inflation
dynamics, even in a large economy such as the US that is relatively less exposed to the global economy.




            E.        CPI Inflation, Domestic and Global Variables: Sensitivity Tests
            The key results that the global variables have played a more important role, and domestic slack
a weaker (but still significant) role, in explaining CPI inflation over the last decade are based on
estimates that required making a number of choices about specification, variable definitions, and timing
conventions. Therefore, the remainder of this section summarizes a series of sensitivity tests exploring if
these key results are robust. It focuses on the baseline equation (3), which uses the full set of domestic
and global variables and compares the pre-crisis period to the last decade, and performs over twenty
sensitivity tests which can be roughly categorized into three groups:

(1)       Different variable definitions: Several papers have highlighted the challenges in measuring the
          output gap (or slack) and global value chains, 48 so I try several different measures. To measure
          domestic slack, instead of using a principal component drawing information from up to seven
          different variables, I simply use the "unemployment gap" (the difference between unemployment
          and NAIRU, reported by the OECD) or a simpler principal component which draws information
          from only three variables--the unemployment gap, output gap, and participation gap (all from the
          OECD and more consistently available across countries than the larger set of variables). I also
          interact domestic slack with the variable for global value chains or the country's trade openness
          (measured as total trade to GDP). Then, instead of using a constructed measure for world slack
          which incorporates growth in China, I use the IMF measure of global slack (which only includes



48   See Albuquerque and Baumann (2017), Hong et al. (2018), and discussion in Section IV.A.

                                                                                                              25
        advanced economies) or the OECD measure of global slack (which only includes OECD members).
        Finally, instead of using the principal component of several measures to capture the role of global
        value chains, I use the ratio of traded intermediate goods to GDP or growth in exports from China
        (over the last four quarters).

(2)     Different time periods and country samples: The analysis above highlights how the relationships
        can change over time, especially during the GFC. Therefore, I re-estimate the model, except
        exclude just 2008, or exclude 2008-2009. Also, although the sample only includes a few emerging
        markets due to data availability, I reestimate the model using only advanced economies. 49

(3)     Different specifications: There is some evidence that the relationship between domestic slack and
        inflation is non-linear, so I try three variants proposed in Hooper et al. (2019): a "spline" model
        (which allows the slope of the Phillips curve to vary when labor markets are tight by adding a
        dummy variable when slack is negative); a "cubic" model (which includes squared and cubed
        slack); and a "piecewise quadratic" model (which allows for non-linearity in countries with less
        slack by including slack squared when slack is negative). 50 Next, I include the restriction that the
        sum of the coefficients on inflation expectations and lagged inflation equal one, or exclude
        inflation expectations and assume that lagged inflation can proxy for inflation expectations (as in
        Ball and Mazumder, 2011 and Gordon, 2013), or use random effects. I also try different
        combinations of the global variables, such as only including one control for commodity prices
        (including oil and commodity prices together), or only including world slack. Finally, I experiment
        with different lag structures and timing conventions for key variables--such as focusing on annual
        changes in oil and commodity prices (instead of quarterly), or different lengths of time for the
        pass-through from exchange rate movements to inflation. 51

          Appendix Table 1 reports a selection of these sensitivity tests, including those that have received
the most attention in other papers or that vary meaningfully from the baseline. Most of the key results
discussed above are robust to these changes, and most of these modifications do not improve the
model fit, but a few changes are worth noting. In some cases the different variable definitions and
specifications matter. For example, when domestic slack is measured with the less comprehensive


49The  sample of emerging markets is so limited that results for this group are not robust to minor changes in specification.
50 For more details on these specifications, see Hooper et al. (2019). Also see Gagnon and Collins (2019) for evidence of
nonlinearity.
51 Forbes, Hjortsoe and Nenova (2017 and 2018) discusses the challenges in measuring the duration of pass-through from

exchange rate movements to inflation.

                                                                                                                                26
measure (just the unemployment gap instead of a principal component, in Column 1), it is less often
significant (as in Hong et al., 2018). Similarly, using a narrower measure of world slack that does not
include slack in emerging markets (column 2) reduces the magnitude of the coefficient on world slack
meaningfully over the last decade. Using different measures for global value chains can affect its sign
and significance. The non-linear specifications for domestic slack also yield mixed results for the
coefficients on slack--with significance varying based on exactly where thresholds are set and which
non-linear specification is used--but generally has no effect on the other key variables.

         These modifications to the baseline specification suggest that the key results highlighted above
are robust to a wide range of definitions, samples, and specifications. More specifically, higher inflation
is associated with higher lagged inflation in both periods, and with less domestic slack. The Phillips curve
relationship between CPI inflation and domestic slack appears to have weakened and often becomes
insignificant if the 2008-2009 crisis is excluded. This "flattening" persists even when the full set of global
controls is included, or when domestic slack is interacted with different measures of openness, although
much of this flattening reflects greater import exposure. 52 Global variables are consistently significant in
both periods, except global commodity prices, which are only consistently significant over the last
decade. An F-test of the joint significance of the global variables (at the bottom of the table) indicates
that the global variables are jointly significant in all the specifications. This joint significance is not just a
crisis-related effect, as the global variables are each still significant over the last decade when 2008 (or
2008-2010) are excluded from the sample (column 4).

         F.        CPI Inflation: Summary of Phillips Curve Analysis

         To summarize, this section finds that the Phillips curve relationship between domestic slack and
CPI inflation has flattened (but is not "dead"), and a meaningful share of this flattening reflects
increased import exposure. Global variables are also independently important in explaining CPI inflation,
suggesting that a component of inflation is "determined abroad", particularly during the last decade.
Greater volatility in commodity prices, combined with a greater impact of commodity prices on CPI
inflation, are part of the reason for this increased role of global factors. This may reflect a greater role of
commodity prices, or could capture shifts in global demand, especially changes in the growth outlook for
emerging markets that are closely linked to commodity demand. But commodity prices are not the full


52When domestic slack is interacted with openness, the coefficient is still negative and significant and becomes smaller in
absolute value during the last decade; when domestic slack is interacted with GVCs the coefficient is insignificant in both
windows.

                                                                                                                              27
 story. The results also suggest that world slack, oil prices, exchange rate movements, and global value
 chains all play a role, and that over the last decade it has become even more important to include a
 broad set of controls for globalization to understand CPI inflation dynamics.




V.       An Alternate Framework to Test for The Role of Globalization: Trend-Cycle Analysis

 Although the Phillips curve relationship between slack and inflation is central to most frameworks for
 thinking about inflation, and models such as equations (1) and (2) are frequently used by policymakers
 and academics, this framework has a number of shortcomings. As shown above, parameter instability
 could limit their ability to explain inflation dynamics in real time and forecast inflation. As also
 highlighted in McLeay and Tenreyro (2019) and Jordà and Nechio (2018), if monetary policy is
 endogenous to expected inflation, this could weaken the relationship between inflation and other
 variables expected to impact inflation (such as domestic slack). Other frameworks can therefore be a
 useful compliment. One such framework is a "trend-cycle" approach, which separates inflation into a
 slow-moving, persistent trend and a temporary cyclical component. This section uses this approach to
 analyze CPI inflation, evaluate the role of the same domestic and global factors, and test if their role has
 changed over time.

         A.       The Trend-Cycle Model

         Although the majority of work analyzing and forecasting inflation has focused on structural
 relationships grounded in the Phillips curve framework, Stock and Watson (2007) provides an alternate,
 data-driven and more atheoretical approach. It proposes focusing on the time-series dynamics of price
 levels to isolate a low frequency and slow-moving component of inflation (the "trend") from deviations
 around this trend (what I call the "cycle"). Stock and Watson (2007) develops this framework in an
 unobserved component stochastic volatility (UCSV) model, which inspired a series of papers. Most of
 these papers have focused on inflation dynamics in the U.S. (such as Stock and Watson, 2010, Chan et
 al., 2013, and Cecchetti et al., 2017), while Cecchetti et al. (2007) applies the UCSV model to the G-7
 countries, and Forbes et al. (2019) builds on these models to analyze inflation dynamics in the U.K.

         This section applies the trend-cycle model developed in Forbes et al. (2019) to the larger sample
 of developed and emerging markets used in this paper. This model is grounded in the UCSV model
 developed by Stock and Watson (2007), but also allows deviations in trend inflation to follow an
 autoregressive process (as in the ARUC model developed in Chan et al., 2013), with minimal other

                                                                                                           28
assumptions. This resulting "ARSV" model used below (and discussed in detail in Forbes et al., 2019 and
Forbes, 2019) can make it more difficult to achieve convergence, but better captures the inflation
dynamics in this paper's more diverse sample of countries (as compared to the US example for which
the original UCSV model was developed).

            This framework can be used to estimate trend inflation (t) for CPI and core inflation for each of
the countries in the sample, using the quarterly, annualized, seasonally-adjusted inflation data from
1990 through 2017 discussed in Section III and Appendix A. 53 The resulting estimates of trend inflation
are then subtracted from CPI and core inflation to back out the "cyclical" component of inflation for
each country, with key statistics reported in Appendix Table 2.54 Columns 1 and 2 report the average
distance from the 15th to the 85th percentiles of the estimated trends and suggest there is some
imprecision in the estimates (with an average distance of 0.95 and 0.71 for CPI and core inflation,
respectively). Columns 3 through 6 show that the median variances of the trends are substantially lower
than for the cyclical components, consistent with the trend as a slow-moving and more stable
component. Columns 7 and 8 report the percent of the variation in inflation for each country explained
by the trend. 55 Over the full sample period, the trend explains 31% of the variation in CPI inflation and
55% in core inflation. This suggests that most of the volatility in CPI inflation in advanced economies is
driven by short-term cyclical movements (albeit the volatility in the trend still plays a meaningful role),
while volatility in core inflation is driven by roughly equal contributions from the cyclical and trend
components. Also noteworthy are changes over the two periods, with the variance in the trend falling
over last decade, while the variance in the cyclical component of CPI inflation (but not core), increases in
the later period. This would be consistent with greater volatility in commodity prices over the last
decade. At the same time, however, the role of the slow-moving trend has increased over the last
decade--for both CPI and core inflation.

            B.       The Cyclical Component of CPI Inflation: The Role of Domestic and Global Variables

What is the relative importance of the domestic and global variables in this framework? Has their role
changed over time? To answer these questions and facilitate a comparison with earlier parts of this


53 The first 12 observations for each country are used to calibrate the prior information, resulting in a trend inflation from 1993
through 2017 for most advanced economies (but limited coverage of emerging markets). Estimates are the (pointwise) median
of 1000 draws. If the algorithm did not converge within five hours, the estimation was terminated.
54 Most emerging markets do not have sufficient data to calculate the trend for the longer periods for this table, and for the few

which do, all have periods of very high inflation which skew estimates. See Forbes (2018 and 2019) for estimates by country.
                         ( -  )2
55   Calculated as: =1
                                   .
                   =1    ( -  )2


                                                                                                                                29
paper, this section focuses on the same domestic and global variables as in the Phillips curve analysis in
Section IV. To assess the ability of these variables and the slow-moving trend to explain the cyclical
component of inflation, I estimate the following fixed-effects model for the full sample from 1993
through 2017:

                     =  +  + 7
                             =1   +   .                                                                       (5)

The it is CPI inflation for country i in quarter t (seasonally-adjusted and annualized),  is the slow
moving trend (estimated in Section V.A.), and the Xit are k additional variables that could help explain
the cyclical movements in inflation around this trend. Following the format in Section IV, the variables in
Xit begin with just domestic variables (inflation expectations and domestic slack), then add a control for
oil prices (to focus on a consistent sample) 56, then the full set of five global variables (world oil prices,
world commodity prices, the country's real exchange rate, world slack, and global value chains), and
then extend this with an interaction of domestic slack with the import share. 57 Each variable in Xkit is
defined as in the last section, with details in Appendix A.

          Columns (1)-(4) of Table 4 report results for the full sample period. The coefficients on the trend
are highly significant, showing an important role for the trend in CPI inflation (which is not surprising
given that the trend is a function of the inflation data). The other variables have the expected sign, and
all except the exchange rate are significant in the baseline. As noted above, however, the relationships
with inflation could change over time. To test this, Table 4 also reports results for the pre-crisis period
and last decade. The coefficient on trend inflation increases by about 1/3 in the last decade in the
baseline.

          A comparison of the other estimates for the two different windows yields similar conclusions as
for the Phillips curve results in Table 3. CPI inflation is associated with less domestic slack, and this
relationship is meaningfully weaker over the last decade, although slack continues to be significant.
When domestic slack is interacted with the import share, the underlying Phillips curve relationship
between just domestic slack and cyclical inflation still declines, although by less, and the decline is still
meaningful even after adjusting for changes in the import share. 58 The global variables usually have the
expected sign, and are often (but not always) significant. Higher oil prices and less world slack are


56 Substituting import prices does not change any of the key results, but shrinks the sample by more than half.
57 Lagged inflation is not included due to its high collinearity with the trend.
58 More specifically, after adjusting for the increase in the import share from 38% to 42% across the two periods in this sample,

the underlying Phillips curve coefficient evaluated at the sample means declines by 16%.

                                                                                                                               30
significantly correlated with higher CPI inflation in both periods, and higher commodity prices are only
significant in the later period. Real exchange rate depreciations are not significantly correlated with this
component of CPI inflation--although any such effects may now be captured by the slow-moving trend
since the pass-through effects of exchange rates on inflation tend to be prolonged. Global value chains
are also usually not significant at the 5% level.

          The bottom of Table 4 provides final evidence on the role of the global variables for the cyclical
component of CPI inflation, and how their role has changed. F-tests suggest that the global variables are
jointly significant in the pre-crisis period, but add minimal explanatory power. In the last decade,
however, the F-statistics of the joint significance of the global variables are much larger, and adding the
global variables increases the R2 by about three times more. As also found for CPI inflation, the
explanatory power of the domestic models falls over the last decade, but including the full set of global
variables can improve the model's fit to around pre-crisis levels (at least as assessed by the R2). Also,
once again, much of this improvement--but not all--comes from including world commodity prices. 59
This supports the conclusion in the last section that more comprehensive controls for global variables
have become more important for understanding inflation dynamics in the last decade, and that
commodity prices are part, but not all, of the story. A series of the same sensitivity tests reported in the
last section supports each of these conclusions.




VI.       The Role of Globalization in Core Inflation, Wage Growth, and the Trend

Over the last decade, CPI inflation and the cyclical component of CPI inflation have had a weaker
relationship with domestic slack (partly explained by increased import exposure) and a stronger
relationship with global variables--especially commodity prices. Do these patterns apply to other
measures of inflation--such as core CPI, wages and the slow-moving trend--all of which might be more
tightly linked to domestic developments and less sensitive to global factors?

      A. Core and Wage Inflation: The Role of Domestic and Global Variables

To begin, I return to the Phillips-curve model discussed in Section IV, and repeat the analysis for core CPI
and wage inflation (defined in Appendix A), measured quarterly, seasonally-adjusted and annualized. I
continue to report four specifications for each inflation measure: with only domestic variables, adding

59When commodity prices are dropped from the set of global variables, the F-statistic from a joint test of the global variables is
52.5 and the R2 is almost unchanged at 0.47 for the period covering the last decade.

                                                                                                                               31
import (or oil) prices, adding the full set of global controls (the baseline) and an extension that interacts
domestic slack with the import share. I make three changes from equations (1)-(4) to more closely
follow the literature: (1) instead of including oil and commodity (ex-fuel) prices separately, I just include
one broader commodity price index; 60 (2) drop real exchange rate movements in the model of wage
growth (which would capture Balassa-Samuelson effects); and (3) add a control for productivity growth
to some models of wage growth.

          Table 5 reports results for core inflation over the full period, the pre-crisis window (1996-2007)
and last decade (2008-2017). Some of the results are similar to those for CPI inflation. Higher core
inflation is positively correlated with higher inflation expectations (which is more consistently significant
across windows), higher lagged inflation, and less domestic slack, and the elasticity with domestic slack
has weakened in the last decade. Results when slack is interacted with the import share, however,
suggest that most of this flattening reflects a weaker underlying relationship between domestic slack
and core inflation, even after controlling for the import share. 61 Adding the global variables has less
impact, and they are less often significant. Commodity prices continue to be positively and significantly
associated with inflation in the last decade, but not the pre-crisis window, and the magnitude of the
estimated effect is more muted (about half that for CPI inflation). The other global variables are usually
insignificant over the last decade (with the significance of exchange rates and world slack fluctuating
across specifications). Not surprisingly, adding the global variables leads to a much more muted
improvement in the explanatory power of the regression in all the windows. 62 More specifically, even
though an F-test suggests that the global variables are jointly significant in each period, adding the
global variables only improves the R2 by 0.01 for the full sample and by 0.02 for the last decade
(compared to 0.07 and 0.17, respectively, for CPI inflation).

          To check the robustness of these results, I repeat the same series of over 20 sensitivity tests
reported for the CPI regressions in Section IV.D. A sample of estimates are in Appendix Table 3. The
results highlighted above are robust; the association between core inflation and domestic slack is still
usually significant, but has weakened over the last decade, and increased import exposure only plays a



60 If oil prices are included separately (as in the CPI regressions), the coefficient is usually insignificant. I lag the broader
measure of commodity prices by one period to allow for slower pass-through to core and wage inflation.
61 More specifically, when the coefficient on domestic slack is adjusted for the increase in the mean import share across periods

(from 39% to 43%), this still implies a decline in the underlying Phillips curve coefficient of about 39%.
62 The significance of the coefficient on world slack fluctuates based on what other variables are included and the specification.

For example, when domestic slack is measured using the non-linear specifications, or if domestic slack is interacted with GVCs
or trade openness, the coefficient on world slack often becomes significant.

                                                                                                                               32
minor role in explaining this "flattening". Global variables usually have the expected sign, but are less
often significant, with the noteworthy exception of commodity price inflation, which is more tightly
linked to core CPI inflation over the last decade. Exchange rate depreciations can be significantly
associated with higher core inflation, especially in the pre-crisis window and over the last decade when
the peak year of the crisis (2008) is excluded.

        Table 6 reports the comparable results for wage inflation. The sample size is meaningfully
smaller--so results are not as comparable across inflation measures. With this caveat, wage inflation is
less strongly correlated with inflation expectations or lagged inflation, but continues to be negatively
and significantly associated with domestic slack. This Phillips curve relationship does not appear to have
weakened over the last decade (with or without the interaction between domestic slack and the import
share)--even when the full set of global controls is included. It is worth highlighting that these results
partially reflect the focus on within-country changes through the fixed-effects specification. When the
model is estimated with random effects (shown in the sensitivity tests), inflation expectations and
lagged inflation are more often significant, while domestic slack is weaker and often insignificant. Higher
wage growth is also positively correlated with higher productivity growth in the pre-crisis window (as
expected), but this relationship seems to reverse over the last decade. Including productivity growth
also shrinks the sample size, so I focus on results without this control. The global variables have the
expected signs, and are often significant for the full period, but not the shorter windows. This suggests
that global variables may play a role in explaining differences in wage growth over longer periods, but
not shorter windows.

        To check the robustness of these results, I repeat the same series of over 20 sensitivity tests in
Section IV.D. Key results are in Appendix Table 4. The one consistent result is that most variables are not
consistently significant. The most robust finding is that higher levels of domestic slack are correlated
with lower inflation, although this relies on using a fixed-effects model. When the cross-country
dimension is included (such as column 7), the relationship between domestic slack and wage inflation
often weakens and becomes insignificant. There is also stronger evidence of a nonlinear relationship
between wages and slack than for the other inflation measures. These results suggest a more limited
role for the global variables in wage inflation than for CPI or core inflation. This is supported by the F-
tests of the joint significance of the global variables (bottom of the table) which suggest that the global
variables are rarely significant (unlike for CPI and core inflation). Wage inflation is still primarily a
domestic phenomenon and does not appear to be "determined abroad."


                                                                                                              33
         As a final test of whether the global variables can improve our understanding of core CPI and
wage dynamics, and especially if the role of these variables has changed over time, I return to the
analysis with rolling regressions from Section IV.D. I estimate rolling regressions for core and wage
inflation over eight-year windows for the different models in Tables 5 and 6, and then calculate the
"error" between actual inflation and inflation explained by the model in each quarter. The resulting
errors for the different models are shown in the top panels in Figure 4. The simple model is far more
successful at explaining core inflation than wage inflation, with not only lower "errors", but much less
variation over time. The graphs also suggest that adding the global variables does little to reduce the
errors for either core or wage inflation--with the lines for the different models very close to each other.

         To more formally capture differences in the explanatory power of the different models, the
bottom of Figure 4 reports summary statistics of the estimated errors. The graphs are a sharp contrast
to the same analysis for CPI inflation. There is no meaningful reduction in the errors from adding the
global variables over any period for core inflation (with the largest improvement only 0.12pp during the
2008-10 window). There are slightly more modest improvements for wage inflation over the last decade
(such as the median error falling by 0.17pp during the 2008-10 window and by 0.13pp from 2011-2014),
but no improvement in 2015-17. When these errors are assessed relative to median core and wage
inflation, the improvements are also much more modest than for CPI inflation, with the global variables
only improving the "fit" by 2.9% and 2.6% for core and wage inflation, respectively, as compared to
11.8% for CPI inflation, over the last decade. 63

    B. Trend Inflation: The Role of Domestic and Global Variables

         To further explore the role of globalization for other measures of inflation, I return to the trend-
cycle decomposition from Section V. Global factors had become more important for the cyclical
movements in CPI inflation around its trend, but what explains this slow-moving trend? Are global
factors less important for this more persistent component of inflation--just as they seem to be less
important for the slower-moving core and wage inflation than the CPI?

         To better understand the slow-moving trend--especially for core inflation where the global
variables play a less important role--this section uses the estimates of trend core inflation (from Section
V.A) and follows Cecchetti et al. (2017) and Forbes et al. (2019) to examine its correlates:



63 Calculated as the reduction in the median error from adding the global variables relative to median inflation in that window.

Median core and wage inflation over the last decade are 2.64% and 3.82%, respectively.

                                                                                                                             34
                     =  + 7
                          =1    +  ,                                                                            (6)

where all variables are defined above, except now expressed in first differences. 64 As explained in
Cecchetti et al. (2017) it is necessary to estimate the equation in first differences due to the assumption
that the trend is a random walk (equation 5), so that the level of inflation is non-stationary.

          Table 7 reports results from these panel regressions of trend core inflation on similar groups of
variables as in equations (1)-(4). 65 Domestic slack continues to be negatively correlated with inflation,
and this relationship continues to weaken over the last decade (including when slack is interacted with
the import share). The "flatter" Phillips curve relationship over the last decade is only partially due to
increased import exposure, with a meaningful decline that does not appear to reflect globalization
(through the interaction term or other global controls). 66 The global variables show noteworthy
differences relative to the comparable regressions for the cyclical component of CPI inflation, but results
are closer to the estimates for core and wage inflation (as would be expected). Most of the global
variables are not significantly correlated with inflation. The only global variable significant at the 5%
level (in the earlier period and sometimes the later window) is exchange rates-- the global variable that
was not significantly correlated with the cyclical component of inflation in Table 4. This suggests that
exchange rates have more persistent effects on inflation than the other global variables. The global
variables are not jointly significant, however, and the overall fit of these regressions is fairly low--with
the within-R2 only 0.02 with the full set of global variables in the last decade. While global variables can
meaningfully improve our ability to understand CPI inflation and the cyclical component of CPI inflation
over the last decade, they only have limited ability to improve our understanding of the dynamics of the
underlying, slow-moving trend in inflation, and they do not appear to have become more important
over the last decade.



VII.      Summary and Conclusions

The global economy has changed in many ways over the last twenty years--including through increased
trade and financial integration, a greater role for emerging markets in driving global growth and


64 The change in the trend is relative to the previous quarter. The change in the other variables is relative to one year ago for
the base case in order to allow for lagged effects on trend inflation. Sensitivity tests show that using different lag structures
does not affect the key results. The current approach reduces concern about seasonality.
65 I use the full set of control variables but exclude lagged inflation, which is highly correlated with the trend.
66 The Phillips curve coefficient falls from -0.35 to -0.10 across the two periods when evaluated at the mean import shares.



                                                                                                                                    35
commodity price fluctuations, and the increased use of global supply chains to shift segments of
production to cheaper locations. These forms of globalization could all affect inflation dynamics. They
could also simultaneously weaken the role of domestic factors in inflation models, explaining the recent
"flattening" in the Phillips curve relationship between domestic slack and inflation in many economies.

        This paper uses three different approaches (principal components, a Phillips curve framework,
and a trend-cycle decomposition) to evaluate the role of global factors for the dynamics of different
inflation measures (CPI, core CPI, wages, the cyclical component and slow-moving trend) and assess if
the role of the global factors has changed over time or can explain the flattening of the Phillips curve.
The rich set of results helps form a more comprehensive picture of how globalization has influenced
different price dynamics. Global factors play a significant and increasingly important role in the
dynamics of CPI inflation and the cyclical component of inflation. Part of this reflects increased volatility
in commodity prices--but not all. Global factors have played a more muted role, but can still be
significant, for core inflation, wage inflation, and the slow-moving trend in core inflation, with little
evidence that the role of the global variables has increased for any of these inflation measures over the
last decade. The relationship between most measures of inflation and domestic slack has weakened
over the last decade, even after interacting domestic slack with a country's exposure to the global
economy or including more comprehensive controls for globalization that are often cited as causing the
flattening of the Phillips curve. This does not mean, however, that the traditional domestic factors are
no longer relevant for inflation; domestic slack continues to play a significant role (albeit often smaller)
for many specifications and inflation measures, especially for core and wage inflation. Moreover, the
weaker relationship between domestic slack and the different measures of inflation may reflect central
banks being more attentive to slack and more willing to look-through changes in inflation that result
from other factors, such as commodity price movements, which have had a stronger relationship with
CPI inflation over the last decade.

        The results in this paper also raise a number of new questions. Are the changes in the
relationships between the global factors and CPI inflation that have occurred over the last decade long
lasting? If these developments have contributed to higher margins, a higher profit share and reduced
labor share--are they sustainable? If global variables have dampened CPI inflation over the last few
years, could inflation quickly rebound if increased tariffs reduce the use of global supply chains? Which
country characteristics determine the role of these different global variables for individual countries?
And could other aspects of globalization be affecting inflation dynamics--such as changes in global

                                                                                                            36
capital flows or the "superstar" effect that is leading to increased firm concentration in some industries?
Finally, given the key result that global variables have become more important for understanding CPI
inflation dynamics, but not wage inflation, could these patterns help improve our understanding of the
factors behind the declining labor share in global income?

        While this paper leaves many questions for future work, it makes some progress in
understanding recent inflation puzzles. Simple frameworks for understanding inflation dynamics are not
"dead", and even though inflation has been "dormant", some of the puzzling patterns in CPI inflation
can be explained by CPI inflation being more "determined abroad". In fact, the explanatory power of
basic models for CPI inflation are meaningfully improved over the last decade with the addition of the
global variables discussed in this paper. This does not mean, however, that there is no longer a role for
central banks or domestic developments in inflation dynamics. Even though CPI inflation is increasingly
affected by globalization, and most inflation measures move less tightly with domestic slack, domestic
variables are still important determinants of inflation dynamics.




REFERENCES
Albuquerque, Bruno and Ursel Baumann. (2017). "Will US Inflation Awake from the Dead? The Role of
Slack and Non-Linearities in the Phillips Curve." European Central Bank Working Paper Series No. 2001.
Auer, Raphael, Claudio Borio and Andrew Filardo. (2017). "The Globalisation of Inflation: the Growing
Importance of Global Value Chains." Bank for International Settlements Working Paper No. 602.
Auer, Raphael, Kathrin Degen and Andreas Fischer. (2013). "Low-wage Import Competition, Inflationary
Pressure, and Industry Dynamics in Europe." European Economic Review 59 (issue C): 141-166.
Auer, Ralphael, Andrei Levchenko and Philip Sauré. (2016). "International Inflation Spillovers through
Input Linkages." Mimeo. University of Michigan.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence Katz, Christina Patterson and John Van Reenan. (2017). "The Fall of
the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms." MIT Working paper, available at:
https://economics.mit.edu/files/12979.
Ball, Laurence. (2006). "Has Globalization Changed Inflation?" NBER Working Paper 12687. November.
Ball, Laurence and N. Gregory Mankiw. (1995). "Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate Supply Shocks."
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1): 161-193.
Ball, Laurence and Sandeep Mazumder. (2015). "A Phillips Curve with Anchored Expectations and Short-
term Unemployment." IMF Working Paper No 15/39.
Ball, Laurence and Sandeep Mazumder. (2011). "Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pgs. 337-381.

                                                                                                         37
Bank for International Settlements. (2015). "Another Year of Monetary Policy Accommodation." 85th
Annual Report, Chapter 4, pgs. 65-82.
Bean, Charles. (2006). "Globalisation and Inflation." Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q4, pgs. 468-475.
Benmelech, Efraim, Nittai Bergman and Hyunseob Kim. (2017). "Strong Employers and Weak Employees:
How Does Employer Concentration Affect Wages?" NBER Working Paper No. 24307.
Berganza, Juan Carlos, Petro del Rio and Fructuoso Borrallo. (2016). "Determinants and Implications of
Low Global Inflation Rates." Banco de Espana Documentos Ocasionales No. 1608.
Bernanke, Benjamin. (2007). "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting." Speech delivered at the
Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research in Cambridge, MA, July 10.
Blanchard, Olivier. (2018). "Should We Reject the Natural Rate Hypothesis?" Journal of Economic
Perspectives 32(1): 97-120.
Blanchard, Olivier. (2016). "The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? " Peterson Institute for International
Economics Policy Brief Number PB16-1.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti and Lawrence Summers. (2015). "Inflation and Activity: Two
Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," in Inflation and Unemployment in Europe:
Conference proceedings, ECB Forum on Central Banking, Frankfurt: European Central Bank.
Borio, Claudio. (2017). "Through the Looking Glass." BIS Lecture. 22 September.
Borio, Claudio and Andrew Filardo. (2007). "Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-country Evidence on
the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation." BIS Working Papers No 227.
Cecchetti, Stephen, Peter Hooper, Bruce Kasman, Kim Schoenholtz and Mark Watson. (2007).
"Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process." Paper prepared for the 2007 US Monetary Policy Forum
and available at: http://people.brandeis.edu/~cecchett/Polpdf/USMPF2007.pdf
Cecchetti, Stephen, Michael Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil Kashyap and Kermit Schoenholtz. (2017).
"Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflations' Simple Dynamics." Paper prepared for
the 2017 US Monetary Policy Forum and available at:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2941510.
Chan, Joshua, Gary Koop and Simon Potter. (2013). "A New Model of Trend Inflation." Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics 31(1): 94-106.
Ciccarelli, Matteo and Benoit Mojon. (2010). "Global Inflation." The Review of Economics and Statistics
92(3): 524-535.
Cravino, Javier. (2019). "Discussion of Inflation Dynamics: Dead, Dormant or Determined Abroad? By
Kristin Forbes." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2019 meetings.
Eberly, Janice, James Stock and Jonathan Wright. (2019). "The Federal Reserve's Current Framework for
Monetary Policy: A Review and Assessment." Paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy
Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices, June 4 5, 2019, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Available at: https://www.chicagofed.org/conference-sessions/session-1
Eickmeier, Sandra and Katharina Pijnenburg. (2013). "The Global Dimension of Inflation ­ Evidence from
Factor-augmented Phillips Curves." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 75(1): 103-122.

                                                                                                          38
Forbes, Kristin. (2019). "Has Globalization Changed the Inflation Process?" BIS Working Papers No. 791.
June.
Forbes, Kristin. (2018). "Fixing the Astrolabe: Global Factors and Inflation Models." In Price and Wage
Setting in Advanced Economies," Conference Proceedings from ECB Forum on Central Banking in Sintra,
Portugal, June 16-18, pages 170-186. Available at:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/sintra/ecb.forumcentbank201810.en.pdf
Forbes, Kristin. (2015). "When, Why, and What's Next for Low Inflation? No Magic Slippers Needed."
Speech at the London School of Economics, June 17. Available at:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2015/when-why-and-whats-next-for-low-inflation-no-magic-
slippers-needed
Forbes, Kristin, Ida Hjortsoe and Tsvetelina Nenova. (2018). "The Shocks Matter: Improving Our
Estimates of Exchange Rate Pass-Through." Journal of International Economics 114(Sept):25-275.
Forbes, Kristin, Ida Hjortsoe and Tsvetelina Nenova. (2017). "Shocks versus Structure: Explaining
Differences in Exchange Rate Pass-Through across Countries and Time." Bank of England External MPC
Unit Discussion Paper No. 50.
Forbes, Kristin, Lewis Kirkham and Konstantinos Theodoridis. (2019). "A Trendy Approach to UK Inflation
Dynamics." The Manchester School, June: 1-53.
Gagnon, Joseph and Christopher Collins. (2019). "Low Inflation Bends the Phillips Curve." Peterson
Institute of International Economics Working Paper 19-6.
Galí, Jordi and Mark Gertler. (1999). "Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis." Journal of
Monetary Economics 44:195-222.
Galí, Jordi and David Lopez-Salido. (2005). "Robustness of Estimates of the Hybrid New Keynesian
Phillips Curve." Journal of Monetary Economics 52: 1107-18.
Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajsek. (2015). "Customer Markets and Financial Frictions: Implications for
Inflation Dynamics." Proceedings of the Jackson Hole Symposium. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
pgs. 1-52.
Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim and Egon Zakrajsek. (2017). "Inflation Dynamics During the
Financial Crisis." American Economic Review 107(3): 785-823.
Goldfeld, Stephen and Alan Blinder. (1972). "Some Implications of Endogenous Stabilization Policy."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 3: 585-640.
Gordon, Robert. (2013). "The Phillips Curve is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow
Recovery." NBER Working Paper 19390.
Gordon, Robert. (1985). "Understanding Inflation in the 1980s." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1: 263-299.
Gordon, Robert. (1977). "World Inflation and Monetary Accommodation in Eight Countries." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2: 409-468.
Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. (2008). "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring."
American Economic Review 98(5): 1978­1997.


                                                                                                         39
Guilloux-Nefussi, Sophie. (2018). "Are Monopolies a Danger to the United States?" Banque de France,
Eco Notepad.
Ha, Jongrim, M. Ayhan Kose, and Franziska Ohnsorge. (2019). Inflation in Emerging and Developing
Economies: Evolution, Drivers, and Policies. Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/research/publication/inflation-in-emerging-and-developing-economies
Hakkio, Craig. (2009). "Global Inflation Dynamics." The Federal Reserve Bank Of Kansas City, Research
Working Paper No 09-01.
Hamilton, James. (2010). "Nonlinearities and the Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Prices." NBER Working
Paper 16186.
Hong, Gee Hee, Zsóka Kóczán, Weicheng Lian and Malhar Nabar. (2018). "More Slack than Meets the
Eye? Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies." IMF Working Paper WP/18/50.
Hooper, Peter, Frederic Mishkin and Amir Sufi. (2019). "Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure
Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or is it Just Hibernating?" Paper prepared for the 2019 US Monetary
Policy Forum.
Ihrig, Jane, Steven Kamin, Deborah Lindner and Jaime Marquez. (2010). "Some Simple Tests of the
Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis." International Finance 13(3): 343­375.
International Monetary Fund. (2016). "Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy."
World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3. October.
International Monetary Fund. (2013). "The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it
Just Sleeping?" World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, April.
Jasová, Martina, Richhild Moessner and Elód Takáts. (2018). "Domestic and Global Output Gaps as
Inflation Drivers: What Does the Phillips Curve Tell?" BIS Working Papers No. 748.
Jordà, Òscar, and Fernanda Nechio. (2018). "Inflation Globally." Unpublished mimeo.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman. (2013). "The Global Decline of the Labor Share." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1, Feb): 61-103.
Kohn, Donald. (2006). "The Effects of Globalization on Inflation and their Implications for Monetary
Policy." Remarks at Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 51st Economic Conference, June 16, available at:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20060616a.htm.
Li, Xin, Bo Meng and Zhi Wang. (2019). "Recent Patterns of Global Production and GFC Participation." In
Global Value Chain Production Report 2019. Geneva: World Trade Organization.
McLeay, Michael and Silvana Tenreyro. (2019). "Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips
Curve." NBER Working Paper No. 25892.
Mikolajun, Irena and David Lodge. (2016). "Advanced Economy Inflation: The Role of Global Factors."
ECB Working Paper No 1948. August.
Miles, David, Ugo Panizza, Ricardo Reis and Ángel Ubide. (2017). And Yet it Moves: Inflation and the
Great Recession. Geneva Reports on the World Economy #19.
Neely, Christopher and David Rapach. (2011). "International Comovements in Inflation Rates and
Country Characteristics." Journal of International Money and Finance 30(7): 1471-1490.

                                                                                                          40
Obstfeld, Maurice. (2019). "Global Dimensions of US Monetary Policy." Unpublished mimeo.
Powell, Jerome (2018). "Monetary Policy and Risk Management at a Time of Low Inflation and Low
Unemployment." Speech at the "Revolution or Evolution? Reexamining Economic Paradigms" 60th
Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, October 2.
Sbordone, Argia. (2010). "Globalization and Inflation Dynamics: The Impact of Increased Competition,"
in Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler, eds. The International Dimensions of Monetary Policy. University of
Chicago Press, pgs. 547-579.
Stock, James and Mark Watson. (2018). "Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation." In Price and Wage
Setting in Advanced Economies," Conference Proceedings from ECB Forum on Central Banking in Sintra,
Portugal, June 16-18, pages 41-79. Available at:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/sintra/ecb.forumcentbank201810.en.pdf
Stock, James and Mark Watson. (2010). "Modeling Inflation after the Crisis." Proceedings of the Jackson
Hole Symposium. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pgs. 173-220.
Stock, James and Mark Watson. (2007). "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 39: 3-34.
Wei, Shang-Jin and Yinxi Xie. (2018). "On the Divergence between CPI and PPI as Inflation Gauges: The
Role of Supply Chains." NBER Working Paper 24319.
World Bank. (2018). Global Economic Prospects. Chapter "The Role of Major Emerging Markets in Global
Commodity Demand." June.
Yellen, Janet. (2017). "Inflation, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy." Speech delivered in Cleveland on
Sept. 26. Available at: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20170926a.htm
Yellen, Janet. (2016). "Macroeconomic Research After the Crisis." Speech delivered in Boston on Oct. 14.
Available at: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20161014a.htm
Yellen, Janet. (2006). "Monetary Policy in a Global Environment." Speech delivered at U.C. Santa Cruz on
May 27. Available at: https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/yellen-
speeches/2006/may/monetary-policy-in-a-global-environment/




                                                                                                        41
                                                             Table 1
                           Global Principal Component of Different Inflation Series

                                                     Fraction of Variance Accounted for:
                                                    PPI            CPI           Core          Wages
                           Full sample:
                           1st PC                 51.6%          40.2%           20.9%         22.5%
                           1st 5 PCs              76.0%          66.7%           51.1%         54.1%
                           # countries              35            43               38            20

                           Sample of countries with wage data:
                           1st PC           56.3%     44.8%                      26.0%          22.5%
                           1st 5 PCs        83.8%     74.0%                      60.6%          54.1%
                           # countries       19         20                        20             20

                           Advanced economies:
                           1st PC         60.5%                  41.1%           25.1%          22.7%
                           1st 5 PCs      81.5%                  69.1%           53.2%          55.3%
                           # countries     29                     31              31             18

                           Emerging markets
                           1st PC         39.2%                  25.4%           23.2%             .
                           1st 5 PCs      95.7%                  75.5%           85.4%             .
                           # countries      6                     12               7               .

Notes: Fraction of variance accounted for by either one or five principal components (PC) for each of four inflation measures. PPI
is producer price inflation. CPI is consumer price inflation. Core inflation is CPI less food and energy, and Wages is private sector,
household hourly wages. All inflation measures are relative to the previous quarter, annualized and seasonally adjusted. See
Appendix A for more details on data. Advanced economies and emerging markets are defined according to the IMF as of 2017.




                                                                                                                                   42
                                                                  Table 2: Phillips Curve Estimates,
                                                               CPI Inflation for Full Period (1996-2017)

                                                Different Control Variables                                          Different Specifications
                                    Domestic       + Import    + Oil  + All Global                 DomSlack* Only Lagged              Random             RE +
                                       Only          Prices   Prices   Variables                   ImpShare   Inflation                Effects       Constraints
                                        (1)            (2)      (3)         (4)                        (5)       (6)                     (7)              (8)
                  Inflation         0.685***      0.717*** 0.656*** 0.654***                        0.631***                         0.708***         0.257***
                    Expect.          (0.105)        (0.161)  (0.108)     (0.101)                     (0.104)                           (0.065)         (0.036)
                  Lagged            0.599***      0.679*** 0.626*** 0.641***                        0.612***  0.716***               0.684***         0.743***
                    Inflation        (0.041)        (0.030)  (0.037)     (0.039)                     (0.047)   (0.037)                 (0.029)         (0.036)
                  Domestic          -0.144***     -0.103*** -0.126*** -0.090***                    -0.231***  -0.086**               -0.065***        -0.052**
                    Slack            (0.027)        (0.021)  (0.026)     (0.030)                     (0.069)   (0.031)                 (0.023)         (0.024)
                  Import                             0.091
                    Prices                          (0.054)
                  World Oil                                 0.033*** 0.029***                       0.030***         0.029***        0.030***          0.029***
                    Prices                                   (0.003)     (0.003)                     (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.003)
                  World Comm.                                           0.030***                    0.030***         0.028***        0.031***          0.028***
                    Prices                                               (0.005)                     (0.006)          (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)
                  Real Exchange                                        -0.029***                   -0.031***        -0.025***        -0.028***        -0.022***
                    Rate                                                 (0.007)                     (0.007)          (0.006)         (0.006)           (0.006)
                  World                                                -0.153***                   -0.160***        -0.149***        -0.158***        -0.158***
                    Slack                                                (0.036)                     (0.034)          (0.036)         (0.037)           (0.039)
                  Global Value                                          -0.055**                     -0.052*        -0.108***          -0.037         -0.068***
                    Chains                                               (0.026)                     (0.028)          (0.030)         (0.024)           (0.025)
                  Constant            -0.514*       -0.772* -0.587**    -0.541**                     -0.418*         0.710***        -0.776***           0.062
                                      (0.260)       (0.374)  (0.263)     (0.227)                     (0.218)          (0.102)         (0.129)           (0.049)
                  R2                   0.418         0.498    0.470       0.487                       0.458            0.476           0.610
                  # obs.               2,635         1,366    2,635       2,635                       2,531            2,635           2,635            2,635

Notes: Phillips curve regressions of equations (1) ­ (4) for quarterly CPI inflation from 1996-2017. See Appendix A for data definitions. Estimated using fixed effects in columns 1-6
with robust standard errors clustered by country. Columns 7 and 8 estimated using random effects. Column 8 constrains the coefficients on the two inflation coefficients (inflation
expectations and lagged inflation) to equal 1. Column 5 interacts domestic slack with the import share of GDP. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the
10% level.


                                                                                                                                                                                   43
                                                                   Table 3: Phillips Curve Estimates,
                                                                   CPI Inflation for Different Periods

                                            Pre-Crisis (1996-2007)                                                           Last Decade (2008-2017)
                     Domestic + Import      + Oil + All Global DomSlack*                               Domestic + Import    + Oil + All Global                      DomSlack*
                        Only    Prices     Prices  Variables   ImpShare                                   Only    Prices   Prices  Variables                        ImpShare
                         (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)                                    (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)                               (5)
Inflation            0.663*** 0.720*** 0.684*** 0.741***        0.696***                                 0.685    0.408    0.508     0.284                             0.324
  Expect.             (0.169)  (0.190)    (0.155)    (0.163)     (0.208)                                (0.425)  (0.506)  (0.373)   (0.274)                           (0.273)
Lagged               0.556*** 0.672*** 0.588*** 0.589***        0.559***                               0.490*** 0.431*** 0.519*** 0.556***                           0.556***
  Inflation           (0.065)  (0.048)    (0.064)    (0.067)     (0.081)                                (0.050)  (0.070)  (0.045)   (0.040)                           (0.037)
Domestic             -0.212***-0.157** -0.198*** -0.188***      -0.410**                               -0.154*** -0.112 -0.157*** -0.105**                            -0.171*
  Slack               (0.054)  (0.058)    (0.050)    (0.061)     (0.155)                                (0.034)  (0.066)  (0.034)   (0.041)                           (0.088)
Import                          0.061                                                                            0.136*
  Prices                       (0.057)                                                                           (0.066)
World Oil                                0.030*** 0.030***      0.031***                                                 0.034*** 0.026***                            0.028***
  Prices                                  (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)                                                  (0.003)   (0.003)                            (0.003)
World Comm.                                           0.004       0.002                                                            0.031***                           0.028***
  Prices                                             (0.013)     (0.013)                                                            (0.009)                            (0.009)
Real Exchange                                       -0.027**   -0.029***                                                           -0.039***                         -0.040***
  Rate                                               (0.011)     (0.010)                                                            (0.013)                            (0.013)
World                                              -0.410***   -0.430***                                                           -0.434***                         -0.517***
  Slack                                              (0.092)     (0.091)                                                            (0.073)                            (0.080)
Global Value                                       -0.258***   -0.253***                                                           -0.357***                         -0.407***
  Chains                                             (0.068)     (0.072)                                                            (0.078)                            (0.086)
Constant            -0.270      -0.700     -0.517  -0.938***    -0.773**                                 -0.370   0.254    -0.063    1.142*                            1.202*
                   (0.380)     (0.450)    (0.350)    (0.321)     (0.351)                                (0.858)  (1.150)  (0.761)   (0.606)                            (0.607)
R2                  0.361       0.497      0.394      0.414       0.365                                  0.252    0.196    0.356     0.419                              0.425
# obs.              1,404        769       1,404      1,404       1,350                                  1,231     597     1,231     1,231                              1,181
F-Test: Joint Significance of Global Variables     32.38***     36.11***                                                           71.33***                          68.09***

Notes: Phillips curve regressions of equations (1) ­ (4) for quarterly CPI inflation from 1996-2007 and 2008-2017. See Appendix A for data definitions. Estimated using fixed effects
with robust standard errors clustered by country. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.

                                                                                                                                                                                 44
                                                                        Table 4:
                                          Explaining the Cyclical Component of CPI Inflation for Different Periods

                                     Full Period                                 Pre-Crisis (1996-2007)                                 Last Decade (2008-2017)
                Domestic        + Oil     + All Global DomSlack*     Domestic     + Oil     + All Global     DomSlack*       Domestic      + Oil  + All Global       DomSlack*
                    Only       Prices      Variables ImpShare           Only     Prices      Variables       ImpShare           Only      Prices    Variables        ImpShare
                     (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)           (7)              (8)            (9)       (10)        (11)              (12)
Trend            0.641*** 0.629*** 0.636***             0.749***     0.550*** 0.548*** 0.542***               0.715***       0.841*** 0.797***      0.781***          0.772***
  Inflation       (0.089)     (0.086)        (0.089)     (0.047)      (0.099)   (0.099)       (0.099)          (0.059)        (0.148)    (0.135)     (0.145)           (0.145)
Inflation          0.172       0.234        0.360**       0.310*      0.465** 0.539**        0.635***           0.491          0.076      0.045       -0.026            0.021
  Expect.         (0.178)     (0.184)        (0.153)     (0.169)      (0.209)   (0.212)       (0.183)          (0.229)        (0.454)    (0.417)     (0.371)           (0.371)
Domestic        -0.189*** -0.181*** -0.162*** -0.264***              -0.282*** -0.277*** -0.238***           -0.355***       -0.178*** -0.196*** -0.165***            -0.329**
  Slack           (0.040)     (0.041)        (0.042)     (0.068)      (0.061)   (0.061)       (0.070)          (0.097)        (0.053)    (0.050)     (0.055)           (0.152)
World Oil                   0.025*** 0.023***           0.024***               0.023*** 0.023***              0.024***                 0.026***     0.023***          0.024***
  Prices                      (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.002)                (0.003)       (0.003)          (0.003)                   (0.003)     (0.003)           (0.003)
World Commodity                            0.018***     0.017***                               -0.008           -0.007                               0.024**           0.021**
  Prices                                     (0.006)     (0.006)                              (0.011)          (0.010)                               (0.009)           (0.009)
Real Exchange                                 -0.017     -0.024*                               -0.011           -0.017                                -0.033            -0.034
  Rate                                       (0.014)     (0.013)                              (0.014)          (0.012)                               (0.021)           (0.022)
World                                       -0.083**     -0.082*                             -0.392***       -0.384***                              -0.266***        -0.329***
  Slack                                      (0.038)     (0.043)                              (0.122)          (0.124)                               (0.046)           (0.046)
Global Value                                 0.065*     0.084***                              -0.170*           -0.127                                -0.075            -0.109
  Chains                                     (0.035)     (0.028)                              (0.091)          (0.088)                               (0.071)           (0.073)
Constant           0.565       0.411          0.160       0.007        0.091     -0.148       -0.562*           -0.652         0.468      0.621       1.141             1.163
                  (0.298)     (0.318)        (0.301)     (0.331)      (0.328)   (0.348)       (0.320)          (0.475)        (0.926)    (0.829)     (0.698)           (0.703)
R2                 0.507       0.537          0.545       0.543        0.474     0.494         0.506            0.500          0.384      0.444       0.471             0.476
# obs.             2,456       2,456          2,456       2,355        1,313     1,313         1,313            1,259          1,143      1,143       1,143             1,096
F-Test: Joint Significance of Global Variables                                               16.55***         15.53***                              42.74***          44.00***


  Notes: Regressions of quarterly, annualized and seasonally-adjusted CPI inflation on the trend and other variables using fixed effects with robust standard errors clustered by
  country. See Appendix A for variable definitions and Section V for estimation of the trend. The ***, **, * are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                    45
                                                                              Table 5:
                                                    Phillips Curve Estimates--Core Inflation for Different Periods


                                     Full Period                                             Pre-Crisis (1996-2007)                                    Last Decade (2008-2017)
              Domestic + Import        + Oil + All Global   DomSlack*     Domestic     + Import + Oil + All Global        DomSlack*    Domestic + Import        + Oil + All Global DomSlack*
                 Only      Prices     Prices    Variables   ImpShare         Only        Prices     Prices    Variables   ImpShare         Only    Prices      Prices  Variables ImpShare
                  (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)     (12)        (13)       (14)        (15)
Inflation     0.501*** 0.434*** 0.503*** 0.515***            0.543***      0.467***   0.472*** 0.466*** 0.483***           0.498***     0.580*** 0.487 0.527*** 0.522***            0.596***
  Expect.      (0.054) (0.080) (0.054)           (0.054)      (0.058)       (0.085)     (0.074) (0.085)         (0.092)     (0.120)      (0.165)  (0.299) (0.157)        (0.165)     (0.173)
Lagged        0.646*** 0.711*** 0.647*** 0.664***            0.639***      0.630***   0.682*** 0.630*** 0.653***           0.641***     0.458*** 0.390*** 0.461*** 0.474***         0.466***
  Inflation    (0.039) (0.046) (0.039)           (0.039)      (0.043)       (0.061)     (0.077) (0.061)         (0.059)     (0.070)      (0.050)  (0.062) (0.050)        (0.051)     (0.053)
Domestic -0.115*** -0.082*** -0.113*** -0.094***            -0.216***     -0.165***   -0.148*** -0.165*** -0.170***       -0.327***    -0.127*** -0.089* -0.128*** -0.116*** -0.223***
  Slack        (0.018) (0.019) (0.018)           (0.018)      (0.041)       (0.037)     (0.043) (0.037)         (0.042)     (0.108)      (0.026)  (0.044) (0.026)        (0.027)     (0.068)
Import                     0.032*                                                        -0.002                                                  0.071***
  Prices                  (0.017)                                                       (0.020)                                                   (0.018)
World Oil                           0.005***                                                        0.000                                                    0.007***
  Prices                             (0.002)                                                       (0.002)                                                    (0.002)
World Comm.                                     0.009***    0.008***                                             -0.001      -0.002                                    0.015***     0.013***
  and Oil Prices                                 (0.003)     (0.003)                                            (0.006)     (0.006)                                      (0.004)     (0.004)
Real Exchange                                  -0.017***    -0.018***                                         -0.026***   -0.027***                                      -0.013      -0.013
  Rate                                           (0.005)     (0.005)                                            (0.006)     (0.006)                                      (0.009)     (0.009)
World                                          -0.078***    -0.080***                                          -0.124**    -0.129**                                      -0.038      -0.070
  Slack                                          (0.022)     (0.021)                                            (0.059)     (0.062)                                      (0.056)     (0.059)
Global Value                                     -0.003       -0.002                                             -0.069      -0.056                                       0.077       0.052
  Chains                                         (0.018)     (0.019)                                            (0.043)     (0.045)                                      (0.062)     (0.065)
Constant      -0.353*** -0.350** -0.369*** -0.390             -0.397       -0.209       -0.378* -0.207           -0.360      -0.356      -0.215    0.066       -0.110    -0.164      -0.245
               (0.111) (0.162) (0.113)           (0.088)     (0.091)       (0.138)      (0.182) (0.136)         (0.111)     (0.146)      (0.276)  (0.612) (0.257)        (0.324)     (0.332)
R2              0.507      0.531      0.508       0.515       0.495         0.475        0.505      0.475        0.488       0.456        0.224    0.162       0.235      0.243       0.241
# obs.          2,636      1,374      2,636       2,636       2,532         1,402         766       1,402        1,402       1,348        1,234     608        1,234      1,234       1,184
F-Test: Joint Significance of Global Variables                                                                 6.58***     6.92***                                      5.71***     6.44***


    Notes: Phillips curve regressions of equations (1) ­ (4) for core CPI inflation from 1996-2017. See Appendix A for data definitions. Estimated using fixed effects with robust
    standard errors clustered by country. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                     46
                                                                        Table 6:
                                              Phillips Curve Estimates--Wage Inflation for Different Periods


                                      Full Period                                Pre-Crisis (1996-2007)                                  Last Decade (2008-2017)
                 Domestic + Product + All Global DomSlack*            Domestic + Product + All Global      DomSlack*        Domestic     + Product + All Global DomSlack*
                     Only     Growth        Variables ImpShare            Only   Growth      Variables     ImpShare            Only        Growth     Variables  ImpShare
                      (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)             (5)      (6)           (7)          (8)              (9)          (10)         (11)       (12)
Inflation         0.535***      0.183         0.472**  0.504***          0.030    -0.536        0.052         0.030            0.233        0.866        0.235      0.428
  Expect.          (0.175)     (0.322)        (0.172)   (0.160)         (0.197)  (0.731)       (0.202)       (0.196)          (0.595)      (0.588)      (0.638)   (0.637)
Lagged            0.244***      0.141          0.217     0.216         0.241*** 0.199*        0.237***      0.254***          -0.036        0.003       -0.026     -0.008
  Inflation        (0.075)     (0.156)        (0.064)   (0.065)         (0.062)  (0.105)       (0.058)       (0.062)          (0.111)      (0.179)      (0.104)   (0.112)
Domestic         -0.273*** -0.246*** -0.153***         -0.326**       -0.213*** -0.195** -0.197***          -0.320**        -0.369***     -0.227**    -0.306*** -0.574***
  Slack            (0.050)     (0.056)        (0.047)   (0.114)         (0.069)  (0.081)       (0.066)       (0.124)          (0.088)      (0.079)      (0.092)   (0.144)
Productivity                    0.512                                           1.035***                                                  -0.847**
  Growth                       (0.305)                                           (0.322)                                                   (0.388)
World Comm.                                    0.002     0.003                                  0.005         0.006                                      0.006      0.007
  and Oil Prices                              (0.006)   (0.006)                                (0.013)       (0.013)                                    (0.008)   (0.008)
World                                       -0.351*** -0.352***                                 -0.230        -0.227                                    -0.233     -0.230
  Slack                                       (0.092)   (0.086)                                (0.178)       (0.181)                                    (0.167)   (0.147)
Global Value                                 -0.144**  -0.154**                                 -0.126        -0.117                                    -0.066     -0.046
  Chains                                      (0.066)   (0.067)                                (0.107)       (0.107)                                    (0.093)   (0.084)
Constant          1.863*** 2.299**           2.167***  2.085***        3.307*** 3.664**       3.100***      3.112***         2.807**        1.211      3.052**    2.512*
                   (0.286)     (0.802)        (0.326)   (0.315)         (0.415)  (1.583)       (0.438)       (0.425)         (1.244)       (1.119)      (1.332)   (1.328)
R2                  0.122       0.069          0.150     0.152           0.061    0.049         0.065         0.057           0.052         0.039        0.059     0.056
# obs.              1,660       1,148          1,660     1,643            878      601           878           871             782           547          782        772
F-Test: Joint Significance of Global Variables                                                   1.21          1.25                                      1.13       1.36

Notes: Phillips curve regressions for wage inflation from 1996-2017. Wages are private-sector household wages. See Appendix A for data definitions. Estimated using fixed effects
with robust standard errors clustered by country. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                                                                                              47
                                                                           Table 7:
                                                  Explaining the Trend in Core Inflation for Different Periods


                                    Full Period                                        Pre-Crisis (1996-2007)                                Last Decade (2008-2017)
                Domestic      + Oil + All Global       DomSlack*          Domestic + Oil + All Global           DomSlack*        Domestic + Oil + All Global            DomSlack*
                   Only      Prices    Variables       ImpShare               Only    Prices Variables          ImpShare            Only     Prices  Variables          ImpShare
                    (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)                 (5)      (6)       (7)                (8)             (9)      (10)       (11)              (12)
 Inflation       0.105**    0.108**    0.113**          0.078***           0.109** 0.109** 0.120***              0.092***          0.059*    0.047      0.034             0.035
   Expect.       (0.039)    (0.039)     (0.043)          (0.025)            (0.042) (0.042)    (0.042)            (0.032)         (0.033) (0.034)     (0.028)            (0.028)
 Domestic       -0.029**   -0.033** -0.036***           -0.075**          -0.058***-0.058*** -0.067***            -0.131*          -0.014 -0.024** -0.023*               -0.041*
   Slack         (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.012)          (0.033)            (0.018) (0.018)    (0.023)            (0.067)         (0.011) (0.011)     (0.012)            (0.024)
 World Oil                   0.001                                                    0.000                                                  0.002
   Prices                   (0.001)                                                  (0.000)                                                (0.002)
 World Comm.                             0.003              0.003                               0.001              0.001                                0.003               0.003
   and Oil Prices                       (0.002)           (0.002)                              (0.001)            (0.001)                             (0.003)              (0.003)
 Real Exchange                         -0.002**          -0.001**                             -0.004**             -0.003                              -0.001               0.000
   Rate                                 (0.001)           (0.001)                              (0.002)            (0.002)                             (0.001)              (0.001)
 World                                   -0.014            -0.019                               0.005              -0.008                             -0.026*             -0.030**
   Slack                                (0.012)           (0.011)                              (0.029)            (0.026)                             (0.013)              (0.014)
 Global Value                          -0.018**           -0.012*                              -0.010              -0.004                             -0.017*              -0.016*
   Chains                               (0.008)           (0.007)                              (0.011)            (0.010)                             (0.009)              (0.008)
 Constant       -0.028*** -0.028*** -0.024***           -0.020***         -0.044***-0.044*** -0.041***           -0.033***       -0.017*** -0.014*** -0.010*              -0.011**
                 (0.001) (0.001)        (0.002)           (0.001)           (0.003) (0.003)    (0.009)            (0.009)         (0.002) (0.003)     (0.005)              (0.004)
 R2               0.009      0.015       0.022             0.022             0.042    0.042     0.052              0.051           0.001     0.014     0.020                0.020
 # obs.           2,260      2,260       2,165             2,067             1,197    1,197     1,102              1,051           1,063     1,063     1,063                1,016
 F-Test: Joint Significance of Global Variables                                                 1.62                1.32                                1.76                1.84


Notes: Regressions of the trend in quarterly core inflation on changes in the explanatory variables using fixed effects with robust standard errors clustered by country. See
Appendix A for variable definitions and Section V for estimation of the trend. The ***, **, * are significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                48
                                              Figure 1
            Principal Component of Different Inflation Measures and Commodity Prices:
                                       Advanced Economies



                       Figure 1a: Percent of Variance of Four Inflation Measures
                                 Explained by 1st Principal Component
           70%


           60%


           50%
                                                                                          CPI
                                                                                          Core
           40%
                                                                                          PPI
           30%                                                                            Wages


           20%


           10%
                      1990-94         1995-99          2000-04         2005-09          2010-14          2015-17



                                         Figure 1b:
                      Principal Components vs. Commodity Price Volatility
            70%               CPI (left axis)                                                                      15%


            60%               Core CPI (left axis)

                              Commodity Price Volatility
            50%                                                                                                    10%
                              (right axis)

            40%


            30%                                                                                                    5%


            20%


            10%                                                                                                    0%
                      1990-94         1995-99        2000-04         2005-09        2010-14         2015-17


Notes: Percent of variance of each inflation measure explained by the first principal component over 5-year windows starting in
1990-94. Commodity Price Volatility measured as the standard deviation over the same windows using the IMF's index of global
commodity prices (including fuel). See text for details on calculation of the first principal component and Appendix A for details
on the price series.

                                                                                                                               49
                        Figure 2: Gap between Actual and Predicted CPI Inflation in Different Models

                 3.0 pp

                                                                                                          Global & Domestic
                                                                                                          Domestic Only
                                                                                                          Domestic + Import Prices
                 2.0




                 1.0




                 0.0
                        2003




                                              2005




                                                              2007




                                                                              2009




                                                                                            2011




                                                                                                             2013




                                                                                                                                2015
                                              Panel b:                                                                Panel c:
               1.5 pp           Median Errors Over Different Periods                  1.5 pp
                                                                                                         Median Errors Over The Last Decade
                                                                                                                          Domestic Only
                                       Domestic Only
                                                                                                                          Domestic + Import Prices
                                       Domestic + Import Prices
                                                                                                                          Global & Domestic
                                       Global & Domestic
               1.0                                                                    1.0




               0.5                                                                    0.5




               0.0                                                                    0.0
                        Full Period                      Pre-Crisis    2008-17                 2008-10       2011-14          2015-17

                                              Panel d: Median Errors with and without Controls for Commodity Prices
                       1.5 pp                 Domestic Only
                                              Domestic + Commodities
                                              Domestic + Global except Commodities
                                              Global & Domestic

                       1.0




                       0.5




                       0.0
                                Full Period                   Pre-Crisis    2008-17                2008-10          2011-14        2015-17


Notes: Median values of the absolute value of the difference between reported and predicted inflation based on coefficients from 8-year rolling regressions.
"Domestic Only" is equation (1), which only includes controls for inflation expectations, lagged inflation, and domestic slack. "Domestic + Import Prices" is
equation (2), which adds import price inflation. "Global & Domestic" is the full set of domestic variables plus five global variables in equation (3), including
world oil prices, world commodity prices, exchange rate movements, world slack, and global value chains. "Domestic + Commodities" is the domestic variables
plus commodity (ex. fuel) prices, while "Domestic + Global except Commodities" is the full set of domestic and global variables except commodity prices. The
sample size is limited to countries/periods with import price data to maintain a consistent sample.


                                                                                                                                                     50
                           Figure 3: The Role of the Global Variables and Domestic Slack on CPI Inflation in the United States




Notes: Figure reports the estimated impact of each variable on US CPI inflation based on coefficients estimated from equation (3) using rolling 8-year windows and the sample of countries/periods used to
estimate Figure 2. Variables defined in Appendix A.

                                                                                                                                                                                                  51
                               Figure 4: Gap between Actual and Predicted Inflation for Core CPI and Wages in Different Models

                                                                                                                        Panel 3b: Wage Growth
                        3.0 pp                                                                            3.0 pp        Median Errors by Quarter
                                      Panel 3a: Core CPI Inflation                                                                                                 Global & Domestic
                                      Median Errors by Quarter                                                                                                     Domestic Only


                        2.0                                                                               2.0
                                                                       Global & Domestic
                                                                       Domestic Only
                                                                       Domestic + Import Prices

                        1.0                                                                               1.0




                        0.0                                                                               0.0
                              2003



                                          2005



                                                 2007



                                                            2009



                                                                    2011



                                                                              2013



                                                                                           2015




                                                                                                                2003



                                                                                                                                2005



                                                                                                                                       2007



                                                                                                                                                 2009



                                                                                                                                                        2011



                                                                                                                                                                       2013



                                                                                                                                                                                  2015
                                        Panel 3c: Core CPI Inflation                                                      Panel 3d: Wage Growth
                                                                                                                                                                          Domestic Only
                          2.0 pp        Median Errors Over Different Periods                              2.0 pp          Median Errors Over Different Periods
                                                                                                                                                                          Global & Domestic

                                                                       Domestic Only
                          1.5                                          Domestic + Import Prices           1.5
                                                                       Global & Domestic


                          1.0                                                                             1.0



                          0.5                                                                             0.5



                          0.0
                                                                                                          0.0
                                      Full         Pre-     2008-          2008-     2011-        2015-
                                                                                                                        Full           Pre-     2008-          2008-      2011-    2015-
                                     Period        Crisis    17             10        14           17
                                                                                                                       Period          Crisis    17             10         14       17


Notes: Median values of the absolute value of the difference between reported and predicted inflation based on 8-year rolling regressions. ""Domestic Only" is equation (1), which only includes controls for
inflation expectations, lagged inflation, and domestic slack. "Domestic + Import Prices" is equation (2), which adds relative import price inflation. "Global & Domestic" is the full set of domestic variables plus
global variables, including an index of world oil and other commodity prices, world slack, and global value chains. The regressions for core CPI also include exchange rate movements. The sample size is limited
to countries/periods with import price data to maintain a consistent sample.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        52
APPENDIX A: Data Definitions and Statistics

Variable           Definition               Details                                            Source
Inflation and Price Data
Commodity          World commodity          Calculated as quarterly percent changes, in
prices             price index, including   regressions measured as difference relative to     Index data from IMF
                   fuel                     quarterly CPI inflation
Commodity          World commodity          Calculated as quarterly percent changes, in
                                                                                               Index from Datastream,
prices, exc. fuel price index, excluding    regressions measured as difference relative to
                                                                                               code: WDXWPCN.F
                   fuel                     quarterly CPI inflation
Core CPI           Consumer prices, all     Calculated as quarterly percent changes,
inflation          items except food and    annualized, seasonally adjusted1                   Index data from OECD
                   energy
CPI inflation      Consumer prices, all     Calculated as quarterly percent changes,
                                                                                               Index data from IMF
                   items                    annualized, seasonally adjusted1
Import prices      Import prices, all       Calculated as quarterly percent changes, in
                   items                    regressions measured as difference relative to     Index data from IMF
                                            quarterly CPI inflation
Inflation         5-year ahead forecast     Forecasts released in spring WEO are treated as    IMF, from historical
expectations      for CPI inflation         Q1, and in fall WEO as Q3; Q2 and Q4 are           WEO forecasts, at:
                                            interpolated between the nearest spring and        https://www.imf.org/e
                                            fall forecasts                                     xternal/pubs/ft/weo/fa
                                                                                               q.htm
Oil prices        World oil price index     Index of crude oil, Brent, spot prices in US$.
                                            Calculated as quarterly percent changes, in        Index from Datastream,
                                            regressions measured as difference relative to     code: WDXWPOI.F
                                            quarterly CPI inflation
Producer price   Producer prices, all       Calculated as quarterly percent changes,
                                                                                               Index data from IMF
inflation        commodities                annualized, seasonally adjusted1
Wage inflation   Hourly earnings in the     Calculated as quarterly percent changes,
                                                                                               Index data from OECD
                 private sector             annualized, seasonally adjusted
Labor Market and Slack Data
Domestic slack   Principal component        Negative of principal component of as many of
                 of 7 measures of           following variables as available: OECD domestic
                 domestic slack, with a     output gap, unemployment gap, participation
                                                                                               Calculated
                 positive value             gap, hours gap, involuntary workers gap, self-
                 indicating more slack      employment gap and temporary workers gap,
                                            all defined below
Domestic slack    Interaction of            Domestic slack defined above. Import share is
                                                                                               Calculated. Import
* Import Share    domestic slack and        the ratio of the country's imports to GDP (both
                                                                                               share data from the
                  import share              in nominal domestic currency), over the last
                                                                                               IMF, IFS.
                                            four quarters
Hours gap         Difference between        Calculated as % of "normal" hours worked (the
                                                                                               Calculated based on
                  hours worked and          sample average for each country)
                                                                                               OECD data
                  "normal" hours
Involuntary       Difference between        Calculated as % of "normal" involuntary
part-time         "normal" involuntary      workers (the sample average for each country);     Calculated based on
workers gap       workers and current       available annually and interpolated to quarterly   Hong et al. (2017) data
                  involuntary workers
OECD domestic     Output gap as % of        Available annually and interpolated to quarterly
                                                                                               OECD
output gap        GDP



                                                                                                                 53
Participation      Gap between actual         Calculated as % of "normal" participation rate
gap                participation rate and     (the sample average for each country); available       Calculated based on
                   "normal" participation     annually and interpolated to quarterly                 OECD data
                   rate
Self-              Difference between         Calculated as % of "normal" self-employment
employment         "normal" self-             (sample average for each country)
                                                                                                     Calculated based on
gap                employment and
                                                                                                     OECD data
                   current rate of self-
                   employment
Temporary          Difference between         Calculated as % of "normal" temporary workers
workers gap        "normal" temporary         (sample average for each country); available           Calculated based on
                   workers and current        annually and interpolated to quarterly                 Hong et al. (2017) data
                   temporary workers
Unemployment       Difference of NAIRU        Available annually and interpolated to quarterly
gap                and unemployment                                                                  OECD
                   rate
World slack        Weighted average of        Slack in advanced economies reported by the
                   slack in advanced          IMF; slack in China calculated as the deviation in
                   economies and China        growth over the previous two years relevant to         Calculated based on
                                              the current quarter. Weights vary over time            IMF data
                                              based on IMF calculation of advanced economy
                                              share of global GDP.
World slack-      Negative of output          Calculated as a % of GDP for relevant
IMF Measure       gap for advanced            economies; available annually and interpolated         IMF
                  economies                   to quarterly
World slack-      Negative of output          Calculated as a % of GDP for relevant
OECD Measure      gap for OECD                economies; available annually and interpolated         OECD
                  economies                   to quarterly
Other Control Variables
Global value      Principal component         Components are: (1) relative growth of
chains            of four measures            merchandise trade volumes relative to
                                              global GDP; (2) traded intermediate goods
                                              as a share of global GDP; (3) share of these           First three components
                                              traded intermediate goods that are                     from Li, Meng and
                                              "complex" in the sense that they cross                 Wang (2019).
                                              country borders at least twice; and (4) PPI
                                              dispersion (defined below). Available
                                              annually and interpolated to quarterly.
PPI dispersion     Dispersion of              Standard deviation in producer price inflation
                                                                                                     Calculated based on
                   producer prices            for all countries in sample in each quarter, PPI
                                                                                                     IMF PPI
                                              inflation measured relative to 4 quarters earlier
Real exchange      Real effective             % change in real exchange rate, relative to 8
rate index         exchange rate based        quarters earlier                                       IMF, IFS
                   on consumer prices


Note: (1) Adjustments for VAT increases: Australia in 2000q3, Japan in 1997q2 and 2014q2, New Zealand in 2010q4, and United
Kingdom in 2010q1 and 2011q1.




                                                                                                                        54
                                  Appendix B: Country Sample


                          Advanced Economies1                Emerging Economies1
                     Australia             Korea                     Brazil
                      Austria              Latvia                    Chile
                     Belgium             Lithuania                  China
                      Canada            Luxembourg                Colombia
                  Czech Republic        Netherlands                Hungary
                     Denmark           New Zealand                   India
                      Estonia             Norway                  Indonesia
                      Finland             Portugal                 Mexico
                      France          Slovak Republic               Poland
                     Germany              Slovenia                  Russia
                      Greece                Spain                South Africa
                      Iceland             Sweden                    Turkey
                      Ireland           Switzerland
                       Israel         United Kingdom
                        Italy          United States
                       Japan




Note: Division between advanced economies and emerging markets based on definitions in IMF, World
Economic Outlook, 2017Q4.




                                                                                                55
                                                     Appendix Figure 1
                     Global Control Variables: World Slack and Global Value Chains


                                           Alternate Measures of Global Slack
        4 %                                       (as % of global GDP)

        3                                     OECD Measure
                                              IMF Measure
        2
                                              Principal Component
        1

        0

        -1

        -2

        -3
             1990     1993          1996      1999      2002        2005       2008       2011          2014     2017




                           Global Value Chains: Principal Component
        3

        2

        1

        0

        -1

        -2

        -3

        -4
             1995   1997     1999      2001     2003     2005       2007    2009      2011       2013     2015    2017




Notes: "World slack" is a weighted average of slack in advanced economies (from the IMF) and slack in China. Slack in China
calculated as the deviation in GDP growth from recent averages. The weight of the advanced economies for this calculation
varies over time, based on the share of advanced economy GDP in world GDP according to IMF statistics. The IMF measure of
slack only includes advanced economies, and the OECD measure only includes OECD economies. See text and Appendix A for
more details.

Global value chains are measured as a principal component of: relative growth of merchandise trade, share of traded
intermediate goods, complex share of traded intermediate goods, and dispersion in PPI inflation. See text and Appendix A for
more details.


                                                                                                                           56
                                                                                 Appendix Table 1

                                                      Sensitivity Tests for Phillips Curve Analysis: CPI Inflation


                                               PRE-CRISIS (1996-2007)                                                               LAST DECADE (2008-2017)
                       Different Definitions           Diff. Period/Sample     Diff. Specifications          Different Definitions         Diff. Period/Sample     Diff. Specifications
               Domestic         World                                                                 Domestic World
                  Slack:        Slack:       GVC:                                                       Slack:       Slack:      GVC:
               Unemploy         OECD China Exp Exclude                Only    Drop Inf.  Random       Unemploy OECD China Exp Exclude                     Only    Drop Inf.     Random
                    Gap        Measure Growth            2008          AEs     Expect.    Effects         Gap      Measure Growth            2008         AEs      Expect.       Effects
                    (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)           (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)           (7)
Inflation       0.794*** 0.708*** 0.800*** 0.741*** 0.640***                            0.693***        0.446        0.382       0.435      0.139        0.298                 0.596***
  Expect.          0.146        0.158       0.166       0.163        0.207                 0.084        0.335        0.289       0.320      0.449        0.270                    0.105
Lagged          0.583*** 0.595*** 0.594*** 0.589*** 0.453***                  0.697*** 0.709***       0.575*** 0.518*** 0.452*** 0.466*** 0.561***                 0.562***    0.623***
  Inflation        0.068        0.066       0.075       0.067        0.055       0.058     0.041        0.039        0.034       0.034      0.030        0.045       0.039        0.043
Domestic         -0.141*      -0.198*** -0.191*** -0.188*** -0.210***          -0.182** -0.103***       -0.016     -0.103**     -0.059      -0.070      -0.084*    -0.110**     -0.045*
  Slack            0.080        0.059       0.059       0.061        0.068       0.066     0.036        0.040        0.042       0.055      0.047        0.042       0.041        0.027
World Oil       0.030*** 0.030*** 0.031*** 0.030*** 0.029***                  0.030*** 0.032***       0.027*** 0.027*** 0.026*** 0.023*** 0.025***                 0.026***    0.026***
  Prices           0.004        0.004       0.004       0.004        0.003       0.004     0.004        0.003        0.003       0.003      0.004        0.003       0.003        0.003
World Comm.       -0.006        0.006       -0.004      0.004        -0.003      0.004     0.005      0.030*** 0.039*** 0.042*** 0.023*** 0.038***                 0.031***    0.029***
  Prices           0.010        0.013       0.012       0.013        0.013       0.013     0.014        0.009        0.009       0.008      0.008        0.008       0.009        0.009
Real Exch.       -0.021*      -0.029*** -0.034*** -0.027** -0.022**            -0.023** -0.020**      -0.036*** -0.037*** -0.039*** -0.038*** -0.038**            -0.039***    -0.035***
  Rate             0.012        0.010       0.011       0.011        0.010       0.010     0.009        0.013        0.013       0.014      0.011        0.014       0.012        0.010
World          -0.481*** -0.272*** -0.174             -0.410*** -0.404***     -0.358*** -0.469***     -0.443*** -0.203*** -0.442*** -0.186** -0.443***            -0.439***    -0.455***
  Slack            0.106        0.059       0.116       0.092        0.091       0.092     0.083        0.062        0.047       0.081      0.079        0.080       0.071        0.072
Global Value -0.282*** -0.229*** 0.000                -0.258*** -0.197**      -0.295*** -0.239***     -0.354*** -0.247*** 0.000*** -0.340*** -0.346***            -0.362***    -0.371***
  Chains           0.067        0.064       0.000       0.068        0.072       0.069     0.059        0.083        0.069       0.000      0.072        0.084       0.077        0.078
Constant       -1.025*** -0.842** -0.721** -0.938***                 -0.425    0.430** -1.178***        0.690        0.769     2.266***     1.216       1.043*     1.735***       0.338
                   0.300        0.319       0.317       0.321        0.372       0.180     0.146        0.715        0.632       0.791      1.030        0.569       0.132        0.273
R2                0.416         0.411       0.406       0.414        0.275      0.397     0.642         0.391       0.405       0.444       0.295        0.447      0.418        0.513
# obs              1360         1404         1404       1404          1263       1404      1404          1191        1231        1107        1111        1080        1231         1231
F-Test: Global 50.9***         32.0*** 30.0***         32.4***      30.6***    22.8*** 154.7***        66.2*** 68.7*** 70.5*** 59.0*** 79.7***                     72.7***     361.1***

Notes: Phillips curve regressions of equation (3) for quarterly CPI inflation from 1996-2017. See Appendix A for data definitions and text for details. Estimated using fixed effects
with robust standard errors clustered by country, except column (7) is estimated with random effects. Column (1) measures domestic slack with the unemployment gap and
column (2) measures world slack using the OECD measure. Column (3) measures GVCs using growth in China's exports. Column (4) drops 2008 and column (5) only includes
advanced economies, according to IMF definitions. Column (6) drops inflation expectations. F-Test: Global is an F-test for the joint significance of the five global variables. *** is
significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.



                                                                                                                                                                                          57
                                                                           Appendix Table 2
                                               Median Values for Key Statistics for Trend-Cycle Estimates



                                           15%-85% Trend                                                                       % of Variation
                                                Range               Variance in "Trend"           Variance in "Cycle"        Explained by Trend
                                            CPI      Core             CPI        Core               CPI        Core            CPI       Core
                                            (1)       (2)             (3)         (4)               (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)
                        Full Period
                        1990-2017         0.954       0.708           0.382       0.311            1.504       0.710            31%         55%

                        Pre-crisis
                        1997-2007         0.914       0.768           0.262       0.305            1.329       0.841            19%         40%

                        Last Decade
                        2008-2017         1.039       0.648           0.170       0.097            1.504       0.642            40%         68%

Notes: Table reports median statistics for estimates of the trend and cycle for CPI and core inflation for advanced economies using the ARSV model developed in Forbes et al.
(2019) and discussed in Section V.A. The column "15% to 85% Trend Range" reports the range between the 15th and 85th percentile estimates of the corresponding measure of the
trend.




                                                                                                                                                                          58
                                                                                Appendix Table 3

                                                     Sensitivity Tests for Phillips Curve Analysis: Core Inflation


                                             PRE-CRISIS (1996-2007)                                                            LAST DECADE (2008-2017)
                       Different Definitions       Diff. Period/Sample       Diff. Specifications         Different Definitions        Diff. Period/Sample        Diff. Specifications
                 Domestic World                                                                     Domestic World
                   Slack:     Slack:       GVC:                                                       Slack:     Slack:       GVC:
                 Unemploy OECD China Exp Exclude                 Only       Drop Inf.   Random      Unemploy OECD China Exp Exclude                  Only        Drop Inf.   Random
                    Gap      Measure Growth          2008        AEs         Expect.     Effects       Gap      Measure Growth           2008        AEs          Expect.     Effects
                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)         (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)                (7)
Inflation      0.440***     0.474***    0.512***    0.483***    0.471***                0.421***      0.345*     0.529***    0.582*** 0.360* 0.553***                        0.527***
  Expect.         0.097        0.095       0.087       0.092      0.126                   0.058        0.179        0.159      0.188     0.200     0.170                       0.097
Lagged         0.674***     0.654***    0.643***    0.653***    0.590***     0.737***   0.788***     0.480***    0.469***    0.442*** 0.407*** 0.444*** 0.497***             0.592***
  Inflation       0.060        0.060       0.059       0.059       0.060       0.042      0.034        0.053        0.047      0.047     0.061     0.068     0.047             0.046
Domestic         -0.118*    -0.176***   -0.167***   -0.170***   -0.173***   -0.164***   -0.097***    -0.074**    -0.111***   -0.102** -0.104*** -0.120*** -0.125***          -0.061***
  Slack           0.062        0.040       0.043       0.042       0.046       0.044      0.031        0.029        0.031      0.038     0.028     0.035     0.029             0.019
World Comm.       -0.002       0.000      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.003      0.000      0.016***    0.015***    0.010*** 0.011*** 0.015*** 0.015***             0.014***
  + Oil Prices    0.005        0.006       0.006       0.006       0.006       0.006      0.005        0.004        0.003      0.003     0.003     0.004     0.004             0.004
Real Exch.     -0.020***    -0.027***   -0.024***   -0.026***   -0.026***   -0.024***   -0.023***     -0.015       -0.013     -0.011   -0.018**   -0.010    -0.013            -0.012*
  Rate            0.006        0.006       0.007       0.006       0.007       0.006      0.006        0.009        0.009      0.008     0.007     0.010     0.008             0.007
World          -0.208***      -0.062     -0.167**    -0.124**     -0.089      -0.101    -0.184***     -0.045       -0.028    -0.119**    0.042    -0.032    -0.047             -0.074
  Slack           0.060        0.044       0.076       0.059       0.066       0.066      0.054        0.050        0.035      0.055     0.089     0.054     0.054             0.048
Global Value    -0.096**      -0.047      0.000*      -0.069      -0.023     -0.092**     -0.051       0.084        0.074     0.000*     0.067     0.062     0.068             0.068
  Chains           0.042       0.043       0.000       0.043       0.042       0.042      0.040        0.061        0.054      0.000     0.068     0.065     0.062             0.062
Constant        -0.321**     -0.315**     -0.157    -0.360***     -0.199     0.525***   -0.558***      0.152       -0.166      0.337     0.162    -0.164 0.913***             -0.383*
                   0.130       0.120       0.149       0.111       0.172       0.135      0.082        0.382        0.315      0.490     0.441     0.281     0.134             0.200
R2                0.475       0.487       0.490       0.488       0.395        0.473      0.714        0.199       0.243       0.253    0.140     0.245     0.239              0.424
# obs              1358        1402        1402        1402        1262        1402        1402        1194         1234       1110      1114      1080      1234               1234
F-Test: Global 6.2***         6.0***     10.6***      6.6***      5.8***      5.6***     30.7***      6.2***       5.3***     6.6***    5.8***    6.1***    6.1***            26.6***

Notes: Phillips curve regressions of equation (3) for quarterly core CPI inflation from 1996-2017. See Appendix A for data definitions and text for details. Estimated using fixed
effects with robust standard errors clustered by country, except column (7) is estimated with random effects. Column (1) measures domestic slack with the unemployment gap
and column (2) measures world slack using the OECD measure. Column (3) measures GVCs using growth in China's exports. Column (4) drops 2008 and column (5) only includes
advanced economies, according to IMF definitions. Column (6) drops inflation expectations. F-Test: Global is an F-test for the joint significance of the four global variables. *** is
significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.



                                                                                                                                                                                     59
                                                                                 Appendix Table 4

                                                     Sensitivity Tests for Phillips Curve Analysis: Wage Inflation


                                                PRE-CRISIS (1996-2007)                                                           LAST DECADE (2008-2017)
                         Different Definitions         Diff. Period/Sample   Diff. Specifications          Different Definitions         Diff. Period/Sample  Diff. Specifications
                 Domestic World                                                                     Domestic World
                    Slack:      Slack:       GVC:                                                     Slack:       Slack:       GVC:
                 Unemploy OECD China Exp Exclude                     Only    Drop Inf. Random       Unemploy OECD China Exp Exclude                    Only  Drop Inf. Random
                      Gap      Measure Growth            2008         AEs     Expect.   Effects         Gap      Measure Growth            2008         AEs   Expect.      Effects
                      (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)           (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)      (6)          (7)
Inflation           -0.086       0.039       0.088      0.052       -0.152             0.528***       -0.148       0.341       0.278      0.077        0.238              1.939***
  Expect.           0.209        0.204       0.198      0.202        0.381               0.182        0.686        0.647       0.651      0.526        0.639                0.508
Lagged           0.239*** 0.241*** 0.231*** 0.237***                 0.120   0.244*** 0.330***        0.050        -0.059      -0.139     -0.074       0.000   -0.024       0.113
  Inflation         0.044        0.059       0.063      0.058        0.089      0.052    0.039        0.114        0.110       0.127      0.104        0.143   0.103        0.083
Domestic           -0.211* -0.200*** -0.195** -0.197*** -0.193**             -0.196*** -0.135**     -0.294*** -0.261** -0.207** -0.278** -0.304*** -0.311*** -0.137
  Slack             0.121        0.064       0.068      0.066        0.076      0.068    0.055        0.054        0.108       0.093      0.099        0.096   0.088        0.094
World Comm.         0.006        0.006       0.004      0.005        0.010      0.005    0.008         0.007       0.007       0.000      0.001        0.003   0.006        0.001
  + Oil Prices       0.013       0.013       0.014      0.013        0.014      0.013    0.013         0.008       0.007       0.007      0.009        0.008   0.008        0.008
World               -0.222      -0.159      -0.192      -0.230      -0.152     -0.228   -0.246        -0.233      -0.202* -0.368**         0.020      -0.147   -0.233     -0.345**
  Slack              0.162       0.148       0.134      0.178        0.184      0.178    0.188         0.160        0.109       0.164      0.174       0.141    0.169       0.168
Global Value        -0.125      -0.114       0.000      -0.126      -0.073     -0.128   -0.060        -0.050       -0.102     0.000**     -0.017      -0.045   -0.071       -0.105
  Chains             0.105       0.110       0.000      0.107        0.109      0.105    0.116         0.087        0.112       0.000      0.085       0.079    0.097       0.112
Constant          3.487*** 3.132*** 3.313*** 3.100*** 3.543***                3.195*** 1.823***      3.560** 2.973** 5.232*** 3.012**                 2.666* 3.542***       -0.748
                     0.411       0.445       0.466      0.438        0.856      0.257    0.496         1.440        1.280       1.490      1.182       1.277    0.304       0.914
R2                  0.067       0.064        0.063      0.065       0.028      0.064     0.365        0.067        0.061       0.074      0.021       0.051    0.059        0.197
# obs                 878         878         878        878          784        878      878           782          782         720        702         703      782         782
F-Test: Global        1.0         0.9         1.7         1.2         1.2        1.0     9.4**          1.3          1.3        2.7*        0.0         0.8      1.2          5.2

Notes: Phillips curve regressions of equation (3) for private sector wage inflation from 1996-2017. See Appendix A for data definitions and text for details. Estimated using fixed
effects with robust standard errors clustered by country, except column (7) is estimated with random effects. Column (1) measures domestic slack with the unemployment gap
and column (2) measures world slack using the OECD measure. Column (3) measures GVCs using growth in China's exports. Column (4) drops 2008 and column (5) only includes
advanced economies, according to IMF definitions. Column (6) drops inflation expectations. F-Test: Global is an F-test for the joint significance of the three global variables. *** is
significant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                    60
