                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




O BROTHER, WHERE START THOU? SIBLING SPILLOVERS IN COLLEGE ENROLLMENT

                                        Joshua Goodman
                                        Michael Hurwitz
                                        Christine Mulhern
                                         Jonathan Smith

                                       Working Paper 26502
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26502


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We are grateful to the College Board for sharing its data for this project. For helpful feedback, we
thank seminar and conference participants at the University of Chicago, Harvard, UVA, Brandeis,
Michigan State, APPAM and AEFP. Melanie Rucinski provided excellent research assistance.
Christine Mulhern was supported, in part, by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education, through grant R305B150010 for the Partnering in Education Research
Fellowship in collaboration with the Center for Education Policy Research at Harvard University.
The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the Institute or
the U.S. Department of Education. All errors are due to our siblings. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, Christine Mulhern, and Jonathan Smith. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
O Brother, Where Start Thou? Sibling Spillovers in College Enrollment
Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, Christine Mulhern, and Jonathan Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 26502
November 2019
JEL No. D1,D62,I20,I23,I24,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

We study within-family spillovers in college enrollment to show college-going behavior is
transmissible between peers. Because siblings' test scores are weakly correlated, we exploit
college-specific admissions thresholds that directly affect older but not younger siblings' college
options. Older siblings' admissibility substantially increases their own four-year college
enrollment rate and quality of college attended. Their improved college choices in turn raise
younger siblings' college enrollment rate and quality of college chosen, particularly for families
with low predicted probabilities of college enrollment. Some younger siblings follow their older
sibling to the same campus but many upgrade by choosing other colleges. The observed
spillovers are not well-explained by price, income, proximity or legacy effects, but are most
consistent with older siblings transmitting otherwise unavailable information about the college
experience and its potential returns. The importance of such personally salient information may
partly explain persistent differences in college-going rates by income, geography and other
characteristics that define a community.

Joshua Goodman                                   Christine Mulhern
Brandeis University                              Harvard University
415 South Street                                 79 JFK St.
Waltham, MA 02453                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                         mulhern@g.harvard.edu
JoshuaGoodman@Brandeis.edu
                                                 Jonathan Smith
Michael Hurwitz                                  Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
College Board                                    P.O. Box 3992
1919 M Street NW                                 Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
Suite 300                                        jsmith500@gsu.edu
Washington, DC 20036
mhurwitz@collegeboard.org
1        Introduction

The college enrollment patterns of US students vary substantially by income and location, as well

as other dimensions. Nationally, students from the highest income one percent of families are 77

times more likely to attend an Ivy League college than those from the bottom quintile (Chetty et al.,

2017). Even among similarly low income students, enrollment rates vary substantially by geogra-

phy. For those in the 25th percentile of the local parental income distribution, college enrollment

rates range from less than 32 percent in the lowest-attending decile of commuting zones to over 55

percent in the highest decile commuting zones (Chetty et al., 2014).1 Some of the most commonly

studied explanations for such gaps by income and geography include credit constraints (Belley

and Lochner, 2007; Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2012), differences in teacher and school qual-

ity (Chetty et al., 2014; Deming et al., 2014), and spatial variation in proximity of college options

(Hillman, 2016).

        Economists have paid less attention to social factors common to members of a given commu-

nity that may partly explain such income-based and geographic differences in college enrollment

patterns. If students' college choices are influenced by the choices of their peers, such spillovers

would contribute to observed enrollment differences. High income students might be more likely

than low income students to enroll at all or to choose high quality colleges in part because of ex-

posure to other high income peers who have made such choices. Communities with historically

low college enrollment rates may struggle to improve such rates because current students have

few peers with firsthand experience of the enrollment process and life on a college campus. Such

spillovers could partly explain persistence in college-going "culture" across communities.

        Suggestive evidence that such social factors matter for college enrollment is scattered through-

out recent papers. Hoxby and Avery (2013) note that high-achieving, low income students who fail

to apply to any selective college are disproportionately from schools where such students "have

only a negligible probability of meeting a... schoolmate from an older cohort who herself attended

a selective college." Dillon and Smith (2017) show that, controlling for a rich set of covariates,

the share of a student's high school graduates enrolling in four-year college strongly predicts the
    1
        See Online Appendix Figure VII, panel B.


                                                     1
quality of college chosen by that student, perhaps because they "have many role models to follow

through the college choice process." Black et al. (2015) similarly find that Black and Hispanic stu-

dents in Texas are more likely to apply to colleges that "recently enrolled any students from the

same high school and recently graduated students from the same high school of the same race".

They hypothesize that students have better information about a given campus when close peers

have attended that campus, and that successful degree completion by such peers is a particularly

important signal. Among high-achieving students in the UK, Campbell et al. (2019) find that high

schools' college enrollment rates statistically account for about half of the socioeconomic gap in

quality of college chosen.

   Siblings are particularly important peers. When asked who most influences their thinking

about postsecondary education, half of American high schoolers choose family members, com-

pared to only four percent who choose friends (Oymak, 2018). Numerous studies suggest that

siblings are particularly influential and even moreso when parents lack college education. These

include smaller scale qualitative studies showing that Black and Hispanic students report older

siblings as important influences (Mwangi, 2015), as well as larger scale quantitative work showing

that Black students' college enrollment rates are much higher when older siblings have enrolled

earlier (Loury, 2004). Our prior work using data on 1.6 million sibling pairs of SAT-takers shows

siblings' college choices are very closely related. One-fifth of younger siblings enroll in the same

college as their older sibling and younger siblings are 15­20 percentage points more likely to en-

roll in four-year or highly competitive colleges if their older siblings do so first (Goodman et al.,

2015). Correlations between sibling choices remain even after inclusion of extensive controls for

potential confounds, such as siblings' academic achievement.

   Such descriptive evidence does not, however, prove that older siblings' college choices causally

influence the choices of their younger siblings. The empirical challenges of identifying such peer

effects are well-known (Manski, 1993; Angrist, 2014). If two peers make similar college choices,

two major issues arise in estimating peer effects. First, the "reflection problem" involves difficulty

in distinguishing whether the first peer affects the second one or vice versa. We solve the reflection

problem by estimating spillover effects from older to younger siblings, making the reasonable



                                                  2
assumption that only the former's college choice can influence the latter's.2 Second, the "common

shock problem" arises from the fact that peers tend to share characteristics or environments that

might be driving both of their choices. This problem is particularly acute when studying siblings,

who share parents, homes, neighborhoods and other important potential determinants of college

choice.

       We solve the common shock problem by finding exogenous variation that affects the colleges

available to older siblings but does not directly affect younger siblings through any channel other

than their older siblings' college choice. The opening of a nearby college, used for example in

Currie and Moretti (2003), would not work as such an instrument because it would directly affect

the college options of both older and younger siblings. Instead, using data on the universe of

SAT-takers with no siblings, we identify a set of colleges that appear to use hidden admissions

thresholds.3 We then identify older siblings who applied to such colleges, which we refer to as

the older siblings' "target" colleges. A regression discontinuity design using older siblings' dis-

tance to the relevant threshold provides clear identification of such thresholds' impacts on older

siblings' choices. Because younger siblings' SAT scores are only weakly correlated with older sib-

lings' scores, the thresholds do not directly affect younger siblings' own admissions outcomes.

Any observed impact on younger siblings' college choices must thus run through older siblings'

choices.

       Our first stage analysis shows that meeting these admissions thresholds improves older sib-

lings' college choices. Admissibility substantially increases older siblings' likelihood of enrolling

in the target college, which has higher graduation rates and peer quality than the four- or two-year

institutions they otherwise would attend. For the older sibling, admissibility provides exogenous

variation in target college enrollment, which in turn thus substantially increases older siblings'

four-year college enrollment rate and quality of college attended.

       Such increases in older siblings' college enrollment and quality spill over onto younger sib-

lings' college choices. Older siblings' enrollment in the target college induces some younger sib-
   2
    See Black et al. (2017) for a similar discussion of identifying peer effects among siblings.
   3
    We do not observe admissions decisions but infer these thresholds from discontinuities in enrollment rates. Such
patterns could in theory also be driven by thresholds that affect financial aid packages, which in turn affect enrollment
probabilities.


                                                           3
lings to follow them to that same college. It induces a similar number of younger siblings to

attend other four-year colleges. Many would not otherwise have attended college at all, so that

younger siblings' college enrollment rates and quality of chosen colleges increase substantially.

Importantly, spillover effects on college enrollment and quality are much larger for those whose

family characteristics predict lower rates of enrollment in four-year colleges.

   What explains sibling spillovers in college enrollment? We consider and largely reject four po-

tential channels as insufficient to explain the observed patterns. Income effects, whereby family

credit constraints imply one sibling's college spending can crowd out another sibling's, are incon-

sistent with our results showing older siblings' slightly costlier college choices induce younger

siblings to make costlier choices as well. Price effects, whereby a younger sibling receives more

financial aid because an older sibling is also attending college, do not explain why we observe

spillovers for siblings far enough apart in age as to not be enrolled simultaneously. Proximity ef-

fects, whereby siblings benefit (or suffer) from being enrolled on the same campus, can not explain

why many younger siblings are induced to attend different colleges than the older sibling. Legacy

effects, whereby colleges give admissions preferences to those whose family members previously

attended, similarly can not explain why many younger siblings attend different colleges than their

older siblings.

   We conclude that the explanation most consistent with the observed spillovers involves infor-

mation effects. Older siblings' enrollment in higher quality colleges generates for parents and

younger siblings information unlikely to be transmitted through other means. Older siblings

attending higher quality colleges than they otherwise would may report to their families more

positive experiences from those campuses. Higher persistence and graduation rates on such cam-

puses may, in particular, change older siblings' reports of the returns to college enrollment. Such

information from older siblings may change parents or younger siblings' perceptions of younger

siblings' potential returns to attending higher quality colleges. Younger siblings may place partic-

ularly high weight on their older siblings' college experiences, given that the educational success

of a close family member may be more salient and predictive of one's own success than less per-

sonalized sources of information.



                                                 4
   These results contribute to two additional major strands of recent research. First, we provide

some of the only evidence, and the only in the US context, of peer effects in college choices. Until

recently, most of the voluminous peer effects literature exploited random or quasi-random as-

signment of classmates, schoolmates or roommates to study spillovers of peers' characteristics or

risky behaviors onto students' own academic achievement or risky behaviors (Sacerdote, 2011).

That literature rarely, if ever, focused on siblings as peers or considered college choices as either

treatments or outcomes. Recent research has begun to provide evidence of spillovers between

siblings in various behaviors, including: smoking and drinking (Altonji et al., 2017); military ser-

vice (Bingley et al., 2019); and paternity leave usage (Dahl et al., 2014). The latter two papers

argue that increased information, about the returns to military service and employers' reaction to

leave-taking, are the most likely mechanism explaining sibling spillovers in these non-educational

choices.

   A handful of recent papers from outside the US suggest sibling spillovers in educational

choices. Using distance to the nearest girls' school as an instrument, Qureshi (2018) shows that ad-

ditional schooling for Pakistani eldest sisters induces younger brothers to pursue more schooling.

Joensen and Nielsen (2018) use quasi-random variation in a school pilot scheme to show Dan-

ish older siblings' pursuit of advanced math and science coursework increases younger siblings'

propensity to take such courses. Dustan (2018) uses randomness induced by Mexico City's high

school assignment mechanism to show students prefer schools older siblings have attended. Most

similar to this paper are two recent working papers exploiting discontinuities in Chilean, Croatian

and Swedish admissions systems to estimate sibling spillovers in choice of degree and institutions

(Aguirre and Matta, 2018; Altmejd et al., 2019). Those papers also find spillovers across siblings

too far apart in age to be enrolling simultaneously and suggest that information transmission is

the most plausible explanation for the observed effects.

   A second related literature, consistent with our argument that siblings can provide important

information too costly or impossible to obtain otherwise, argues that "low-touch" interventions

substantially underperform "high-touch" ones with respect to college choice. Multiple recent

papers using nudge-style informational interventions at state or national scale fail to meaning-



                                                 5
fully impact college enrollment choices (Gurantz et al., 2019; Bird et al., 2019; Hyman, 2019). Re-

searchers testing multiple treatments often find that information only interventions have little im-

pact on students (Bettinger et al., 2012; Carrell and Sacerdote, 2017). Information on college-level

earnings, released through the US federal government's College Scorecard website, does not affect

the college application patterns of students from non-wealthy families or high schools (Hurwitz

and Smith, 2018). One explanation consistent with these findings is that students, particularly low

income ones, may not view as salient the information provided by such interventions, information

which is rarely personalized to their own circumstances.

      Conversely, higher touch interventions with a more personalized flavor seem to make substan-

tial differences in the college choices of low income students. Carrell and Sacerdote (2017), for ex-

ample, show in-person mentoring improves college attendance, perhaps by substituting for costly

or absent time investments of parents and teachers. Intensive after-school college counseling can

improve the quality of colleges first generation students choose (Castleman and Goodman, 2018;

Barr and Castleman, 2018). Traditional high school guidance counselors can make a substantial

difference in the college choices of disadvantaged students, in part through the provision of infor-

mation (Mulhern, 2019a). College choices can even be affected by personalized software showing

students how their admission chances compare to prior students from their own high school with

similar GPAs and SAT scores (Mulhern, 2019b). This body of work suggests students react power-

fully to information from people close to them or sources that otherwise are highly personalized

and thus salient. Siblings, and socially close peers more generally, are one critical source of such

information.



2     Data and Empirical Strategy

2.1     Data

We begin with student-level data from the College Board on all students from the high school

classes of 2004-14 who took the PSAT, the SAT, or any Advanced Placement exams. We observe

each student's name, home address and high school attended, as well as self-reported demo-



                                                 6
graphic information on gender, race, parental education and family income. We also observe

scores from all takes of the SAT, which during this time is offered seven times a year and can be

taken as often as the college application timeline allows.4 We observe all section scores from all

takes, allowing us to construct the SAT superscores most commonly used by college admissions

processes (Goodman et al., 2020). The superscores are the sum of a student's maximum math and

maximum critical reading scores, regardless of whether those scores occurred on the same take.

       For college outcomes, we observe all colleges to which students send their SAT scores, which

serves as a decent proxy for college application behavior (Smith, 2018). A merge between the Col-

lege Board data and the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), which tracks the enrollment of

students at nearly all U.S. colleges, allows us to observe the specific college a student enrolls in

at any given moment in time. We obtain some characteristics of such colleges, such as the aver-

age net price paid by students, by merging the NSC data to the federal government's Integrated

Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS).

       We construct two measures of college quality because neither NSC nor IPEDS provide useful

measures that are comparable across all colleges. First, we use the NSC data to construct for

each college the fraction of initial enrollees who eventually earn a B.A. from any college within

six years. Relative to IPEDS' graduation rate measures, this has the advantage of accounting for

transfers between institutions and allows direction comparisoon of two- and four-year colleges.

Students who do not enroll in college are assigned a zero for this variable. Second, we follow

Smith and Stange (2016) and construct for each college the average standardized PSAT score of

initial enrollees. This peer quality measure again has the advantage of allowing comparisons

between two- and four-year institutions, the former of which do not require SAT scores and thus

lack such a peer quality measure in IPEDS. Students who do not enroll in college are assigned the

mean PSAT score of all such students for this variable.
   4
    During this time period, retakes cost roughly $40, with low income students eligible for fee waivers for up to two
takes.




                                                          7
2.2      Identifying Siblings

We identify siblings as pairs of students from different high school classes whose last name and

home address match. This approach should yield relatively few false positives, such as cousins

living together. It does, however, likely generate many false negatives in which we mistakenly

label individuals with siblings as only children. This can stem from two primary sources. First,

we fail to identify as siblings any students whose family changes residential addresses in between

the years in which those siblings took the SATs. Second, and likely a smaller concern, siblings may

record their last names or home address differently.5

       That we fail to identify such students as having siblings will have no impact on the internal

validity of our subsequent estimates but does affect both sample size and the characteristics of

the population we study. In order to have a sibling in this data, families must have at least two

children in the high school classes of 2004-14, each of whom takes at least one College Board test

and who live at the same home address at the last test take. We refer to anyone for whom we fail

to identify a sibling as an "only child".

       Because some families have more than two siblings, we use each family's oldest sibling to

determine the "treatment" status of all younger siblings. The vast majority of siblings in our

data (77 percent) appear in pairs but 23 percent come from families where identify three or more

siblings. Because we use SAT-based admissions thresholds for variation in college access, our

sample therefore consists of families where the oldest identified sibling took the SAT. Families'

demographic characteristics are assigned to all younger siblings based on oldest siblings' reports,

for consistency across siblings and because treatment status is determined at the time of oldest

siblings' college applications. We structure the data so that each observation is a younger sibling,

whose characteristics and treatment status are assigned based on their oldest sibling.

       Our starting samples, shown in the first two columns of Table 1, consist of 11.3 million SAT-

takers with no identifiable sibling in the data and 3.1 million younger siblings with an identifiable

oldest sibling who took the SAT. Panel A summarizes demographic characteristics common to
   5
     Our matching process also identifies twins as only children because they are in the same high school class. We do
this in order to generate a set of siblings where influences clearly run from older to younger siblings. With twins, the
direction of influence is unclear.



                                                           8
all siblings in a family, while panels B and C show SAT scores and college outcomes of older and

younger siblings separately. Because siblings are more likely to be identified in residentially stable

families and those where test-taking is more common, the sibling sample is more economically

and educationally advantaged than the only child sample. Relative to only children, siblings have

higher family income and more educated mothers, are more likely to be white, and have higher

SAT scores and college enrollment rates. The sibling sample is, however, somewhat diverse, with

20 percent coming from black or Hispanic families and 35 percent having mothers who did not

attend college.


2.3     Detection of Admissions Thresholds

We use our data to detect which colleges admit students in part on the basis of minimum SAT

thresholds not known to applicants. Many colleges use minimum SAT scores as one criterion for

determining admissions decisions, so that meeting or exceeding a college's threshold typically

increases a student's probability of being admitted to that college. We focus on thresholds hidden

from applicants because publicly known thresholds induce some students to retake the SAT until

their scores meet the thresholds (Goodman et al., 2017). Such behavior creates endogenous sorting

around the threshold that invalidates the regression discontinuity design.

      Conversely, students can not react endogenously to cutoffs about which they are unaware.

Colleges that use such thresholds but not make this fact public are, for obvious reasons, unlikely to

share information about such practices with researchers. We therefore search our data for colleges

that use minimum SAT thresholds in the admissions process but do not make this fact public.

      We search for such thresholds using the only child sample, which is independent of the sibling

sample we use to estimate spillover effects. This avoids the potentially spurious findings that

might be generated by searching for thresholds using the same observations and outcomes used

to estimate treatment effects. For each college and year, we find all only children who sent their

SAT scores to that college, generating an indicator for a student enrolling in that college within one

year of graduating high school. We then search for discontinuities by SAT score in a given college's

enrollment rate among its applicants. We limit our search to the 526 colleges that received SAT


                                                  9
scores from at least 1,000 students each year, in order to minimize the possibility of false positives

arising from small samples.

      To search for discontinuities, we estimate local linear regression discontinuity models at each

SAT score that might represent a potential threshold.6 We define the set of potential thresholds for

each college as the set of SAT scores in the 5th to 50th percentiles of the applicant distribution for

the specified college and year. Colleges are unlikely to set minimum thresholds lower or higher

in their applicant distributions. For every potential threshold T and all applicants i to college c in

year y , we run regressions of the form:


  Enrolledicy = 0 + 1 1[SATi  Tcy ] + 2 (SATi - Tcy ) + 3 1[SATi  Tcy ] × (SATi - Tcy ) +        icy

                                                                                                   (1)


We define the running variable using students' SAT superscores, the most frequently used form of

scores considered by college admissions offices. To minimize false positives driven by specifica-

tion error, we use a bandwidth of 60 SAT points, within which enrollment graphs look generally

linear.

      The coefficient of interest 1 estimates the magnitude of any potential discontinuity in enroll-

ment rates at the given threshold T . To further limit potential false positives, we consider as

discontinuities only those instances where discontinuities in enrollment rates exceed five percent-

age points and where we reject the null hypothesis of no discontinuity with p > 0.0001. Finally,

we discard any colleges where thresholds are detected in fewer than five years, given that most

colleges that use minimum SAT scores in admissions are unlikely to change that policy from year

to year. We also discard a small number of colleges for which we find evidence from admissions

websites that the detected thresholds are publicly known.

      This procedure yields 21 threshold-using colleges, which we refer to as "target" colleges both

for brevity and because of older siblings' interest in attending these institutions. These target col-

leges are largely public institutions (16 public, 5 private) with an average enrollment of over 10,000

full-time equivalent students, and are located in eight different East coast states. The median SAT
  6
      Our approach is similar to that used in Andrews et al. (2017).



                                                            10
threshold across years for these colleges ranges from 720 to 1060, with students relatively widely

distributed across these colleges and thresholds.7 These target colleges' average graduation rate is

63 percent and the average PSAT z-score of their students is 0.27. They have average net prices of

$12,500, making them $4,000 less expensive per year than the average college attended by students

in our full sample.

    Our last use of the only child sample is to predict college enrollment rates in our sibling sample

based on families' demographic characteristics and college applications. Using only children who

applied to one of the target colleges, we regress a four-year college enrollment indicator on indica-

tors for all observed categories of income, race, maternal education and paternal education, as well

as indicators for the target college applied to. This has the advantage of using all demographic

information simultaneously and dealing with missing information by treating such missingness

as its own category.8 We then use the coefficients from that regression to make out-of-sample

predictions of four-year college enrollment rates in our sibling sample.

    We label the bottom third of the predicted enrollment distribution as "uncertain college-goers"

and the top two-thirds as "probable college-goers". Uncertain college-goers have a predicted four-

year college enrollment rate of 62 percent, compared to probable college-goers' predicted enroll-

ment rate of 77 percent. These rates are fairly high because the sample is already conditioned on

families with oldest siblings who have taken the SAT and applied to four-year colleges. Nonethe-

less, there is still sufficient variation in these predicted enrollment rates to capture meaningful

differences in families' attachment to and engagement with postsecondary education.

    Having used the only child sample to identify target colleges and make enrollment predictions,

we now set the only child sample aside and perform all subsequent analysis on the sibling sample.

Our main analytical sample is the set of younger siblings whose oldest sibling sent SAT scores to

a target college in a year when that college was using an admissions threshold. This yields over

166,000 younger siblings, 77 percent of whom have only one older sibling in the data and 23

percent of whom have at least two siblings in the data. The sample of younger siblings whose
   7
     Figure 1 shows the number of younger siblings in each college represented in our final regression discontinuity
sample, described further below.
   8
     Among our final sibling sample, fewer than one percent are missing race, about 10 percent are missing parental
education, and 35 percent are missing income.


                                                        11
oldest siblings applied to target colleges looks fairly similar demographically to the full sibling

sample, as seen in column 3 of Table 1. Both are 66 percent white, have average family income

around $80,000, and have oldest siblings' average SAT scores somewhat under 1100.


2.4     Estimation of Sibling Spillovers

Identification of spillover effects comes from comparison of families whose oldest siblings applied

to the same target college in the same year with nearly identical SAT scores, but whose college op-

tions differed only because of a hidden admissions threshold. We first characterize the treatment

by exploring how target colleges' admissions thresholds changed older siblings' college choices.

Our first stage regression is a local linear regression discontinuity design of the form:


  OlderT argetif cy = 0 + 1 OlderAccessf + 2 Distancef + 3 OlderAccessf × Distancef

                                                                                    + cy +   if cy .   (2)


Here, OlderT arget indicates older siblings' target college enrollment, with subscripts denoting

younger sibling i, from family f , whose oldest sibling applied to target college c in year y . OlderAccess

indicates the older sibling's SAT superscore met or exceeded the admissions threshold and Distance

represents the older sibling's distance from that threshold. The coefficient of interest 1 estimates

the difference in target college enrollment rates between older siblings just above and below the

threshold. Target college-by-year fixed effects  imply that all such comparisons are made only

between older siblings applying simultaneously to the same target college.

      To study the impact of older siblings' college access on their own college choices and those of

their younger siblings, we could then estimate reduced form regressions of the form:


  Yif cy = 0 + 1 OlderAccessf + 2 Distancef + 3 OlderAccessf × Distancef

                                                                                    + cy +   if cy ,   (3)


where Y characterizes the college choices of older or younger siblings.



                                                  12
   We instead focus on instrumental variables estimates of the impact of older siblings' target

college enrollment on younger siblings' college choices. We do so in part because we do not

observe actual admissions and thus can not scale any reduced form impacts in a meaningful way.

The instrumental variables approach also makes what we believe is a warranted assumption that

older siblings' access to the target college can affect younger siblings only through older siblings'

enrollment in that college. In other words, these estimates assume that older siblings' admission

alone can not affect younger siblings unless the former actually enroll in the target college.

   We therefore run regressions of the form


  Yif cy = 0 + 1 OlderT argetf + 2 Distancef + 3 OlderAccessf × Distancef

                                                                                    + cy +   if cy ,   (4)


where older siblings' target college enrollment OlderT arget is instrumented by their threshold-

driven access, using first stage Equation 2. We first describe the "treatment" more fully by defining

outcomes Y that characterize older siblings' college choices, in order to show how target colleges

differ from the counterfactual college choices older siblings would have made. We then study

younger siblings' college choices, estimating spillovers onto younger siblings' target college en-

rollment, four- and two-year enrollment, quality of chosen college chosen, and price and location

of chosen college.

   Our default specification uses a bandwidth of 100 SAT points, roughly the (Imbens and Kalya-

naraman, 2012) optimal bandwidth for many outcomes, though we show our main results are

robust to different bandwidth choices. Because our hidden thresholds may be measured with

noise, we also default to a donut hole specification that excludes observations on the threshold

itself. We later show are results are robust, though slightly less precise, to inclusion of such obser-

vations. Finally, we cluster our standard errors by oldest siblings' high schools, which accounts

for unobserved high school-specific correlations in prediction errors and nests within it clustering

by family, to account for the fact that some older siblings are represented multiple times in the

data across their multiple younger siblings.



                                                  13
       Our final regression discontinuity sample, shown in column 4 of Table 1, contains over 49,000

younger siblings. Relative to the full sample of only children and siblings, our RD sample is more

racially diverse but fairly similar in income and parental education. Columns 5 and 6 separately

show the uncertain and probable college-goers from this RD sample. Only 45 percent of younger

siblings in the former group enroll in four-year college, compared to 65 percent in the latter group,

suggesting our predictive analysis successfully detected the relevant heterogeneity.

       Before turning to our main results, we first confirm the validity of our regression discontinu-

ity approach. The distribution of observations near the hidden admissions thresholds appears

smooth.9 Excess mass to the right of the threshold would imply that older siblings were either

retaking the SAT to meet the admissions threshold or that those who had met the threshold were

disproportionately likely to apply to that college in the first place. The absence of such excess

mass suggests that students are unaware of the existence of these thresholds. Similarly, we see no

evidence of imbalance in any of the observed demographic characteristics, either in the full sam-

ple or among uncertain and probable college-goers separately.10 Younger siblings whose oldest

siblings fall just above and below hidden admissions thresholds appear observationally identical.

They appear to differ only in their oldest siblings' potential access to the threshold-using college.

       That siblings' SAT scores are not very highly correlated rules out one final threat to validity,

namely that target colleges' admissions thresholds are affecting younger siblings not through their

older siblings' college options but directly through their own. Among the nearly 90 percent of

younger siblings who took the SAT, the distribution of differences between their scores and those

of their older siblings is 175 SAT points, or 165 points among the regression discontinuity sam-

ple).11 This means that the set of older siblings just above and below the admissions thresholds

rarely have younger siblings who are similarly near those thresholds. The threshold thus provides

exogenous variation in older siblings' target college access distinct from younger siblings' access,

making the exclusion restriction more plausible.
   9
     See Figure A.1.
  10
     See Figure A.2 and Table A.1.
  11
     See Figure A.3.




                                                    14
3     Results

3.1     Older Siblings' College Choices

We begin our causal analysis by documenting the impact of hidden admissions thresholds on

older siblings' college choices. Our goal is to fully characterize how such thresholds alter the types

of colleges older siblings attend, in order to better understand the nature of the treatment younger

siblings are being exposed to. We find that meeting these thresholds substantially increases older

siblings' enrollment in target colleges and that such colleges are of much higher quality and, if

anything, higher cost than the college choices older siblings would otherwise have made. We now

discuss these findings in detail.

      Threshold-based admissibility roughly doubles the probability that older siblings enroll in the

target college. Figure 2 shows the remarkably linear first stage relationship between an older sib-

ling's distance to the target college's admissions thresholds and his or her probability of enrolling

in that target college. The visually striking discontinuity suggests that those just above the thresh-

old are roughly 10 percentage points, or nearly twice as likely, to enroll in target colleges as those

just below the threshold. That the point on the threshold is farthest from the fitted line suggests

potential mis-identification of the precise minimum SAT score used by the target colleges' admis-

sions processes, which motivates our decision to default to donut hole specifications.

      Table 2 quantifies that first stage discontinuity, estimating that meeting the minimum threshold

increases by nine percentage points the probability an older sibling enrolls in the threshold-using

college. The instrument is quite strong, with F-statistics exceeding 150 in our full sample default

specification and exceeding 20 even with narrower bandwidths and among smaller sub-samples.

The point estimate is quite robust to different specifications, ranging only from 8-10 percentage

points across bandwidths of 60-140 SAT points and remaining unchanged by the addition of de-

mographic controls. Eliminating the donut hole leaves the instrument quite strong but shrinks

the first stage magnitude to six percentage points. The magnitude of the first stage varies little by

predicted college enrollment rate, with quite similar estimates for uncertain and probable college-

goers.



                                                   15
   Nearly half of the marginal older siblings induced by admissions thresholds to attend target

colleges would not have attended four-year colleges otherwise. Panel A of Figure 3 shows a clear

discontinuity at the admissions threshold in the probability an older sibling enrolls in any four-

year college. Instrumental variables estimates in Table 3 imply that enrolling in the target college

increases older siblings' four-year college enrollment rate by 42 percentage points, from a baseline

rate of 58 percent. Many of these older siblings would otherwise have attended two-year colleges,

so that the two-year enrollment rate of marginal older siblings drops by 34 percentage points (to

zero). Only eight percent of these marginal older siblings would not otherwise have attended

college at all, so that access to the target college largely creates opportunities to choose four-year

institutions over two-year ones. That pattern appears both for uncertain and probable college-

goers.

   For marginal older siblings, target colleges are of substantially higher quality than the two-

year and four-year alternatives they would otherwise have chosen. Panel B of Figure 3 shows a

discontinuity at the admissions threshold in the historical B.A. completion rate of older siblings'

chosen colleges. Instrumental variables estimates in Table 3 imply that target colleges have B.A.

completion rates 26 percentage points higher than the 41 percent completion rate older siblings'

counterfactual colleges would have had. Peer quality at target colleges, as measured by student

body mean PSAT scores, is 0.45 standard deviations higher than the -0.06 average at older siblings'

counterfactual colleges. The magnitude of older siblings' college quality improvements is some-

what larger for uncertain college-goers than for probable college-goers, though such differences

are not statistically significant.

   Older siblings' target colleges are, if anything, more costly for their families and farther from

home than their counterfactual college options. Estimates in column 5 of Table 3 imply that target

colleges' annual net prices are over $3,000 higher than the alternative, an unsurprising result given

that two-year colleges generally have substantially lower tuition than do four-year colleges. This

difference, though statistically insignificant, suggests that older siblings' target college enrollment

may result in families having less savings to spend on younger siblings potential college tuition.

Target college enrollment also substantially increases the likelihood that older siblings enroll in an



                                                  16
institution at least 50 miles away from their home. Though not shown here, we observe weaker

evidence that target college enrollment increases out-of-state enrollment, suggesting that most

older siblings are enrolling in in-state colleges farther from home than they would otherwise have

chosen.

       Our estimates about the impact of hidden admissions thresholds on older siblings' college

choices are robust to alternative specifications. The magnitude and statistical significance of our

first stage and instrumental estimates are stable across all but the narrowest bandwidths between

60 and 140 SAT points, both for the full sample and for the sub-sample of uncertain college-goers.12

The estimated discontinuities are largest at the true admissions thresholds and diminish when we

use our default specification to test placebo thresholds at other points in the SAT score distri-

bution.13 This suggests our measured effects are true causal impacts and not simply statistical

artifacts.

       In summary, the admissions thresholds we identify serve as a strong instrument, generating

substantial variation in older siblings' college choices. Admissibility increases older siblings' en-

rollment at target colleges. Many would otherwise have attended two-year colleges, so that this

treatment involves large increases in four-year college enrollment and college quality, as mea-

sured by graduation rates and peers' academic skills. Older siblings end up at institutions that, if

anything, cost their families more tuition than alternatives and end up farther from home.


3.2      Younger Siblings' College Choices

We turn to estimating the impact on younger siblings of having older siblings who attend colleges

with higher BA completion rates and peer quality, and perhaps higher cost, than they otherwise

would have. We first consider younger siblings' college application process and then consider

their college enrollment decisions. We find that older siblings' enrollment in target colleges in-

creases younger siblings' probability of applying to the target college, generally improves the

quality of colleges they apply to, and substantially increases younger siblings' college enroll-

ment rate and quality of college chosen. The impact of older siblings' college choices on younger
  12
       For details, see Figures A.4 and A.5.
  13
       For details, see Figure A.6.


                                                 17
siblings' college enrollment rate and college quality are particularly pronounced for uncertain

college-goers, with probably college-goers seeing smaller spillovers. We now discuss these find-

ings in detail.

    Older siblings' enrollment in higher quality colleges does not affect their younger siblings'

SAT-taking behaviors but does increase the quality of colleges to which they apply. The estimates

in Table4 suggest that older siblings' target college enrollment has little clear impact on young

siblings' probability of taking the SAT or on their ultimate SAT scores.14 Older siblings' target

college enrollment does, however, nearly quadruple the probability that younger siblings apply

to the same target college (from 10 to 37 percent). Though younger siblings do not appear to

increase their number of college applications, they roughly double their probability (from 25 to

53 percent) of applying only to colleges with historical graduation rates higher than 50 percent,

suggesting their portfolio of applications improves given their older siblings choice of a higher

quality college. Younger siblings' application patterns suggest interest in imitating older siblings'

choices, both in terms of the specific college and general quality of college chosen.

    Spillover effects result in some younger siblings following their older siblings to the target

colleges to which the latter were exogenously granted access. Figure 4 shows the reduced form

impact of older siblings' admissibility to the target college on their younger siblings' probability

of enrolling in that same college. A large discontinuity in younger siblings' enrollment rate is

clearly visible at the admissions threshold faced by the older sibling. As Table 5 shows, 13 percent

of younger siblings follow their older sibling to the target college only because their older sibling

enrolled there, an impact that is highly statistically significant. Our control complier estimates

suggest that only two percent of younger siblings would otherwise have attended the target col-

lege, implying that nearly the only reason they attend is because their older sibling did. The extent

to which younger siblings follow their older siblings to the same college is roughly twice as large

for uncertain college-goers as for probable college-goers.

    Older siblings' enrollment in higher quality target colleges increases the college enrollment
  14
     To deal with potential selection into which younger siblings have valid SAT scores, we also create indicators for
having a valid score above every multiple of 100. We see no clear evidence that older siblings' college choices affect any
part of the SAT distribution for younger siblings, including the extensive margin.




                                                           18
rates of younger siblings, and not only due increased enrollment at the target colleges. The

spillover effects are not simply the result of younger siblings substituting the target college for

another four-year college they would otherwise have attended. Panel A of Figure 5 shows a clear

discontinuity at older siblings' admissions thresholds in younger siblings' four-year college en-

rollment rate. As Table 5 shows, younger siblings four-year college enrollment rate increases by

28 percentage points, nearly doubling, with little of that increase representing substitution away

from two-year colleges. Many younger siblings would not have attended college at all if their

older sibling had not enrolled in the target college. That the coefficient in column two is twice the

magnitude of the coefficient in column one implies that at least half the rise in four-year college

enrollment rates comes from younger siblings choosing four-year colleges other than the target

colleges themselves.

   The target colleges and other four-year colleges that younger siblings enroll in are of higher

quality than the counterfactual college choice they would have made. Panel B of Figure 5 shows

a clear discontinuity at older siblings' admissions thresholds in the graduation rate of younger

siblings' chosen colleges. Estimates in Table 5 imply that younger siblings' chosen colleges have

graduation rates 20 percentage points higher and peer quality 0.35 standard deviations higher

than the choices they otherwise would have made. Increases in younger siblings' college enroll-

ment rates and college quality are driven almost entirely by uncertain college-goers, with much

smaller spillover effects for probably college-going families.

   Younger siblings also enroll in colleges that are, if anything, more costly than the choice they

would have made had their older siblings not enrolled in the target college. On average, younger

siblings choose colleges with net prices $3,600 higher than they otherwise would have, though

that difference is not statistically significant. Uncertain college-goers drive these results, enrolling

in colleges with net prices close to $10,000 higher. Given that older siblings are, if anything, in-

creasing their families' costs by attending the target college, the fact that younger siblings' costs

also rise implies families are spending more in total on their childrens' college educations. Any in-

come effect therefore appears dominated by other channels and does not explain well the observed

spillovers between siblings. Uncertain college-goers also appear more likely to choose colleges far



                                                  19
from home as a result of their older siblings' enrollment in target colleges far from home.

       Our estimates about the impact of older siblings' target college enrollment on younger siblings'

college choices are robust to alternative specifications. The magnitude and statistical significance

of our instrumental estimates are fairly stable across bandwidths between 60 and 140 SAT points,

both for the full sample and for the sub-sample of uncertain college-goers.15 The reduced form

discontinuities peak at or close to the estimated admissions thresholds and diminish at placebo

thresholds to the right and left, again suggesting our measured effects are not simply statistical

artifacts.16 The magnitude and statistical significance of these spillover effects are robust to in-

clusion of covariates in our default specification and generally robust to elimination of the donut

hole, though the latter reduces their precision somewhat due to a diminished first stage.17

       In summary, older siblings' college choices have large and clear spillover effects on the choices

of their younger siblings. Younger siblings shift their college application portfolios to include the

colleges that their older siblings attend and generally upgrade the quality of colleges they apply to

because their older sibling enrolled in a higher quality college. Younger siblings then also enroll

in higher quality colleges, in part by enrolling in four-year colleges when they would not have

enrolled anywhere otherwise. These spillover effects are much larger for uncertain college-goers,

those from families whose ex ante characteristics predict only moderate likelihood of attending

four-year colleges at all.


3.3      Channels

What explains the college enrollment spillover effects from older to younger siblings? We consider

five potential channels through which such spillovers might occur: income effects; price effects;

proximity effects; legacy effects; and information effects. We discuss each of these in turn and

conclude that only the last, information, is consistent with our results.

       Income effects can generate spillovers if older siblings' college choices affect family budget

constraints that determine younger siblings' college financing options. Older siblings' choices
  15
     For details, see Figures A.7 and A.8.
  16
     For details, see Figure A.6.
  17
     For details, see Table A.2.



                                                    20
of more expensive colleges may leave credit constrained families with less funding to provide

younger siblings. Our estimates suggest that older siblings' enrollment in target colleges slightly

increases their cost of college. If income effects were large, we would then expect to see younger

siblings making less costly college choices, including enrolling at lower rates. Instead, we observe

younger siblings enrolling at higher rates, choosing colleges that are slightly more costly than they

otherwise would have or much more costly in the case of uncertain college-goers. If income effects

are present, they are dominated by other channels.

   Price effects can generate spillovers because an older sibling's enrollment in college can in-

crease the amount of financial aid a younger sibling is eligible for, as formulas for both federal

financial aid and some colleges' own financial aid plans take such factors into account. Some col-

leges also offer same-campus tuition discounts for siblings. Importantly, price effects are salient

only when both siblings are in college at the same point in time. When we split the sample by

siblings' age difference, as in the first two columns of Table 6, we find that siblings one to three

years apart exhibit somewhat smaller spillover effects than do siblings four or more years apart,

even though the latter are unlikely to be enrolled in college simultaneously. Price effects therefore

seem unlikely to explain a large portion of the observed spillovers.

   Proximity effects occur because younger siblings may gain or lose utility from being on the

same campus with their older siblings. This may stem from enjoying (or disliking) each other's

company, providing study help to each other, providing information about campus-specific issues

such as course choices, or even reducing enrollment costs through carpooling. That siblings four

or more years apart exhibit large spillovers again make this channel less compelling, given that

such siblings are unlikely to attend college simultaneously. That same-gender sibling pairs exhibit

no larger spillovers than opposite-gender sibling pairs, as in the middle two columns of Table 6,

also renders proximity effects less likely, assuming that former tend to be socially closer than the

latter. Proximity effects also fail to explain why younger siblings' four-year college enrollment rate

rose by twice as much as their target college enrollment rate, implying that many were induced

to enroll in different four-year colleges than their older siblings. Finally, the last two columns of

Table 6 show that spillover effects on four-year college enrollment and college quality are driven



                                                 21
entirely by the subset of younger siblings who never even applied to their older siblings' target

colleges.18 Such sibling pairs could not attend the same campuses, making proximity effects an

unlikely explanation for those spillovers.

       Legacy effects occur because some colleges give admissions preferences to students whose

family members have previously enrolled, in large part to increase the likelihood that family

members donate money to the college (Hurwitz, 2011). Legacy effects are unlikely to explain the

spillovers observed here, for two main reasons. First, the target colleges identified here are largely

public, non-flagship institutions, whereas legacy admissions are concentrated in more elite private

and public colleges. Second, as the discussion of proximity effects noted, much of the observed

spillover effect runs through younger siblings attending different colleges than their older sibling

and thus lacking any legacy status.

       Having ruled out price, income, proximity and legacy effects as potential explanations for the

observed college choice spillovers between siblings, we note that information effects are consistent

with such patterns. An older sibling's enrollment at a particular college campus may generate in-

formation for parents or a younger sibling that would otherwise be costly or impossible to obtain.

Older siblings attending higher quality colleges than they otherwise would may report to their

families more positive experiences from those campuses. Higher persistence and graduation rates

on such campuses may, in particular, change older siblings' reports of the returns to college en-

rollment. This is particularly true given that many older siblings would otherwise have attended

two-year colleges with particularly low graduation rates.

       Such information from older siblings may change younger siblings' own perceptions of the

potential returns to attending high quality colleges, which would be consistent with our obser-

vations of younger siblings applying to and enrolling in higher quality colleges than they would

otherwise. Younger siblings may place particularly high weight on their older siblings' college

experiences, given that the educational success of a close family member may be more salient and

predictive of one's own success than less personalized sources of information. Families may not

actively seek out information about college quality and the expected returns from a given insti-
  18
   Splitting the sample by an endogenous variable makes coefficient interpretation harder but provides one simple
way to demonstrate spillovers between siblings not sharing a campus.


                                                       22
tution. If they do, the average statistics contained in websites and college guides may feel only

somewhat relevant. Intimate personal knowledge of one person's positive experience with higher

education may be substantially more powerful, particularly for those whose family characteristics

suggest fewer close social connections to others pursuing higher education.



4   Conclusion

We provide some of the first causal evidence of peer effects in college choice, showing that younger

siblings are more likely to enroll in college and choose higher quality colleges after their older

siblings do so first. We argue that an older sibling's enrollment in a higher quality college can

provide for families information about postsecondary education that would otherwise be difficult

or impossible to obtain. In that sense, an older sibling's college choice is a particularly high touch

intervention, providing prolonged exposure to another person's experience of the complex good

that college education represents. Such information is particularly important in families where

parents do not otherwise provide it, perhaps because they themselves have little or no college

experience.

    If students' college choices are deeply affected by the college experiences of people in their

social networks, such social factors may partly explain persistent differences in college enrollment

by income, race and geography. Further research might investigate the role played by college

choices of other socially close individuals, such as parents, friends or neighbors. Such social factors

have been relatively understudied by economists and might shed further light on the origins of

inequalities in postsecondary outcomes.




                                                  23
References
Aguirre, J. and J. Matta (2018). Walking in your footsteps: Sibling spillovers in higher education
 choices. Working paper.

Altmejd, A., A. Barrios Fernandez, M. Drjle, C. Neilson, and D. Kovac (2019). Siblings' effects on
  university and major choice: Evidence from Chile, Croatia and Sweden. Working paper.

Altonji, J. G., S. Cattan, and I. Ware (2017). Identifying sibling influence on teenage substance use.
  Journal of Human Resources 52(1), 1­47.

Andrews, R. J., S. A. Imberman, and M. F. Lovenheim (2017). Risky business? The effect of major-
 ing in business on earnings and educational attainment. Working Paper 23575, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

Angrist, J. D. (2014). The perils of peer effects. Labour Economics 30, 98­108.

Barr, A. and B. Castleman (2018). An engine of economic opportunity: Intensive advising, college
  success, and social mobility. Working paper.

Belley, P. and L. Lochner (2007). The changing role of family income and ability in determining
  educational achievement. Journal of Human Capital 1(1), 37­89.

Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012). The role of application
  assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1205­1242.

Bingley, P., P. Lundborg, and S. V. Lyk-Jensen (2019). Brothers in arms: Spillovers from a draft
  lottery. Journal of Human Resources, 0317­8646R3.

Bird, K. A., B. L. Castleman, J. T. Denning, J. Goodman, C. Lamberton, and K. O. Rosinger (2019).
  Nudging at scale: Experimental evidence from FAFSA completion campaigns. Working Paper
  26158, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Black, S. E., S. Breining, D. N. Figlio, J. Guryan, K. Karbownik, H. S. Nielsen, J. Roth, and M. Simon-
  sen (2017). Sibling spillovers. Working Paper 23062, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Black, S. E., K. E. Cortes, and J. A. Lincove (2015). Apply yourself: Racial and ethnic differences in
  college application. Education Finance and Policy, 1­59.

Campbell, S., L. Macmillan, R. Murphy, and G. Wyness (2019). Inequalities in student to course
  match: Evidence from linked administrative data. CEP Discussion Papers 1647.

Carrell, S. and B. Sacerdote (2017). Why do college-going interventions work? American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 9(3), 124­51.

Castleman, B. and J. Goodman (2018). Intensive college counseling and the enrollment and per-
  sistence of low-income students. Education Finance and Policy 13(1), 19­41.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014). Measuring the impacts of teachers II: Teacher
 value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. American Economic Review 104(9), 2633­79.

                                                  24
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, E. Saez, N. Turner, and D. Yagan (2017). Mobility report cards: The role
 of colleges in intergenerational mobility. Working Paper 23618, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? The geogra-
 phy of intergenerational mobility in the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4),
 1553­1623.

Currie, J. and E. Moretti (2003). Mother's education and the intergenerational transmission of
 human capital: Evidence from college openings. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), 1495­
 1532.

Dahl, G. B., K. V. Løken, and M. Mogstad (2014). Peer effects in program participation. American
 Economic Review 104(7), 2049­74.

Deming, D. J., J. S. Hastings, T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014). School choice, school quality, and
 postsecondary attainment. American Economic Review 104(3), 991­1013.

Dillon, E. W. and J. A. Smith (2017). Determinants of the match between student ability and college
  quality. Journal of Labor Economics 35(1), 45­66.

Dustan, A. (2018). Family networks and school choice. Journal of Development Economics 134, 372­
 391.

Goodman, J., O. Gurantz, and J. Smith (2020). Take two! SAT retaking and college enrollment
 gaps. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Goodman, J., M. Hurwitz, and J. Smith (2017). Access to 4-year public colleges and degree com-
 pletion. Journal of Labor Economics 35(3), 829­867.

Goodman, J., M. Hurwitz, J. Smith, and J. Fox (2015). The relationship between siblings' college
 choices: Evidence from one million SAT-taking families. Economics of Education Review 48, 75­85.

Gurantz, O., J. Howell, M. Hurwitz, C. Larson, M. Pender, and B. White (2019). Realizing your
 college potential? Impacts of College Board's RYCP campaign on postsecondary enrollment.
 Technical Report 40, Annenberg Institute at Brown University.

Hillman, N. W. (2016). Geography of college opportunity: The case of education deserts. American
  Educational Research Journal 53(4), 987­1021.

Hoxby, C. and C. Avery (2013). The missing "one-offs": The hidden supply of high-achieving,
 low-income students. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 44(1), 1­65.

Hurwitz, M. (2011). The impact of legacy status on undergraduate admissions at elite colleges and
 universities. Economics of Education Review 30(3), 480­492.

Hurwitz, M. and J. Smith (2018). Student responsiveness to earnings data in the College Scorecard.
 Economic Inquiry 56(2), 1220­1243.

Hyman, J. (2019). Can light-touch college-going interventions make a difference? Evidence from
 a statewide experiment in Michigan. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.

                                                  25
Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression disconti-
  nuity estimator. The Review of Economic Studies 79(3), 933­959.

Joensen, J. S. and H. S. Nielsen (2018). Spillovers in education choice. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 157, 158­183.

Lochner, L. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2012). Credit constraints in education. Annual Review of
  Economics 4(1), 225­256.

Loury, L. D. (2004). Siblings and gender differences in African-American college attendance. Eco-
  nomics of Education Review 23(3), 213­219.

Manski, C. F. (1993). Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem. The review
 of economic studies 60(3), 531­542.

Mulhern, C. (2019a). Beyond teachers: Estimating individual guidance counselors' effects on ed-
 ucational attainment. Working paper.

Mulhern, C. (2019b). Changing college choices with personalized information at scale: Evidence
 on Naviance. Working paper.

Mwangi, C. A. G. (2015). (Re) examining the role of family and community in college access and
 choice: A metasynthesis. The Review of Higher Education 39(1), 123­151.

Oymak, C. (2018). High school students' views on who influences their thinking about education
 and careers. National Center for Education Statistics, Stats in Brief. NCES 2018-088.

Qureshi, J. A. (2018). Additional returns to investing in girls' education: Impact on younger sibling
 human capital. The Economic Journal 128(616), 3285­3319.

Sacerdote, B. (2011). Peer effects in education: How might they work, how big are they and how
  much do we know thus far? In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 3, pp. 249­277.
  Elsevier.

Smith, J. (2018). The sequential college application process. Education Finance and Policy 13(4),
  545­575.

Smith, J. and K. Stange (2016). A new measure of college quality to study the effects of college
  sector and peers on degree attainment. Education Finance and Policy 11(4), 369­403.




                                                 26
                                           Figure 1: Distribution of Younger Siblings Across Target Colleges



                                  12,000          Public college
                                                  Private college
     Number of younger siblings
                                  9,000
                                  6,000
                                  3,000




                                            720     780   790       800   830    890   900   920   1000 1050 1060

                                                           College's median admissions threshold

Notes: Shown above is the number of younger siblings in the main regression discontinuity sam-
ple, grouped by each college's median admissions threshold over the years observed. Each rect-
angle represents a single college.




                                                                            27
                                                           Figure 2: Older Siblings' Enrollment in Target College

                                             0.21
  Older sibling enrolled in target college
                                             0.01




                                                    -100           -50                   0                 50       100
                                                                      Older sibling's distance to threshold

Notes: Shown above is older siblings' average rate of enrollment in the target college, by their own
distance to the admissions threshold. Dot sizes are proportional to the number of younger siblings
in each bin. Also shown are fitted lines from a local linear regression model using a bandwidth of
100 and excluding observations on the threshold.




                                                                                    28
                                                                        Figure 3: Older Siblings' College Choices



                                                                                         (A) College type

                                                          0.80
          Older sibling enrolled in 4-year college

                                                          0.54




                                                                 -100         -50               0                 50   100
                                                                               Older sibling's distance to threshold

                                                                                       (B) College quality
          B.A. completion rate, older sibling's college

                                                          0.57
                                                          0.39




                                                                 -100         -50               0                 50   100
                                                                               Older sibling's distance to threshold

Notes: Shown above are older siblings' average enrollment rate in four-year college (panel A) and
college quality measured by six-year B.A. completion rates (panel B), by their own distance to the
admissions threshold. Dot sizes are proportional to the number of younger siblings in each bin.
Also shown are fitted lines from a local linear regression model using a bandwidth of 100 and
excluding observations on the threshold.


                                                                                           29
                                                       Figure 4: Younger Siblings' Enrollment in Older Siblings' Target Colleges

                                               0.06
  Younger sibling enrolled in target college
                                               0.03




                                                      -100               -50                  0                 50                 100
                                                                           Older sibling's distance to threshold

Notes: Shown above is younger siblings' average rate of enrollment in their older siblings' target
colleges, by their older siblings' distance to the admissions threshold. Dot sizes are proportional
to the number of younger siblings in each bin. Also shown are fitted lines from a local linear
regression model using a bandwidth of 100 and excluding observations on the threshold.




                                                                                          30
                                                                          Figure 5: Younger Siblings' College Choices



                                                                                            (A) College type

                                                            0.64
          Younger sibling enrolled in 4-year college

                                                            0.50




                                                                   -100           -50              0                 50   100
                                                                                  Older sibling's distance to threshold

                                                                                          (B) College quality
          B.A. completion rate, younger sibling's college

                                                            0.49
                                                            0.39




                                                                   -100           -50              0                 50   100
                                                                                  Older sibling's distance to threshold

Notes: Shown above are younger siblings' average enrollment rate in four-year college (panel A)
and college quality measured by six-year B.A. completion rates (panel B), by their older siblings'
distance to the admissions threshold. Dot sizes are proportional to the number of younger siblings
in each bin. Also shown are fitted lines from a local linear regression model using a bandwidth of
100 and excluding observations on the threshold.


                                                                                              31
                                       Table 1: Sample Characteristics

                                                                      Older        Regression discontinuity sample
                                                                     sibling
                                                                    applied to                   Uncertain      Probable
                                         Only          Sibling        target          All         college-      college-
                                        children       sample        college       students        goers         goers
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
(A) Demographics
Siblings                                  1.00           2.32           2.26          2.25          2.25              2.25
White                                     0.51           0.66           0.66          0.58          0.38              0.67
Black                                     0.14           0.08           0.16          0.24          0.29              0.21
Hispanic                                  0.15           0.12           0.06          0.07          0.14              0.04
Asian                                     0.11           0.09           0.08          0.07          0.09              0.05
Income (000s)                             67.1           80.0           82.5          75.4          43.8              92.1
Mother attended college                   0.58           0.65           0.70          0.65          0.34              0.81

(B) Older siblings
Maximum SAT score                         1013           1082          1070           949            910              968
Score sends                               3.67           4.37          6.61           6.15           5.61             6.41
Enrolled in 4-year college                0.54           0.68          0.78           0.70           0.60             0.75
College's B.A. completion rate            0.42           0.53          0.58           0.50           0.42             0.54
College's peer quality                    0.06           0.25          0.26           0.05          -0.08             0.12

(C) Younger siblings
Took SAT                                                 0.83          0.88           0.85           0.76         0.90
Maximum SAT score                                        1072          1059           989            935          1012
Score sends                                              3.49          4.22           3.74           2.78         4.21
Enrolled in 4-year college                               0.62          0.65           0.58           0.45         0.65
College's B.A. completion rate                           0.49          0.51           0.45           0.35         0.50
College's peer quality                                   0.22          0.20           0.07          -0.12         0.16

N                                      11,287,116     3,145,006       166,080        49,069        16,356        32,713
 Notes: Notes: Mean values of key variables are shown. Columns 1 and 2 divide the high school classes of 2004-14
 into those with no observed siblings and those with at least one observed sibling. Column 3 includes only those
 families in which the oldest sibling applied to one of the target colleges. Column 4 limits that sample to those
 within 100 SAT points of the relevant threshold, excluding those on the threshold itself. Columns 5 and 6 divide
 the RD sample into those in the bottom third and top two-thirds of the distribution of predicted four-year college
 enrollment. College quality is measured by the fraction of students starting at that college who complete a B.A.
 anywhere within six years and the mean standardized PSAT score of students at that college.




                                                        32
     Table 2: First Stage Impacts of Thresholds on Older Siblings' Target College Enrollment

Bandwidth =                        60          80           100          120          140         100          100
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
All students                   0.075        0.082        0.085        0.095        0.101        0.085       0.061
                                (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.007)
F-statistic                       62.4        109.3        152.9        234.8        314.1        154.0        80.8

Uncertain college-goers        0.078        0.076        0.083        0.091        0.101        0.083       0.060
                                (0.016)      (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.012)
F-statistic                       23.2         33.1         50.6         76.0        113.0         50.9        26.5

Probable college-goers         0.073        0.084        0.085        0.095        0.100        0.085       0.061
                                (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.008)     (0.008)
F-statistic                       40.2         76.7        100.0        160.7        205.8        101.2        54.8

Donut hole                         Y            Y              Y          Y           Y            Y            N
Demographic controls               N            N              N          N           N            Y            N
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school are in parentheses (*
 p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is a first stage estimate of the impact of an older sibling's threshold-
 based admissibility on their enrollment in the target college. Each estimate comes from a local linear regression
 that includes fixed effects for each combination of older sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and the target
 college to which the older sibling applied. Columns 1-5 use bandwidths from 60 to 140 SAT points and a donut hole
 specification that exclude observations on the threshold itself. Columns 6 and 7 replicate column 3 but respectively
 add demographic controls (for gender, race, income and parental education) and eliminate the donut hole. The first
 row includes all students, while the second and third rows divide the sample into those in the bottom third and top
 two-thirds of the distribution of predicted four-year college enrollment. Beneath each coefficient is the F-statistic
 for the admissibility instrument.




                                                          33
                       Table 3: Characteristics of Older Siblings' Chosen Colleges

                                      College type                  College quality                Price, location
                                                                                                                50+
                                                                   B.A.            Peer           Net          miles
                                  4-year        2-year          completion        quality         price        from
                                  college       college            rate          (Z-score)       (000s)        home
                                    (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)
All students                     0.424         -0.344            0.257            0.446           3.289      0.324
                                  (0.115)       (0.105)           (0.063)          (0.103)       (2.026)      (0.125)
                 ^
Control complier Y                 0.58           0.34             0.41             -0.06         10.44        0.23

Uncertain college-goers           0.409         -0.465           0.317            0.570           1.920        0.336
                                  (0.207)        (0.196)          (0.110)          (0.185)       (3.220)      (0.207)
                 ^
Control complier Y                  0.59          0.47             0.31             -0.29         11.37         0.21

Probable college-goers           0.370          -0.229           0.197            0.361           3.356       0.289
                                  (0.140)       (0.126)          (0.078)           (0.127)       (2.642)      (0.157)
                 ^
Control complier Y                 0.63           0.23             0.49             0.07          10.57        0.28
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school are in parentheses (*
 p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of an older sibling's
 enrollment in the target college on their own college choices, using admissibility as an instrument. Each estimate
 comes from a local linear regression with a bandwidth of 100 SAT points, a donut hole specification that excludes
 observations on the threshold, and fixed effects for each combination of older sibling's cohort, younger sibling's
 cohort, and older sibling's target college. The first row includes all students, while the second and third rows
 divide the sample into those in the bottom third and top two-thirds of the distribution of predicted four-year college
 enrollment. College quality is measured by the fraction of students starting at that college who complete a B.A.
 anywhere within six years (column 3) and the mean standardized PSAT score of students at that college (column
 4). Also listed below each coefficient is the predicted value of the outcome for control compliers.




                                                           34
             Table 4: Younger Siblings' College Entrance Exam and Application Choices

                                     College entrance exams                          College applications
                                    Ever            Maximum                                               Only high
                                    took              SAT                  Target          Total          grad. rate
                                    SAT              score                 college        number           colleges
                                     (1)               (2)                   (3)            (4)               (5)
All students                        0.074               41.1              0.267             0.610           0.278
                                   (0.090)             (39.8)              (0.096)         (0.910)          (0.119)
                 ^
Control complier Y                   0.82               949                 0.10            2.75              0.25

Uncertain college-goers             0.001               81.7                0.250           0.248            0.398
                                   (0.178)             (68.7)              (0.164)         (1.379)           (0.205)
                 ^
Control complier Y                   0.87               858                  0.13            2.97             0.10

Probable college-goers              0.113               -0.5               0.285            0.583             0.196
                                   (0.095)             (50.7)              (0.124)         (1.197)           (0.152)
                 ^
Control complier Y                   0.80               1015                 0.06           2.78              0.35
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school are in parentheses (*
 p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of an older sibling's
 enrollment in the target college on younger siblings' testing and application choices, using admissibility as an
 instrument. Each estimate comes from a local linear regression that includes fixed effects for each combination
 of older sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and the target college to which the older sibling applied. Each
 regression uses a bandwidth of 100 SAT points and a donut hole specification that exclude observations on the
 threshold itself. The first row includes all students, while the second and third rows divide the sample into those in
 the bottom third and top two-thirds of the distribution of predicted four-year college enrollment. The outcome in
 column 5 is an indicator for a student's application portfolio containing only colleges whose B.A. completion rates
 exceed 50 percent. Also listed below each coefficient is the predicted value of the outcome for control compliers.




                                                          35
                                 Table 5: Younger Siblings' College Choices

                                                 College type             College quality              Price, location
                               Followed                                                                             50+
                                   to                                    B.A.            Peer          Net         miles
                                 target       4-year      2-year      completion        quality        price       from
                                college       college     college        rate          (Z-score)      (000s)       home
                                   (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)         (7)
All students                    0.132         0.275       -0.060        0.201           0.345          3.556       0.190
                                 (0.048)      (0.122)     (0.101)        (0.074)        (0.137)       (2.191)     (0.117)
                 ^
Control complier Y                0.02          0.33       0.26           0.28           -0.24         7.51        0.19

Uncertain college-goers          0.200        0.448        0.061        0.423           0.649        9.820        0.459
                                 (0.085)      (0.216)     (0.186)        (0.129)         (0.230)      (3.614)     (0.198)
                 ^
Control complier Y                 0.00         0.13        0.12          0.03            -0.65        0.86         0.00

Probable college-goers            0.096        0.152      -0.106          0.068          0.158        -0.399       0.010
                                 (0.062)      (0.150)     (0.128)        (0.091)        (0.170)       (2.824)     (0.150)
                 ^
Control complier Y                0.06         0.48        0.31           0.44           0.01          11.81       0.36
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school are in parentheses (*
 p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of an older sibling's
 enrollment in the target college on younger siblings' college choices, using admissibility as an instrument. Each
 estimate comes from a local linear regression with a bandwidth of 100 SAT points, a donut hole specification that
 excludes observations on the threshold, and fixed effects for each combination of older sibling's cohort, younger
 sibling's cohort, and older sibling's target college. The first row includes all students, while the second and third
 rows divide the sample into those in the bottom third and top two-thirds of the distribution of predicted four-year
 college enrollment. College quality is measured by the fraction of students starting at that college who complete
 a B.A. anywhere within six years (column 4) and the mean standardized PSAT score of students at that college
 (column 5). Also listed below each coefficient is the predicted value of the outcome for control compliers.




                                                          36
                             Table 6: Exploring Channels for Spillover Effects

                                                                                                  Younger sibling
                                              Siblings'                     Siblings'                applied to
                                            age difference                  genders                target college
                                         1-3 years     4+ years        Same       Different         No          Yes
                                            (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)
(A) All students
Target college                            0.108         0.195          0.072       0.176          0.054        0.145
                                          (0.057)       (0.096)       (0.065)      (0.070)        (0.031)     (0.133)

Four-year college                          0.176        0.529          0.217       0.326         0.387        -0.121
                                          (0.135)       (0.247)       (0.165)      (0.175)       (0.169)      (0.149)

College's B.A. completion rate            0.166         0.290         0.168        0.226         0.277        -0.068
                                          (0.081)       (0.147)       (0.099)      (0.108)        (0.103)     (0.087)

N                                         33,356         15,713       25,047        24,016        39,142       9,865
(B) Uncertain college-goers
Target college                            0.179           0.246        0.154       0.295           0.097       0.337
                                          (0.099)        (0.165)      (0.112)      (0.137)        (0.064)     (0.225)

Four-year college                          0.293         0.812         0.328       0.674          0.600       -0.120
                                          (0.240)        (0.459)      (0.277)      (0.359)        (0.307)     (0.259)

College's B.A. completion rate            0.355         0.579         0.375        0.498         0.550         0.011
                                          (0.142)       (0.276)       (0.165)      (0.218)        (0.185)     (0.147)

N                                         10,866         5,482         8,461        7,844         13,407       2,815
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school are in parentheses (*
 p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of an older sibling's
 enrollment in the target college on younger siblings' college choices, using admissibility as an instrument. Each
 estimate comes from a local linear regression with a bandwidth of 100 SAT points, a donut hole specification that
 excludes observations on the threshold, and fixed effects for each combination of older sibling's cohort, younger
 sibling's cohort, and older sibling's target college. Columns 1 and 2 split the sample by siblings' age difference,
 columns 3 and 4 by siblings' gender match, and columns 5 and 6 by whether the younger sibling applied to the older
 sibling's target college. Panel A includes all students while panel B includes only those whose family characteristics
 predict four-year college enrollment probabilities in the bottom third of the distribution.




                                                          37
                                   Figure A.1: Density of Observations



                                              (A) Full sample
                .0024
          Density
                0




                        -500                           0                             600
                                  Older sibling's distance to admission threshold

                                 (B) Regression discontinuity sample
                .0073
          Density
                0




                          -100                            0                         100
                                  Older sibling's distance to admission threshold

Notes: Shown above is the density of younger siblings by their older siblings' distance to the
admissions threshold. Panel A shows the full sample of those whose older siblings applied to
a target college, while panel B limits the sample to those whose older siblings' SAT scores were
within 100 points of the relevant threshold.



                                                    38
                                                                   Figure A.2: Covariate Balance



                                                      (A) Gender                                                                            (B) Race/Ethnicity
                            0.53




                                                                                                                   0.17
                                                                                         Black or Hispanic
  Female
                            0.50




                                                                                                                   0.13
                                   -100        -50         0          50          100                                     -100        -50           0            50      100
                                          Older sibling's distance to threshold                                                  Older sibling's distance to threshold

                                                      (C) Income                                                                       (D) Parental education
                            0.50




                                                                                                                   0.71
  Family income > $50,000




                                                                                         Mother attended college
                            0.40




                                                                                                                   0.59




                                   -100        -50         0          50          100                                     -100        -50           0            50      100
                                          Older sibling's distance to threshold                                                  Older sibling's distance to threshold


Notes: Shown above are the mean values of younger siblings' characteristics by their older sib-
lings' distance to the admissions threshold. Dot sizes are proportional to the number of younger
siblings in each bin.




                                                                                    39
                               Figure A.3: Differences in Siblings' SAT Scores



                                                 (A) Full sample
                .0024


                                                                              = 175
          Density
                0




                        -600     -400         -200          0        200          400   600

                                        Difference between siblings' SAT scores

                                 (B) Regression discontinuity sample
                .0025




                                                                              = 165
          Density
                0




                        -600     -400         -200          0        200          400   600

                                        Difference between siblings' SAT scores

Notes: Shown above is the density of the difference between younger and older siblings' SAT
scores (for younger siblings who took the SAT). Also shown is the standard deviation of that
distribution. Panel A shows the full sample of those whose older siblings applied to a target
college, while panel B limits the sample to those whose older siblings' SAT scores were within 100
points of the relevant threshold.


                                                       40
                             Figure A.4: Robustness of Older Sibling Effects to Bandwidth Choice, All Students



                                               (A) Older sibling enrolled in target college                                    (B) Older sibling enrolled in 4-year college
                 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12




                                                                                                                         .6
                                                                                                      Treatment effect
                                                                                                                         .4
   First stage




                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         -.2
                                              60   70    80   90   100   110   120   130   140                                 60      70   80    90   100   110   120   130   140
                                                               Bandwidth                                                                          Bandwidth


                                            (C) B.A. completion rate, older sibling's college                                       (D) Peer quality, older sibling's college
                 .4




                                                                                                                         .6
   Treatment effect




                                                                                                      Treatment effect
   0 .1 .2 .3




                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                         0
                 -.1




                                                                                                                         -.2




                                              60   70   80    90   100   110   120   130   140                                 60      70   80    90   100   110   120   130   140
                                                               Bandwidth                                                                          Bandwidth


Notes: Shown above are first stage estimates of older siblings' admissibility on their target col-
lege enrollment (panel A) and instrumental variables estimates (panels B-D) of the impact of older
siblings' target college enrollment on their own college choices. Also shown are 95 percent con-
fidence intervals based on heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's
high school. Each estimate comes from a local linear regression with the listed bandwidth, a donut
hole specification that excludes observations on the threshold, and fixed effects for each combi-
nation of older sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and older sibling's target college. The
sample includes all students.




                                                                                                 41
 Figure A.5: Robustness of Older Sibling Effects to Bandwidth Choice, Uncertain College-Goers



                                               (A) Older sibling enrolled in target college                                    (B) Older sibling enrolled in 4-year college
                 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12




                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                      Treatment effect
   First stage




                                                                                                                         .5
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         -.5
                                              60   70    80   90   100   110   120   130   140                                 60      70   80    90   100   110   120   130   140
                                                               Bandwidth                                                                          Bandwidth


                                            (C) B.A. completion rate, older sibling's college                                       (D) Peer quality, older sibling's college
                                                                                                                         1.5
                    .6
   Treatment effect




                                                                                                      Treatment effect
                                                                                                                         1
       .2    .4




                                                                                                                         .5
                 0




                                                                                                                         0




                                              60   70   80    90   100   110   120   130   140                                 60      70   80    90   100   110   120   130   140
                                                               Bandwidth                                                                          Bandwidth


Notes: Shown above are instrumental variables estimates of the impact of older siblings' target
college enrollment on their own college choices. Also shown are 95 percent confidence intervals
based on heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school. Each
estimate comes from a local linear regression with the listed bandwidth, a donut hole specifica-
tion that excludes observations on the threshold, and fixed effects for each combination of older
sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and older sibling's target college. The sample includes
only students whose family characteristics predict four-year college enrollment probabilities in
the bottom third of the distribution.




                                                                                                 42
                                            Figure A.6: Placebo Thresholds for Older Sibling Effects



                               (A) Older sibling enrolled in target college                                          (B) Older sibling enrolled in 4-year college




                                                                                                              .06
                 .1




                                                                                        Reduced form effect
                                                                                                              .04
                 .05
   First stage




                                                                                                              .02
                 0




                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                              -.02
                 -.05




                              -40   -30   -20     -10   0   10      20   30   40                                     -40   -30   -20   -10   0   10    20   30     40
                                                Placebo threshold                                                                  Placebo threshold


                            (C) B.A. completion rate, older sibling's college                                          (D) Peer quality, older sibling's college
                                                                                                              .06
   -.01 0 .01 .02 .03
      Reduced form effect




                                                                                        Reduced form effect
                                                                                                              .04
                                                                                                              .02
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                              -.02




                             -40    -30   -20     -10   0   10   20      30   40                                     -40   -30   -20   -10   0   10    20   30     40
                                            Placebo threshold                                                                      Placebo threshold


Notes: Shown above are first stage (panel A) and reduced form (panels B-D) estimates of older sib-
lings' admissibility on their own college choices. Also shown are 95 percent confidence intervals
based on heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school. Each
estimate comes from a local linear regression re-centered around the true admissions threshold
by the listed amount, with a bandwidth of 100 SAT points, a donut hole specification that ex-
cludes observations on the re-centered threshold, and fixed effects for each combination of older
sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and older sibling's target college. The sample includes
all students.




                                                                                   43
                      Figure A.7: Robustness of Younger Sibling Effects to Bandwidth Choice, All Students



                           (A) Younger sibling enrolled in target college                                   (B) Younger sibling enrolled in 4-year college
                      .4




                                                                                                      .6
   Treatment effect




                                                                                   Treatment effect
                      .3




                                                                                                      .4
                      .2




                                                                                                      .2
                      .1




                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                      -.2
                      0




                           60    70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140                                  60   70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140
                                            Bandwidth                                                                        Bandwidth


                       (C) B.A. completion rate, younger sibling's college                                   (D) Peer quality, younger sibling's college
                      .5




                                                                                                      .8
   Treatment effect




                                                                                   Treatment effect
   .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                      .4
                                                                                                      .2
                                                                                                      0
                      0




                           60   70    80   90   100   110   120   130   140                                  60   70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140
                                            Bandwidth                                                                        Bandwidth


Notes: Shown above are instrumental variables estimates of the impact of older siblings' target
college enrollment on the characteristics of younger siblings' chosen colleges. Also shown are
95 percent confidence intervals based on heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by
oldest sibling's high school. Each estimate comes from a local linear regression with the listed
bandwidth, a donut hole specification that excludes observations on the threshold, and fixed ef-
fects for each combination of older sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and older sibling's
target college. The sample includes all students.




                                                                              44
Figure A.8: Robustness of Younger Sibling Effects to Bandwidth Choice, Uncertain College-Goers



                           (A) Younger sibling enrolled in target college                                   (B) Younger sibling enrolled in 4-year college




                                                                                                      1.5
                      .6
   Treatment effect




                                                                                   Treatment effect
                                                                                                      1
                      .4




                                                                                                      .5
                      .2




                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                      -.5
                      0




                           60    70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140                                  60   70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140
                                            Bandwidth                                                                        Bandwidth


                       (C) B.A. completion rate, younger sibling's college                                   (D) Peer quality, younger sibling's college
                                                                                                      1.5
                    .8
   Treatment effect




                                                                                   Treatment effect
              .6




                                                                                                      1
         .4




                                                                                                      .5
    .2




                                                                                                      0
                      0




                           60   70    80   90   100   110   120   130   140                                  60   70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140
                                            Bandwidth                                                                        Bandwidth


Notes: Shown above are instrumental variables estimates of the impact of older siblings' target
college enrollment on younger siblings' college choices. Also shown are 95 percent confidence
intervals based on heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high
school. Each estimate comes from a local linear regression with the listed bandwidth, a donut
hole specification that excludes observations on the threshold, and fixed effects for each combi-
nation of older sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and older sibling's target college. The
sample includes only students whose family characteristics predict four-year college enrollment
probabilities in the bottom third of the distribution.




                                                                              45
                                                    Figure A.9: Placebo Thresholds for Younger Sibling Effects



                                       (A) Younger sibling enrolled in target college                                                (B) Younger sibling enrolled in 4-year college
                         .01 .02 .03




                                                                                                                       .04
   Reduced form effect




                                                                                                 Reduced form effect
                                                                                                                       .02
                                                                                                                       0
                         0




                                                                                                                       -.02
                         -.01




                                       -40   -30   -20     -10   0   10      20   30   40                                            -40    -30   -20   -10   0   10    20   30   40
                                                         Placebo threshold                                                                          Placebo threshold


                               (C) B.A. completion rate, younger sibling's college                                                    (D) Peer quality, younger sibling's college
   -.02 -.01 0 .01 .02 .03




                                                                                                                       .02 .04 .06
       Reduced form effect




                                                                                                 Reduced form effect
                                                                                                                       -.04 -.02 0




                                       -40   -30   -20     -10   0   10   20      30   40                                             -40   -30   -20   -10   0   10    20   30   40
                                                     Placebo threshold                                                                              Placebo threshold


Notes: Shown above are reduced form estimates of older siblings' admissibility on their younger
siblings' college choices. Also shown are 95 percent confidence intervals based on heteroskedas-
ticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school. Each estimate comes from
a local linear regression re-centered around the true admissions threshold by the listed amount,
with a bandwidth of 100 SAT points, a donut hole specification that excludes observations on the
re-centered threshold, and fixed effects for each combination of older sibling's cohort, younger
sibling's cohort, and older sibling's target college. The sample includes all students.




                                                                                            46
                                                                Table A.1: Covariate Balance Tests

                                                                  Black          Income        Income       Income         Income          Mother         Predicted
                                                                    or            above         above        above        response        attended         prob. of
                                      Female        White        Hispanic         30,000        50,000       75,000        missing         college         college
                                        (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)             (8)             (9)
     All students                       0.004        -0.006        -0.001         0.008        -0.001         0.000         -0.004          0.001            0.003
                                       (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.009)        (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.011)          (0.002)
     Control mean                        0.52         0.54          0.34           0.55         0.44          0.33           0.33           0.63             0.71
     N                                 49,069       49,069        49,069         49,069        49,069        49,069         49,069         49,069           49,069

     Uncertain college-goers            0.001        -0.013        0.002          0.005         0.000         -0.006         0.018         -0.032            -0.001




47
                                       (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.017)        (0.019)       (0.016)       (0.012)        (0.017)        (0.017)          (0.002)
     Control mean                        0.53         0.36         0.45            0.43         0.24           0.11          0.29            0.36             0.61
     N                                 16,348       16,348        16,348         16,348        16,348        16,348         16,348         16,348           16,348

     Probable college-goers             0.005        -0.008        0.002          0.006        -0.006         -0.001        -0.019          0.010            0.002
                                       (0.013)      (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.010)          (0.001)
     Control mean                        0.50         0.65         0.28            0.62         0.56           0.47          0.35           0.80             0.76
     N                                 32,686       32,686        32,686         32,686        32,686        32,686         32,686         32,686           32,686
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). All coefficients
      are reduced form estimates of an older sibling's admissibility to the target college on the covariate listed. Each estimate comes from a local linear regression
      that includes fixed effects for each combination of older sibling's cohort, younger sibling's cohort, and the target college to which the older sibling applied.
      Each regression uses a bandwidth of 100 SAT points and excludes observations on the threshold itself. The outcome in column 9 is the younger sibling's
      predicted probability of enrolling in four-year college. Also listed are mean values of the covariate for students just below the threshold.
                  Table A.2: Further Robustness of Younger Siblings' College Choices

                                                  Baseline                    Including                  Eliminating
                                                specification                 covariates                 donut hole
                                                     (1)                          (2)                        (3)
(A) All students
Enrolled in target college                         0.132                       0.128                        0.223
                                                    (0.048)                     (0.047)                      (0.062)
Enrolled in 4-year college                         0.275                        0.219                         0.205
                                                    (0.122)                     (0.116)                      (0.150)
B.A. completion rate                               0.201                       0.159                         0.175
                                                    (0.074)                     (0.069)                      (0.092)
Peer quality                                       0.345                       0.258                        0.339
                                                    (0.137)                     (0.129)                      (0.170)
(B) Uncertain college-goers
Enrolled in target college                         0.200                       0.200                        0.332
                                                    (0.085)                     (0.085)                      (0.118)
Enrolled in 4-year college                         0.448                       0.454                         0.472
                                                    (0.216)                     (0.213)                      (0.272)
B.A. completion rate                               0.423                       0.407                        0.472
                                                    (0.129)                     (0.127)                      (0.171)
Peer quality                                       0.649                       0.590                        0.784
                                                    (0.230)                     (0.223)                      (0.304)
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by oldest sibling's high school are in parentheses (*
 p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of an older sibling's
 enrollment in the target college on younger siblings' college choices, using admissibility as an instrument. Each es-
 timate comes from a local linear regression that includes fixed effects for each combination of older sibling's cohort,
 younger sibling's cohort, and the target college to which the older sibling applied. Column 1 uses a bandwidth of
 100 SAT points and a donut hole specification that exclude observations on the threshold itself. Column 2 adds to
 that regression covariates, including gender, race, income and parental education. Column 3 eliminates the donut
 hole, including observations on the threshold itself. Panel A includes all students, while panel B includes those in
 the bottom third of the distribution of predicted four-year college enrollment.




                                                           48
