                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE INVESTMENT NETWORK, SECTORAL COMOVEMENT, AND THE CHANGING
                        U.S. BUSINESS CYCLE

                                         Christian vom Lehn
                                          Thomas Winberry

                                        Working Paper 26507
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26507


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2019, Revised December 2019




We thank Rodrigo Adao, Gadi Barlevy, Bob Barsky, David Berger, Steve Davis, Emmanuel
Farhi, Simon Gilchrist, Mike Golosov, Francois Gourio, Veronica Guerrieri, Jonathan Heathcote,
Erik Hurst, Anil Kashyap, Jennifer La'O, Lilia Maliar (discussant), Brent Neiman, Pablo
Ottonello, Matt Rognlie, Elisa Rubbo, Rob Shimer, Henry Siu, Joe Vavra, Christian Wolf, and
seminar participants at various institutions for useful suggestions. Winberry gratefully
acknowledges financial support from Chicago Booth. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christian vom Lehn and Thomas Winberry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Investment Network, Sectoral Comovement, and the Changing U.S. Business Cycle
Christian vom Lehn and Thomas Winberry
NBER Working Paper No. 26507
November 2019, Revised December 2020
JEL No. E22,E23,E24,E32,E62

                                        ABSTRACT

We argue that the network of investment production and purchases across sectors is an important propagation
mechanism for understanding business cycles. Empirically, we show that the majority of investment
goods are produced by a few "investment hubs" which are more cyclical than other sectors. We embed
this network into a multisector business cycle model and show that sector-specific shocks to the investment
hubs and their key suppliers have large effects on aggregate employment and drive down labor productivity.
Quantitatively, we find that sector-specific shocks to hubs and their suppliers account for an increasing
share of aggregate fluctuations over time, generating the declining cyclicality of labor productivity
and other changes in business cycle patterns since the 1980s.


Christian vom Lehn
Brigham Young University
435 Crabtree Building
Provo, UT 84602
cvomlehn@byu.edu

Thomas Winberry
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.winberry@chicagobooth.edu
1         Introduction
The defining feature of business cycles is the comovement of production across different
sectors of the economy. However, recent work has shown that the degree of sectoral co-
movement has fallen since the early 1980s, suggesting that sector-specific shocks have be-
come more volatile relative to aggregate shocks.1 Of course, a large literature studies how
the input-output network of intermediate goods propagates such sector-specific shocks to
macroeconomic aggregates. But given the central role of investment in business cycle fluc-
tuations, our goal in this paper is to understand the role of the investment network -- the
distribution of investment production and purchases across sectors -- in propagating these
sector-specific shocks and therefore understanding the changing nature of business cycles
since the early 1980s.
        We argue that the investment network is an important propagation mechanism for un-
derstanding business cycle fluctuations. We make this argument in three main steps. First,
we measure the investment network in the data and show that investment production is
dominated by a small number of investment hubs which are substantially more cyclical than
other sectors. Second, we embed our measured investment network into a multisector real
business cycle model and find that sector-specific shocks to investment hubs and their key
intermediates suppliers have large effects on aggregate employment, driving down labor pro-
ductivity. Third, we measure the realized time series of sector-level shocks in the data, feed
them into our model, and show that shocks to the hubs and their key suppliers account for a
large and increasing share of aggregate fluctuations over time. This fact allows the model to
generate the declining cyclicality of labor productivity and other changes in business cycle
patterns since the early 1980s -- despite the fact that the model has flexible prices and
frictionless labor adjustment.
        The first step in our analysis is to measure the investment network, which we define
as the amount of investment goods that are produced in sector i and subsequently sold to
sector j for each pair of sectors (i, j ) in the economy in any given year t. While the BEA has
released this information in its capital flows tables, those tables are only available for a small
    1
        See, for example, Foerster, Sarte and Watson (2011) or Garin, Pries and Sims (2018).



                                                       1
subset of years, do not include the majority of intellectual property, and are not consistently
coded across time. We therefore perform our own measurement of the investment network
building on disaggregated asset-level data for each sector. Our network covers a 37-sector
disaggregation of the entire private nonfarm economy, is available each year between 1947-
2018, incorporates intellectual property, and is consistently coded over time. For most of our
analysis in this paper, we average the network over time and refer to the averaged network
as "the" investment network. We have constructed alternative investment networks which
incorporate the agriculture and government sectors, separate equipment, structures, and
intellectual property products, and make other adjustments that may be of interest to other
researchers. We have also constructed the network of capital rental services across sectors
consistent with the national accounting procedure suggested by Barro (2019).
   Our measured investment network is extremely sparse: four investment hubs ­ construc-
tion, machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles manufacturing, and professional/technical
services ­ produce nearly 70% of total investment even though they only account for 15%
of value added, employment, or intermediates production. Production and employment in
these hubs are more volatile, more correlated with aggregates, and more strongly lead the
aggregate cycle than in non-hub sectors, consistent with their central role in our model.
   The second step of our analysis is to incorporate this measured investment network into
a version of the multisector real business cycle framework from Horvath (2000). Each sector
in our model produces gross output using capital, labor, and a bundle of intermediate goods
consisting of other sectors' output; this bundle is computed by a Cobb-Douglas aggregator
which characterizes the intermediates input-output network. Each sector also accumulates
new capital using another Cobb-Douglas aggregator of investment goods, which characterizes
our investment network. While other studies have also employed this basic model structure,
we discipline it with our new measurement of the investment network, explicitly study the
network's role in propagating sector-specific shocks onto employment, and show that it quan-
titatively accounts for the declining cyclicality of labor productivity and other changes in
business cycle patterns over time.
   Our main new result from this model is that shocks to investment hubs and their key
suppliers generate large changes in aggregate employment while shocks to other sectors do


                                              2
not. The key mechanism is that a sector-specific shock only affects employment if it increases
the production of investment goods in the economy; shocks that only affect the production of
consumption goods generate offsetting income and substitution effects, leaving employment
unchanged. We show that the importance of each sector in producing investment goods can be
summarized using the Leontief-adjusted investment network, which accounts for both directly
producing investment as well as indirectly supplying intermediates to investment producers.
Shocks to hubs and their key suppliers in this network act as aggregate investment supply
shocks, generating a large increase in employment.2 In contrast, shocks to other sectors act
as idiosyncratic investment demand shocks, which do not generate large changes in aggregate
employment.
       Our third step is to quantify the importance of this mechanism in explaining the postwar
U.S. time series by feeding the realizations of sector-level productivity shocks into a calibrated
version of the model. Since the early 1980s, the covariance of productivity shocks across
sectors has fallen by much more than the variance of shocks within sectors. We interpret this
fact as reflecting a decline in the volatility of aggregate shocks, which affect all sectors, relative
to the volatility of sector-specific shocks, which affect particular sectors in isolation. This
change is consistent with the decline in aggregate volatility following the Great Moderation
(see, e.g., Foerster, Sarte and Watson (2011)). In order to isolate the role of this change in
the shock process in driving our results, we hold all other parameters of the model (including
the investment network) fixed over time.
       The rising importance of sector-specific shocks, when propagated through the investment
network, quantitatively generates the declining cyclicality of labor productivity and other
business cycle changes since the 1980s. The pre-1980s sample is dominated by aggregate TFP
shocks, which generate procyclical labor productivity nearly by definition. However, since
sector-specific shocks become more important after the 1980s, shocks to investment hubs and
their suppliers account for an increasing share of employment fluctuations over time. These
   2
     Our investment hub shocks are reminiscent of the investment-specific technology shocks studied in,
for example, Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (2000) or Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2010). A
common problem in that literature is that investment-specific shocks generate negative comovement between
investment- and consumption-producing sectors, decreasing the aggregate effect of these shocks. Our model
generates positive comovement through the intermediate inputs channel in this Leontief-adjusted investment
network.



                                                    3
shocks drive down labor productivity because they increase aggregate employment by more
than GDP, thereby generating the declining cyclicality of labor productivity. Our model also
generates the observed decline in the volatility of GDP and the increase of the volatility of
employment relative to GDP over this period.
   These quantitative results are robust to a number of model extensions. First, they are
robust to allowing for trend changes in the investment network and other structural param-
eters, indicating that the rising importance of sector-specific shocks is the key driving force
behind these changes in business cycle patterns. Second, our results also hold in a second-
order approximation with CES proudction functions and preferences, which allows for richer
nonlinearities (see, e.g. Baqaee and Farhi (2019)). Third, our results are robust to various
forms of adjustment frictions in labor and capital markets.
   Finally, we document two new empirical results which support the role of the investment
network in accounting for the changes in business cycle patterns since the 1980s. First, we
show that the volatility of investment relative to the volatility of GDP has substantially
increased since the 1980s, consistent with the idea that sector-specific shocks to investment
suppliers play an increasingly important role over time. Second, we show that the changes in
business cycle patterns have not occurred within individual sectors but are due to changes
in the comovement of activity across sectors. For example, labor productivity is still highly
procyclical within sector; instead, the entire decline in the cyclicality of aggregate labor pro-
ductivity is due to changes in the covariance of value added and employment across sectors.
Our model matches these changing covariance patterns due to the declining importance of
aggregate shocks and the sparseness of the investment network. In contrast, existing ex-
planations for the declining cyclicality of labor productivity largely abstract from sectoral
heterogeneity and therefore do not speak to this empirical result.


Related Literature      Our paper builds on three lines of existing research. The first uses the
multisector real business cycle model to study how connections between sectors propagate
sector-specific shocks to macroeconomic aggregates. Our model's basic structure builds on
Horvath (2000), as do many others in the literature (see, for example, Foerster, Sarte and
Watson (2011) and Atalay (2017)). We make four main contributions to this literature. First,


                                               4
we focus on the investment network rather than on the input-output network of intermediate
goods. While a number of other papers also include an investment network, they do not
analyze its role in propagating sector-specific shocks.3 Thus, our paper is the first to analyze
the particular role of the investment network in propagating business cycle fluctuations.
Second, our new measurement of the investment network provides annual time series of
the network, includes all of intellectual property, and is consistently coded over the entire
postwar sample.4 Third, we study the joint dynamics of GDP and aggregate employment,
while most other papers focus on GDP. Fourth, we show that shocks to investment hubs and
their key suppliers decrease labor productivity and that their rising importance over time
accounts for the declining cyclicality of labor productivity.
       The second line of related research is the fast-growing networks literature which studies
how richer input-output networks in intermediate goods propagate idiosyncratic shocks to
macroeconomic aggregates (see, for example, Acemoglu et al. (2012), Acemoglu, Ozdaglar
and Tahbaz-Salehi (2017), Baqaee and Farhi (2019), Baqaee and Farhi (2020), Bigio and
La'o (2020), or the survey in Carvalho and Tahbaz-Salehi (2019)). In order to allow for
rich network structures, these papers use static models which abstract from investment. A
natural benchmark in these models is a strong version of Hulten's theorem: under Cobb-
Douglas preferences/production and competitive/ frictionless markets, the effect of a sector-
specific shock on real GDP is globally equal to the sector's Domar weight. The literature
has shown how deviations from Cobb-Douglas production (e.g. Baqaee and Farhi (2019)) or
from competitive/frictionless markets (e.g. Baqaee and Farhi (2020) or Bigio and La'o (2020))
can break this version of Hulten's theorem. We show that the presence of investment also
breaks Hulten's theorem because the capital accumulation technology is not Cobb-Douglas.
   3
     In a recent complementary paper, Foerster et al. (2020) use the same model structure to study how
changes in the trend growth of sector-level productivity affect aggregate trend growth (rather than studying
deviations from trend, as in our paper). Quantitatively, they find that capital accumulation in investment-
producing sectors plays an important role in aggregating sector-specific trends to the aggregate growth
rate, complementary with the role of investment hubs in propagating shocks which we study in this paper.
However, they take employment ­ our main outcome of interest ­ as exogenous. In addition, like other papers
in this literature, they measure the investment network using the 1997 capital flows table (see Footnote 4).
   4
     Foerster, Sarte and Watson (2011) and Atalay (2017) calibrate the investment network using the BEA
capital flows data from 1997, which excludes the majority of intellectual property. They are also forced to
make an adjustment to ensure their model is invertible but which artificially reduces the importance of the
concentration of the network. We do not require any ad-hoc adjustment to our model.



                                                     5
Furthermore, we characterize how the investment network interacts with the input-output
network using our Leontief-adjusted investment network.
       The final line of related literature studies how business cycle patterns have changed since
the 1980s and whether the real business cycle framework can explain those patterns. A large
subset of this literature focuses on the declining cyclicality of labor productivity in particular
and has suggested roughly three sets of explanations. The first is that the aggregate shock
process has changed over time (see, for example, Galí and Gambetti (2009) or Barnichon
(2010)). The second set is that firms and/or workers can now more easily adjust labor
inputs in response to shocks (see, for example, Galí and Van Rens (2020), Koenders and
Rogerson (2005), Berger (2012), or Bachmann (2012)). The third is that there has been no
actual change in the cyclicality of labor productivity, but that mismeasurement of those
objects has changed (see, for exmaple, Fernald and Wang (2016), McGrattan and Prescott
(2014), or McGrattan (2020)). This literature typically constructs models without sectoral
heterogeneity and therefore cannot speak to our empirical finding that the entire decline in
the cyclicality of labor productivity is due to changes in the covariance of activity across
sectors.5 More generally, we show that the investment network can reconcile a real business
cycle framework with key features of business cycles since the 1980s.


Road Map          Our paper is organized as follows. We measure the empirical investment net-
work and document the cyclical behavior of investment hubs in Section 2. We describe our
version of the multisector real business cycle model and calibrate it to match the measured
investment network in Section 3. In Section 4, we show that shocks to investment hubs
and their suppliers have large effects on aggregate employment, driving down labor pro-
ductivity, while shocks to other sectors have small aggregate effects. In Section 5, we feed
the realized time series of sector-level productivity into the model and show that the rising
   5
    We are aware of one paper which studies the declining cyclicality of labor productivity in a model with
sectoral heterogeneity: Garin, Pries and Sims (2018). We view their paper as complementary to our paper;
we both study the rise of sector-specific shocks, but focus on different mechanisms which propagate those
shocks to the aggregate. In Garin, Pries and Sims (2018)'s two sector model, a negative sector-specific shock
induces costly worker reallocation to the other sector, so employment falls by more than value added and
labor productivity increases. This mechanism implies that employment in the two sectors comoves negatively,
especially post-1984; however, in the data, employment comovement is positive and stable pre- and post-1984.
Hence, to our knowledge, our model is the only explanation for the declining cyclicality of labor productivity
that is consistent with the empirical comovement of employment across sectors.


                                                      6
importance of sector-specific shocks generates the declining cyclicality of labor productivity
since the 1980s. We provide empirical support for this mechanism in Section 6, which shows
that those aggregate changes have not occurred within sector but are driven by changes in
sectoral comovement (consistent with our model). Section 7 concludes.



2     Descriptive Evidence on the Investment Network
We combine three sources of sector-level data for our empirical work. We construct the
investment network using the BEA Fixed Assets and Input-Output databases for a sample
of 37 private non-farm sectors from 1947-2018 (our construction of the investment network
is described below). We use the BEA GDP-by-Industry database to obtain value added and
employment for the same set of sectors; however, since this data only records employment at
our level of disaggregation starting in 1977, we extend the data back to 1948 using historical
supplements to the data. Our combined dataset contains annual observations of value added,
investment, and employment for the 1948 - 2018 period. Appendix A.1 contains details about
the construction of our dataset.
    Table 1 lists the sectors available in our dataset. The main advantage of this dataset is
that it covers the entire postwar sample, which is necessary to analyze changes in business
cycle patterns over time. In addition, the partition of sectors provides fairly detailed coverage
of the private nonfarm economy. We cannot disaggregate the sectors much more finely in a
consistently-defined way over time and retain coverage of the entire postwar time period.


2.1    Empirical Investment Network

We define the investment network in year t as the share of the total investment expenditure
of a given sector j that is purchased from another sector i for each pair of sectors (i, j ) in
the economy. While the BEA capital flows tables provides information about these pairwise
flows, those tables have three key shortcomings for our analysis. First, the BEA tables are
only available for a handful of years, most recently 1997. Second, the sectoral disaggregation
used in the various BEA tables is not consistently defined over time. Finally, and most
importantly, the BEA tables do not include all of intellectual property; in fact, the 1997

                                               7
                                      Table 1
                       The 37 Sectors Used in Our Analysis
 Mining                                     Utilities
 Construction                               Wood products
 Non-metallic minerals                      Primary metals
 Fabricated metals                          Machinery
 Computer and electronic manufacturing      Electrical equipment manufacturing
 Motor vehicles manufacturing               Other transportation equipment
 Furniture & related manufacturing          Misc. manufacturing
 Food & beverage manufacturing              Textile manufacturing
 Apparel manufacturing                      Paper manufacturing
 Printing products manufacturing            Petroleum & coal manufacturing
 Chemical manufacturing                     Plastics manufacturing
 Wholesale trade                            Retail trade
 Transportation & warehousing               Information
 Finance & insurance                        Real estate and rental services
 Professional & technical services          Management of companies and enterprises
 Administrative & waste management services Educational services
 Health care & social assistance            Arts & entertainment services
 Accommodation                              Food services
 Other services

Notes: list of sectors used in our empirical analysis. Sectors are classified according to the NAICS-based
BEA codes. See Appendix A.1 for details of the data construction.



table is the only one which records any intellectual property at all, but even that only
records software (which was a third of all intellectual property investment in that year).
       We therefore construct our own measurement of the investment network which overcomes
these issues. Our construction is based on disaggregated asset-level data which records the
purchases of 33 types of capital goods for each sector in each year. We then use a "bridge
file" to allocate the production of these 33 types of capital goods to a mix of producing
sectors. Appendix A.2 describes our procedure for estimating this bridge file, which follows
BEA practice as closely as possible.6
       To our knowledge, our investment network is the only version of the capital flows tables
that is available in every year 1948-2018, is consistently defined over that period, and is
consistent with modern national accounting practices regarding intellectual property. We
   6
    Our measured investment network includes imports from outside of the U.S. and therefore accounts for
the fact that the share of imported capital has increased over time (see House, Mocanu and Shapiro (2017)).



                                                      8
also provide a number of alternative tables which may be of interest to other researchers
(as well as the asset-level bridge files used to construct the network). First, we provide an
investment network which also includes agriculture, federal government, and state/local gov-
ernment sectors. Second, we provide an investment network that adds an ad-hoc adjustment
for estimates of maintenance investment following Foerster, Sarte and Watson (2011) and
Atalay (2017).7 Finally, we provide analogous tables for capital rental services, which may be
useful in calibrating static models with capital (but without investment) or in constructing
a measure of national income along the lines of Barro (2019).8


Investment Network is Highly Concentrated Figure 1 plots a heatmap of our invest-
ment network averaged over time. Four sectors supply the majority of investment goods to
the rest of the economy: construction, which supplies the majority of structures; machinery
manufacturing and motor vehicle manufacturing, which supply the majority of equipment;
and professional/technical services, which supplies a majority of intellectual property. We
refer to these four sectors as investment hubs. Together, these hubs produce approximately
70% of the investment goods produced in the economy, even though they only account for
approximately 15% of value added produced, intermediate goods produced, or workers em-
ployed. The fact that this small number of hubs produce the majority of investment indicates
that the investment network is highly concentrated; in fact, Appendix A shows that the in-
vestment network is two to three times more concentrated than the intermediates network
according the skewness of their eigenvalue centralities or weighted outdegrees.
   7
     Foerster, Sarte and Watson (2011) and Atalay (2017) add an adjustment to the investment network
implied by the 1997 BEA capital flows table to ensure their models are invertible (though Horvath (2000)
does not). This adjustment is meant to account for maintenance investment that is done out of own-sector
output. While there is evidence that maintenance investment are sizable (see McGrattan and Schmitz Jr
(1999)), there are not estimates of which sectors produce this maintenance investment and maintenance
investment is not counted as part of GDP in national accounting anyway. Therefore, we prefer not to add an
artificial adjustment for maintenance investment in our baseline analysis; however, Appendix G shows that
our model results are robust to adding this correction.
   8
     Barro (2019)'s measure of national income satisfies the natural requirement that the present value of
national income equals the present value of national consumption. GDP does not satisfy this requirement
because investment is counted once when it is produced and then again when the resulting capital is used
in production. Barro (2019) suggests measuring national income as the sum of non-capital income plus the
net rental services on the current capital stock because the present value of these rental services equals the
present value of the capital used in production. Our net capital rental services network provides the sectoral
flows of the capital income portion of Barro (2019)'s measure of national income.



                                                      9
                     Figure 1: Heatmap of Empirical Investment Network


                                                                                           0.7




                                                                                           0.6




                                                                                           0.5




                                                                                           0.4




                                                                                           0.3




                                                                                           0.2




                                                                                           0.1




                                                                                            0




Notes: heatmap of empirical investment network. Entry (i, j ) computes share of total investment
expenditure in sector j that is purchased from sector i, averaged over the 1947 - 2018 sample.



       Appendix A.3 analyzes how the investment network has changed over time. The primary
change has been the rising importance of professional/technical services as an investment
supplier, consistent with the rising importance of intellectual property products. While these
changes are important for long-run trends, we focus on the average investment network for
our business cycle analysis in this paper.


Investment Hubs are Highly Cyclical                  Table 2 shows that employment and real value
added produced at investment hubs are more volatile over the business cycle than those at
non-hubs. We measure business cycle volatility using log-first differences and the HP filter.
Under both transformations of the data, the investment hubs are approximately 1.5 - 2 times
as volatile as non-hub sectors in both subsamples.9 For the rest of the paper, we will use
log-first differences to analyze business cycle fluctuations in order to avoid the issues with
two-sided filters explained in e.g. Hamilton (2018). However, all our results are robust to
using the HP filter, and we present those results from time to time to help compare our
   9
     We compute these statistics as the unweighted average across sectors in order to focus on the volatility
of the average sector. Of course, aggregate value added and employment, which we analyze in Section 5, will
also depend on the share of activity in the various sectors.

                                                     10
                                            Table 2
                           Volatility of Activity at Investment Hubs

                                  Investment Hubs                       Non-Hubs
                                 Pre-1984 Post-1984                 Pre-1984 Post-1984
                          (yst ) 9.13%    9.18%                     6.63%    5.51%
                          (lst ) 6.14%    4.83%                     3.81%    3.14%
                             hp
                          (yst  )    5.64%       6.29%              3.91%     3.40%
                            hp
                          (lst )     4.08%       3.21%              2.29%     1.91%

Notes: standard deviation of sector-level value added or employment. yst is logged real value added in
sector s and lst is logged employment in sector s.  (yst ) and  (lst ) refer to the standard deviation of
                                                   hp          hp
the first-differences of these variables, while  (yst ) and  (lst ) refer to the standard deviation of the
HP-filtered variables with smoothing parameter 6.25 for annual data. "Investment hubs" computes the
unweighted average of these statistics over s = construction, machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles
manufacturing, and professional/technical services. "Non-hubs" compute the unweighted average over the
remaining sectors. "Pre-1984" performs this analysis in the 1948 - 1983 subsample and "post-1984"
performs this analysis in the 1984 - 2018 subsample. To avoid endpoint bias from the HP filter, we omit the
first and last three years of data of the entire sample in computing the HP-filtered statistics.


     Figure 2: Correlogram of Sector-level Value Added with Aggregate Employment


                   0.8                                       0.8

                   0.6                                       0.6

                   0.4                                       0.4

                   0.2                                       0.2

                    0                                          0

                  -0.2                                       -0.2

                  -0.4                                       -0.4
                      -2        -1     0     1      2            -2      -1   0       1   2




Notes: correlation of value added growth in sector s in year t + h, yst+h , with aggregate employment
growth in year t, lt . Both yst+h and lt are logged and  denotes the first-difference operator. The x-axis
varies the lead/lag h  {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2}. "Investment hubs" compute the unweighted average of these
statistics over s = construction, machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles manufacturing, and
professional/technical services. "Non-hubs" compute the unweighted average over the remaining sectors.
"Pre-1984" performs this analysis in the 1948 - 1983 subsample and "post-1984" performs this analysis in
the 1984 - 2018 subsample.



results to previous studies.
    Figure 2 shows that investment hubs are also more correlated with the aggregate business
cycle. We compute the correlogram of sector-level real value added growth in year t + h with


                                                        11
aggregate employment growth in year t.10 Investment hubs' value added is more correlated
with aggregate employment at most horizons and the difference is larger in the post-1984
subsample, consistent with the idea that shocks to investment hubs have become more im-
portant for aggregate fluctuations over time. In addition, investment hubs more strongly lead
the aggregate cycle than do non-hubs.11



3      Model and Calibration
We now develop and calibrate a version of the multisector real business cycle model in order
to match our empirical investment network.


3.1     Model Description, Equilibrium, and Solution

The specification of the model is standard and follows Horvath (2000).


Environment Time is discrete and infinite. There are a finite number of sectors indexed
by j = {1, ..., N }, where N = 37 as in our data. Each sector produces gross output using
the production function
                                                                 j
                                                           1-j         1-j
                                     Qjt = Ajt Kjtj Ljt              Mjt                                    (1)

where Qjt is output, Ajt is total factor productivity, Kjt is capital, Ljt is labor, Mjt is a
bundle of intermediate goods, and j and j are parameters. Total factor productivity, Ajt ,
follows the AR(1) process
                                      log Ajt+1 = j log Ajt + jt+1 ,                                        (2)

where j is the persistence and jt are innovations (which can be correlated across sectors).
  10
     We use aggregate employment growth as our proxy for the aggregate cycle because our model predicts
that shocks at investment hubs have a stronger impact on aggregate employment than GDP. Nevertheless,
Appendix B shows that similar results hold when using GDP to proxy for the aggregate cycle.
  11
     Appendix B shows that non-hub manufacturing sectors' behavior is more similar to the non-hub sectors
than they are to the investment hubs. This result allays the concern that our results are driven by the
fact that two of our four investment hubs are manufacturing sectors, and that manufacturing may be more
cyclical than other sectors for reasons outside of our model. Furthermore, Appendix F shows that the extent
to which manufacturing sectors differ from other non-hub sectors is largely explained by their role as suppliers
of intermediate goods to the investment hubs, consistent with our model.




                                                      12
   The bundle of intermediate inputs Mjt consists of inputs produced from other sectors'
output, aggregated through the economy's intermediates input-output network:

                                                                  N
                                               ij
                                 Mjt =    N
                                          i=1 Mijt ,    where          ij = 1,                         (3)
                                                                 i=1


where Mijt is the amount of sector i's output used by sector j and ij are parameters. Con-
stant returns to scale in intermediate bundling implies that, within sector j , the parameters
ij sum to one. Each period, each sector j observes the TFP shock Ajt , uses its pre-existing
stock of capital Kjt , hires labor Ljt from a competitive labor market, and purchases inter-
mediates Mijt in competitive markets in order to produce gross output Qjt .
   After production, each sector accumulates capital for the next period using a bundle of
inputs that are aggregated through the economy's investment network. The capital accumu-
lation technology is
                                          Kjt+1 = (1 - j )Kjt + Ijt                                    (4)

where j is the depreciation rate of capital in sector j and Ijt is a bundle of investment goods.
The bundle is given by
                                                                N
                                               ij
                                  Ijt =   N
                                          i=1 Iijt ,   where          ij = 1,                          (5)
                                                                i=1

where Iijt is the amount of sector i's output used by sector j and ij are parameters. Invest-
ment hub sectors i have high ij for many purchasing sectors j . We denote the investment
network matrix as  = [ij ]ij .
   There is a representative household which owns all the firms in the economy and supplies
labor to those firms. The household's preferences are represented by the utility function

                                          1+1/                                          N
                                       L                                     j
           E0            t
                             log Ct -  t           ,   where Ct =      N
                                                                       j =1 Cjt   and          j = 1   (6)
                t=0
                                      1 + 1/                                            j =1


where  is the discount factor,  controls the disutility of labor supply,  is the Frisch
elasticity of labor supply, and j are parameters governing the importance of each sector's
consumption good in aggregate consumption.



                                                       13
Equilibrium        We study the competitive equilibrium, which is efficient. Output market
clearing for sector j ensures that gross output is used for final consumption, investment, or
an intermediate in production:

                                                    N             N
                                    Qjt = Cjt +          Ijit +         Mjit .                              (7)
                                                   i=1            i=1


                                                                                                   N
Labor market clearing ensures that aggregate labor demand equals labor supply:                     j =1   Ljt =
Lt . We denote the price of sector j 's output by pjt , the rental rate on sector j 's capital by
rjt , and the wage rate by Wt (which is common across sectors since labor is perfectly substi-
tutable). We take the price index of the household's consumption bundle as the numeraire.
See Appendix C for more details on the equilibrium conditions.


Solution Method           We solve the model by log-linearization. A key advantage of lineariza-
tion is that it is efficient enough to handle a model of this size (with nearly one hundred
state variables). In addition, the linear solution features certainty equivalence, so that the
covariance matrix of these innovations does not affect the decision rules. This property allows
us to simply feed the empirical time series of realized shocks into the decision rules without
needing to estimate how the entire covariance structure of shocks has changed over time.
However, linearization implies that we do not capture potential nonlinearities, such as size-
or state- dependent responses to shocks. We show that our results are robust to allowing for
nonlinearities in Appendix G.


3.2     Remarks on Simplifying Assumptions

We have made a number of simplifying assumptions in our model specification. For example,
Cobb-Douglas preferences impose that the elasticity of substitution across different sectors'
output is one, while Cobb-Douglas production technologies impose that the elasticity between
capital, labor, and intermediates are also one.12 We have also assumed that there are no
  12
    While purposely simple, we nevertheless view these assumptions as a useful benchmark, especially given
estimates of elasticities of substitution from the data. On the preference side, Oberfield and Raval (2020)
estimate the elasticity of substitution between finely disaggregated manufacturing sectors to be between 0.8
and 1.1. On the production side, most empirical estimates of the elasticity between capital and labor are less



                                                     14
adjustment frictions to capital or labor, either across sectors or over time (though we will
add a simple capital reallocation friction in our quantitative analysis in Section 5).
   As will become clear in Section 4, these stark assumptions allow us to clearly explain
the contribution of the investment network in propagating sector-specific shocks. In fact,
without investment, employment is constant in response to shocks and the effect of these
shocks on real GDP is given by the sector's Domar weight. Hence, our model is a useful
benchmark for understanding the role of investment -- and the investment network -- in
driving employment fluctuations. Nevertheless, we show in Appendix G that our main results
are robust to relaxing these simplifying assumptions.
   As discussed in the introduction, we also assume that all structural parameters of the
model are constant over time, so that the only force which generates changing business cycle
patterns is changes in the process generating sector-level shocks. We also show in Appendix G
that our results are robust to allowing these other structural parameters to change over time
as well. We interpret this finding as indicating that changes in these other parameters are of
secondary importance for understanding the aggregate business cycle fluctuations that we
study (though they may be important for understanding long-run changes or other business
cycle features).


3.3    Calibration

We calibrate the structural parameters of the model so that the model's steady state matches
key empirical targets averaged over the postwar sample. A model period is one year. We
identify the N = 37 sectors in our model with those in our empirical work, and therefore
use the BEA input-output database to infer the parameters of the production function. The
share of primary inputs in production j is given by the ratio of sector j 's value added
to its gross output, averaged over time. The labor share 1 - j is given by average labor
compensation (adjusted for taxes and self employment) as a share of total value added. See
Appendix D for the calibrated values of these parameters.
   The parameters of the intermediates input-output network ij are given by sector j 's
than one, but some estimates are greater than one. However, Atalay (2017) argues intermediates are much
more complementary with capital and labor than implied by Cobb-Douglas.


                                                  15
                          Figure 3: Heatmap of Intermediates Network


                                                                                            0.6




                                                                                            0.5




                                                                                            0.4




                                                                                            0.3




                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                            0.1




                                                                                             0




Notes: heatmap of intermediates input-output network ij constructed as described in Appendix D. The
(i, j ) entry of each network corresponds to parameter ij , i.e. the share of intermediate expenditures by
sector j on goods produced by sector i averaged across the years 1947-2018.



expenditure on intermediates from sector i as a share of its total intermediates expenditure,
averaged over the years 1947-2018. Figure 3 plots the heatmap of our calibrated intermediates
network. It has a strong diagonal element, capturing firms' purchases of intermediates from
within their own sector, but is also richly populated off the diagonal, capturing intermediates
purchased from other sectors.13
       The parameters of the investment network, ij , are equal to the share of sector j 's total
investment expenditure that is purchased from sector i, averaged over time ­ already plotted
in Figure 1. Capital depreciation rates j are the implied depreciation rates for each sector,
based on average annual depreciation of each capital good and the average amount of each
type of good used in sector j .
       The consumption shares j are given by the average consumption expenditure on sector j
  13
     Our measured intermediates and investment input-output networks account for goods that are imported
from sectors outside the U.S. Therefore, our model's decision rules for factor demand correctly account for
trade with the result of the world; however, the model counterfactually assumes that all factor supply is
domestically produced. While extending our model to an open economy framework would be an interesting
exercise, it is outside the scope of this paper. Our measured productivity shocks, discussed in Section 5, are
derived from purely domestic sources, so the exogenous shocks fed into our model are not driven by changes
in foreign demand.



                                                     16
output as a fraction of total consumption expenditure. We set the discount factor to  = 0.96.
We normalize the disutility of labor parameter to  = 1. We take the Frisch elasticity   
to capture indivisible labor at the individual level, as in Rogerson (1988), since we analyze
fluctuations in employment rather than hours.



4      Role of Investment Network in Propagating Sector-
       Specific Shocks
Before turning to our quantitative analysis, we explain the theoretical mechanisms through
which sector-specific shocks affect employment, GDP, and labor productivity.


4.1    Aggregation of Sector-Level Outcomes

Our first step is to define real GDP and aggregate employment in our multisector model.
                                                                                          N
While it is straightforward to compute aggregate employment Lt =                          j =1   Ljt , it is more
difficult to compute real GDP because relative prices change over time. We follow national
accounting practices and define real GDP using a Divisia index. The Divisia index begins
                                                           N
with the definition of nominal GDP PtY Yt =                j =1   pY                Y     Y
                                                                   jt Yjt , where Pt and pjt are price indices

for aggregate and sector-level value added and Yjt is sector-level real value added (defined
in Appendix C). The Divisia index then computes real GDP growth as the log-change in
nominal value added, holding prices fixed:14

                                               N
                                                      pY
                                                       jt Yjt
                                  d log Yt =                         d log Yjt .                             (8)
                                               j =1
                                                      PtY Yt

In our model, sector-level value added is equal to payments to the primary inputs because
there are no economic profits. Appendix C shows that these payments depend only on TFP
and the primary inputs themselves: d log Yjt =              1
                                                            j
                                                              d log Ajt    + j d log Kjt + (1 - j )d log Ljt .
Plugging this expression into the Divisia index (8) implies the following proposition:
  14
     The Divisia index is defined in continuous time while our model is in discrete time. For the purposes
of simplifying exposition here, we do not take a stance on the exact discrete time approximation to the
continuous time Divisia index used, but in our quantitative analysis, we use a Tornqvist index.


                                                      17
Proposition 1. Up to first order, the impact effect of a sector-specific shock Ait on real
GDP Yt is determined by

                                       N                                             N        
                                             pj Q j                                      Lj
                        d log Yt =                        d log Ajt +(1 -  )                     d log Ljt .              (9)
                                      j =1
                                             PY Y                                j =1
                                                                                         L
                                              d log T F Pt                               d log Lt


                     
            pj Qj
where       PY Y
                           is the ratio of sector j 's sales to nominal GDP in steady state (its Domar
                        
                           is sector j 's employment share in steady state, and 1 -  =
                Lj
weight),        L
                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                    j =1 (1   -
                
        pY
         j Yj              WL     
j )     PY Y
                    =      PY Y
                                     is the aggregate labor income share in steady state.

Proof. See Appendix E.                                                                                                        

       Proposition 1 shows that the effect of a sector-specific shock in some sector i, Ait , on the
Divisia index can be decomposed into the shock's effect on aggregate TFP, d log T F Pt , and
aggregate employment, d log Lt (capital does not enter this expression since it is fixed upon
impact). Aggregate TFP is the sum of sector-level TFP weighted by the ratio of the sectors'
                                                              
                                             N        pj Qj
steady state Domar weights                   j =1     PY Y
                                                                 (Hulten, 1978).15 The insight of Hulten's theorem
is that the Domar weight is a sufficient statistic for capturing how a shock to a given sector
propagates to the other sectors through the input-output network of intermediate goods.
       Since Hulten's theorem for aggregate TFP is well understood, we will instead focus our
analysis on understanding the endogenous responses of aggregate employment. Under our
preference specification, equilibrium employment in sector j is given by

                                                                         pjt Qjt
                                                    Ljt = (1 - j )j              .                                      (10)
                                                                           Ct

                                                                                                  pjt Qjt
Employment is proportional to the household's valuation of output                                   Ct
                                                                                                          ,   which converts
gross sales into utility units by multiplying by the marginal utility of consumption.16
  15
     In principle, the reallocation of activity across sectors may also affect aggregate TFP by changing the
distribution of Domar weights across sectors. However, Proposition 1 shows that these reallocation effects are
second order; up to first order, only the steady state Domar weights are relevant for computing aggregates.
  16
     The expression (10) uses our assumption that the Frisch elasticity of labor supply  1
                                                                                            . With a finite




                                                                   18
4.2     What Determines Fluctuations in Employment?

In order to understand the effect of a shock on the household's valuation of output, and
therefore on employment, we must define two objects summarizing the intermediates network.
First, the input-output matrix summarizes the intermediates network across sectors:
                                                                           
                                          11 (1 - 1 ) . . . 1N (1 - N )
                                                                          
                                                .
                                                .                  .
                                                                   .      
                               =                .                  .      .
                                                                          
                                          N 1 (1 - 1 ) . . . N N (1 - N )

Second, the Leontief inverse is


                                     L = (I - )-1 = I +  + 2 + ...


As described by Carvalho and Tahbaz-Salehi (2019), the (i, j )-th element of this matrix,
ij , captures all the direct and indirect paths in the input-output matrix  through which
sector i supplies intermediate goods to sector j . The Leontief inverse is key in determining
the allocation of employment across sectors:


Proposition 2. The allocation of employment across sectors satisfies

                                      N                   N        N
                                                pkt Ckt                pI Imt
                              Ljt          jk           +     jk     km mt .                            (11)
                                     k=1
                                                  Ct      k=1    m=1
                                                                         Ct


Furthermore,    pkt Ckt
                  Ct
                          = k for all realizations of {Ait }N
                                                            i=1 .


Proof. See Appendix E.                                                                                    

    Proposition 2 shows that employment in a given sector j depends on how that sector
supplies consumption goods to the household and investment goods to other firms, either
Frisch elasticity, the expression becomes
                                                         pjt Qjt 1
                                             Ljt = j j               .
                                                           Ct L1 t
                                                                   /


All of our results hold using this more general preference specification, but the expressions become more
complicated. Therefore, we prefer to use the 1
                                                 specification to keep this discussion as simple as possible.


                                                       19
directly or indirectly through the intermediates network. The contribution to consumption
is characterized by the Leontief inverse, jk , times the household's valuation of consumption
                                    pkt Ckt
produced by those sectors k ,         Ct
                                            .   The contribution to investment is characterized by the
Leontief inverse, jk , times the contribution of those sectors k in supplying investment goods
to other sectors m through the investment network, km , times the household's valuation of
                                                   pI
                                                    mt Imt
investment purchased by those sectors,                Ct
                                                           .
       Due to the household's Cobb-Douglas preferences, its valuation of consumption across
sectors is constant over time and equal to the preference parameter k ; therefore, shocks
which only affect the household's valuation of consumption goods do not affect employment
­ regardless of the structure of the intermediates network. Because such shocks do not affect
investment, they generate generate equal-sized increases in the marginal product of labor
and in aggregate consumption. The resulting income and substitution effects on labor supply
exactly offset because our preferences are consistent with balanced growth in the aggregate.17
                                                                                    pI
                                                                                     mt Imt
       In contrast, the household's valuation of investment goods                      Ct
                                                                                              may fluctuate over
time because investment is a dynamic problem and the capital accumulation technology is
not Cobb-Douglas.18 These fluctuations reflect the fact that investment weakens the income
effect on labor supply. Therefore, shocks affect employment in sector j only if they affect
                                                               pI
                                                                mt Imt
the household's valuation of investment goods                     Ct
                                                                         in some sector m in the economy, and
sector j supplies investment goods to that sector m.
  17
      It is fairly well-known in the one-sector RBC model that employment only responds to TFP shocks
because the household would like to produce more investment goods in order to smooth consumption over
time (see the discussion in Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1991), for example). Basu et al. (2013) extend
that logic to a two-sector model and show that shocks which only affect the production of consumption
goods have no effect on employment, while shocks which affect investment production have a strong effect on
employment. Our results further extend this logic to a multisector framework and show that the classification
of consumption- and investment-producing sectors interacts with the intermediates network through the
Leontief inverse.
   18
      Appendix F shows that the linearity of the capital accumulation equation is the key departure from
Cobb-Douglas which generates employment fluctuations. In particular, we show that if the capital accumu-
                                                  1- j
lation equation is also Cobb-Douglas Kjt+1 = Kjt j Ijt  , then sector-level employment is constant over time
(similar to Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007)). In this case, the unitary elasticity of substitution implies that
investment is proportional to output, so shocks generate exactly offsetting income and substitution effects
(as they do for the household's valuation of consumption). The linearity of the capital accumulation equation
Kjt+1 = (1 - j )Kjt + Ijt breaks this result because flow investment becomes perfectly substitutable with
undepreciated capital in the production of new capital.
A related special case is our linear capital accumulation equation with full depreciation j  1. In this case,
one can view capital as an intermediate good with one period time to build. This specification also implies
constant employment because it falls within the Cobb-Douglas class.


                                                         20
                   Figure 4: The Leontief-Adjusted Investment Network 

                                                    0.7                                               0.7




                                                    0.6                                               0.6




                                                    0.5                                               0.5




                                                    0.4                                               0.4




                                                    0.3                                               0.3




                                                    0.2                                               0.2




                                                    0.1                                               0.1




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                            N
Notes: left panel plots plots the elements of the Leontief-adjusted investment network ij = k=1 ik kj ,
where ik are elements of the Leontief inverse and kj are elements of the investment network. Right panel
plots the elements of our measured investment network ij (reproduced from Figure 1 for convenience).



    Proposition 2 shows that the investment supply linkages between two sectors j and m are
determined by jm            N
                            k=1 jk km ,   which captures the role of sector j in supplying invest-
ment goods to sector m both directly through the investment network and indirectly through
the intermediates network. We call the matrix of these linkages the Leontief-adjusted invest-
ment network because it is the matrix product of the Leontief inverse with the investment
network:  = L. The left panel of Figure 4 shows that the Leontief-adjusted investment
network is less concentrated than the raw investment network  (reproduced in the right
panel of the figure). This occurs because the density of the intermediates network implies
that many sectors supply intermediate goods to investment hubs. The durable manufactur-
ing sectors near the top of the heatmap ­ primary metals, fabricated metals, and computers
­ as well as wholesale trade and transportation & warehousing are particularly important
intermediate suppliers of the investment hubs.
    Since the Leontief-adjusted investment network  is fairly dense, shocks Ait which affect
the household's valuation of investment throughout the sectors of the economy m will also
generate employment fluctuations in many sectors j . This result can be seen more clearly by
re-writing Proposition 2 in terms of log-deviations from steady state:

                                              N
                                                               pI
                                                                mt Imt
                                d log Ljt =         jm d log             ,                         (12)
                                              m=1
                                                                  Ct

                                                          21
                Figure 5: Elasticity of Aggregate Employment to Sectoral Shocks
                     0.8


                     0.7


                     0.6


                     0.5


                     0.4


                     0.3


                     0.2


                     0.1


                      0
                                M rnitu rt
                              C ch tals




                                  Pr ape l




                                              s
                              M Metals
                       Fa rim M o t
                         br a in od




                               Pr es FI
                                       m m




                                              T




                                      M ch

                                       E in
                                              T
                                          TW




                                     rv m
                                 Se cco ts
                               Pe in r



                                      as al




                                            lth
                                El put ry




                                      /T e
                               ed e s




                                Fu nsp s




                                     H duc
                               Fo sc Mre
                                   od fg
                                    Te Mfg




                                     Ad mt




                                             er
                                              g
                                     C til




                                       pa le




                                             fo
                                 Ve tric s




                                C ole g




                                      O es
                               Tr hic al




                                     P re
                                             s




                                          tic
                             at M al




                                  a le
                                   ec er




                                  of tat
                                           o
                                          in




                                  tr tin




                                           R
                                          W
                                          U
                                        on




                                         m



                             od A Ar
                                  Pl ic
                                  Ap xti




                                  he u
                                          e




                                         In




                                        th
                                         e



                                       ea



                                        ic
                                         g
                           ic ry er
                                       in




                                om in
                                     W
                      M




                                   i




                                  l
                                 a




                               ea
                             R




                          Fo
                         P




Notes: reduced-form elasticities of aggregate employment Nt to sector-specific shocks Ait . For each sector,
we simulate the model with  (it ) = 1% shocks to that sector only. The bars plot the volatility of aggregate
employment  (log Nt ) divided by the volatility of sector-specific TFP  (log Ait ). Investment hubs are
highlighted in red.


                                            
                     N             pI
                                    m Im
where jm =           k=1 jk km     p j Qj
                                               is the Leontief-adjusted investment network further ad-
justed for steady state sector size and investment expenditures.


Which Shocks Generate Large Changes in Employment? Unfortunately, just as
with the one-sector RBC model, our model does not admit a closed-form solution to show ex-
                                                                                                     pI
                                                                                                      mt Imt
actly how sector-specific shocks Ait affect the household's valuation of investment d log               Ct

throughout the economy. Instead, we provide numerical results to show which sectors' shocks
generate large changes and then use basic investment theory to explain those results.
       Figure 5 shows that shocks to investment hubs and their key suppliers have large effects on
aggregate employment while shocks to other sectors do not. The figure computes a numerical
elasticity of aggregate employment with respect to a sector-specific shock Ait in each sector.19
The investment hubs have the four largest elasticities, particularly construction. The next
largest elasticities are in the key suppliers to hubs identified in the Leontief-adjusted invest-
ment network: durable manufacturing, wholesale trade, and transportation & warehousing.
  19
       We assume that the persistence of the shocks j are the calibrated values from Section 5.



                                                       22
The remaining sectors have very small elasticities.


What's Special About Investment Hubs and their Suppliers?                              By equation (12),
shocks to investment hubs and their suppliers have large effects on employment because
those shocks generate large changes in the household's valuation of investment throughout
the economy (we also confirm this fact numerically in Appendix F). In order to understand
why that is the case, consider the Euler equation for investment in some sector m:

                     pI            pm,t+1 Qm,t+1            pI
                                                             m,t+1
                      mt
                         =  Et m m               + (1 - m )        .                                 (13)
                     Ct             Ct+1 Km,t+1              Ct+1

The marginal benefit of investment on the right-hand side of (13) is the present value of
next period's marginal product of capital plus the value of undepreciated capital, relative
to the household's marginal utility of consumption. The marginal cost of investment on the
                                                                              km
                                                    mt  k=1
                                                                        pkt
left hand side of (13) is equal to its price index pI   N
                                                                        km
                                                                                   , again relative to the
marginal utility of consumption.

Proposition 3. Up to first order, the effect of sector-specific shocks Ait on the investment
price index for sector m, pI
                           mt , holding primary input prices fixed, is:


                                                 N
                                d log pI
                                       mt   =-         im d log Ait ,                                (14)
                                                 i=1


where im are the elements of the Leontief-adjusted investment network.

Proof. See Appendix E.                                                                                  

   Proposition 3 shows that shocks to investment hubs and their key suppliers Ait act as
investment supply shocks in the sense that they decrease the price index for investment
goods pI
       mt for many sectors m. In fact, holding primary input prices fixed, the investment

price index is a sum of all sectors' productivity, weighted by the sectors' Leontief-adjusted
investment network connections im . A shock to one of these key sectors increases the supply
of investment goods in the economy, decreasing the price index. In response, sectors increase
their optimal quantity of investment Imt , and therefore the household's valuation of their


                                                 23
investment goods and ultimately employment.20
       In contrast, shocks to other sectors act as idiosyncratic investment demand shocks in the
sense that they primarily affect the marginal product of capital in their own sector. While
these shocks may spill over to other sectors, Figure 5 shows that these spillovers are small
in terms of their impact on employment. Therefore, going forward, we focus on the role of
shocks to investment hubs and their key suppliers in driving employment fluctuations. We
define the key suppliers as durable manufacturing, wholesale trade, and transportation &
warehousing because these sectors have large weights in the Leontief-adjusted investment
network (displayed in Figure 4).


Relationship to Networks Literature                 These results are related to the recent networks
literature, which typically uses static models without investment to study how idiosyncratic
shocks affect macroeconomic aggregates. Without investment, our model implies that em-
ployment is literally constant because shocks do not affect the household's valuation of
consumption in Proposition 2. In this case, the Domar weight is also a sufficient statis-
                                                                                    
                                                                     N      pj Qj
tic for the effect of the shock on real GDP: d log Yt =              j =1   PY Y
                                                                                       d log Ajt . In addition,
the Domar weights are constant over time, so Domar aggregation is no longer a first-order
approximation but instead is globally true.
       Our results in this section show that investment, and the investment network, breaks this
strong version of Hulten's theorem in two ways. First, the Domar weight is not a sufficient
statistic for the effect of a shock on real GDP because the shock also affects employment, and
the response of employment also is determined by the Leontief-adjusted investment network.
Second, the Domar weights fluctuate over time due to changes in the household's valuation
of investment.21
  20
     The sensitivity of investment Imt with respect to its relative price pI
                                                                           mt is heterogeneous across sectors
given heterogeneity in depreciation rates and production parameters in our model. For example, investment
in sectors which purchase high-depreciation assets are less responsive to changes in the price. Appendix F
numerically explores these sources of heterogeneity.
  21
     Of course, the investment network also shapes the distribution of Domar weights in steady state. Ap-
pendix F shows that the average Domar weights of the investment hubs are comparable to the Domar weights
of other sectors.




                                                     24
           Figure 6: Impulse Responses to Aggregate vs. Hub + Supplier Shocks

                4                                           2.5

                                                              2
                3

                                                            1.5
                2
                                                              1
                1
                                                            0.5

                0
                                                              0

                -1                                          -0.5
                        5        10      15       20                5       10       15       20




Notes: impulse responses of real GDP, aggregate employment, aggregate TFP, and aggregate labor
productivity to combinations of sector-specific shocks Ait . Left panel: response to a 1% increase in Ait for
all sectors i. Right panel: response to a 1% increase in Ait for the investment hubs and their key suppliers
only.



4.3     Implications for Changing Business Cycles Since the 1980s

We now briefly discuss how the key insight of this section -- employment fluctuations are pri-
marily driven by shocks to investment hubs and their suppliers -- can qualitatively account
for a number of changes in business cycle patterns since the early 1980s; we will quantify
this mechanism in Section 5. We will show that the key change in the early 1980s was that
the correlation of shocks Ait across sectors fell dramatically. We interpret this change as
reflecting the fact that the pre-1980s sample is dominated by aggregate shocks, which affect
all sectors at once, while the post-1980s sample is dominated by idiosyncratic shocks, which
affect specific sectors in isolation.
    The left panel of Figure 6 plots the impulse responses of real GDP, aggregate employ-
ment, aggregate TFP, and aggregate labor productivity to a 1% aggregate shock (which
increases TFP Ait by 1% in each sector). The shock increases employment because it in-
creases the productivity of investment hubs and their key suppliers, as discussed above. The
shock simultaneously increases productivity at the other sectors, raising their production and
therefore real GDP. The effect on these other sectors' productivity is reflected in a roughly
2% increase in aggregate TFP, equal to the sum of Domar weights across all sectors in the
economy. Overall, real GDP increases by more than aggregate employment, so labor produc-
tivity rises upon impact of the shock -- consistent with its procyclicality in the pre-1980s


                                                       25
sample.
       The right panel of Figure 6 plots the same impulse responses in response to a shock
which affects only the investment hubs and their suppliers. As before, aggregate employment
increases because these sectors are the primary suppliers of investment. But unlike before,
this increase in employment is not accompanied by an increase in productivity of the other
sectors. Therefore, TFP only increases by 0.5% (since these sectors' Domar weights are
only about 1/4 of the aggregate). In total, aggregate employment increases by more than
real GDP upon impact of the shock, driving down aggregate labor productivity.22 Section 5
shows that this mechanism generates acyclical labor productivity in the post-1980s sample
because these idiosyncratic shocks account for a larger share of employment fluctuations over
time. In contrast, shocks to other sectors have small effects on aggregate employment.


4.4       Additional Results

Appendix F contains two sets of additional results. First, we relate our analysis to the
literature which studies the effects of investment-specific technical shocks (e.g. Greenwood,
Hercowitz and Krusell (2000) or Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2010)). One can view
these models as a two-sector version of our model without the intermediates input-output
network. Of course, our model provides a richer classification of sectors in which the correct
concept of an "investment producer" is not only its direct production of investment goods but
also its role in supplying intermediate goods to the investment hubs. But our model also solves
the so-called "comovement" problem in this literature, which is that shocks to the investment-
producing sector do not generate positive comovement in the consumption-producing sector.
Our model generates comovement through the intermediates network, through which many
non-investment hubs indirectly produce investment goods (captured by the Leontief-adjusted
investment network).
       The second set of additional results provides supporting evidence for key mechanisms
  22
    Appendix F computes the cyclicality of labor productivity induced by each sectors' shocks in isolation.
We show that shocks to nearly all of the investment hubs and their suppliers generate countercyclical labor
productivity. The only exceptions are professional/technical services, wholesale trade, and transportation
& warehousing. While shocks to these sectors have a large effect on employment, they are also important
suppliers in the intermediates network; hence, they have large Domar weights, generating a larger effect on
aggregate TFP and therefore real GDP.


                                                    26
described above. Similar to Section 2, we show that the key suppliers to investment hubs
are more volatile and more correlated with the aggregate cycle than the non-suppliers. This
finding is consistent with the role of key suppliers in our model documented above.



5       Application: Changes in Business Cycles Since 1980s
We now apply the insights developed in Section 4 to study changes in business cycle patterns
since the early 1980s.


5.1       Quantifying the Effects of Changes in Sector-Level Productiv-
          ity Shocks

In our model, the key force driving these changes in business cycle patterns is the fact
that sector-level productivity shocks have become less correlated across sectors. We measure
sector-level productivity as the Solow residual of real gross output net of the primary inputs:23


             log Ajt = log Qjt - jt jt log Kjt - jt (1 - jt ) log Ljt - (1 - jt ) log Mjt .               (15)


Of course, changes in the measured Solow residual may reflect changes in technology shocks
or changes in other non-technology forces, such as allocational efficiency or the utilization of
resources (see, for example, Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006)). We view our simple exercise
as a natural first step in quantifying the role of the investment network in propagating
sector-specific shocks.24
       We need to detrend sector-level TFP because our model does not feature trend growth.
However, a log-linear trend does not fit sector-level data well because sectors typically grow
and shrink in nonlinear ways. We therefore take out a log-polynomial trend in order to cap-
ture these nonlinearities. We choose degree 4 in order to strike a balance between flexibility
  23
     We allow the factor shares jt to change year-by-year to ensure that changes in our measured productivity
are not driven by changes in the production technology. This choice creates a slight inconsistency with our
model, in which the factor shares are constant over time. However, our main model results are virtually
unaffected by keeping these parameters fixed over time.
  24
     These is also a practical reason that we do not correct for utilization: consistent measures of hours-per-
worker in each sector, which are required to perform the Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006) correction, are
not available in our data.

                                                      27
                                           Table 3
                              Decomposition of Shock Volatility

                                    Measured TFP Value Added
                                    Pre-84 Post-84 Pre-84 Post-84
                       1000Var(xt )  0.41   0.10    1.01   0.39
                        Variances    0.08   0.06    0.12   0.08
                       Covariances   0.33   0.03    0.89   0.31

Notes: results of the decomposition (16) in the pre-1984 sample (1948-1983) and post-1984 sample
                                                                    N
(1984-2018). "Variances" refers to the variance component 1000 j =1 (jt )2 Var( log Ajt ), weighted by
sector j 's average Domar weight in the relevant subsample. "Covariances" refers to the covariance
                    N
component 1000 j =1 o=j jt ot Cov ( log Ajt ,  log Aot ). "Measured TFP" refers to performing this
analysis on log measured TFP growth  log Ajt . "Value added" refers to performing this analysis on log
real value added growth; in this specification, we weight by value added shares rather than Domar weights.
Totals may not appear to be exact sums due to rounding.



in the trend and not overfitting the data; Appendix D shows how various degrees fit the data
and justifies our use of a fourth-order trend. Furthermore, Appendix G shows that our main
results hold for other degrees of this polynomial trend.
    The left panel of Table 3 characterizes how TFP shocks have changed over time by
performing the following statistical decomposition:

                        N                                N
   Var( log At ) =            (jt ) Var( log Ajt ) +
                                  2
                                                                  jt ot Cov ( log Ajt ,  log Aot )   (16)
                       j =1                            j =1 o=j

                                   variances                             covariances


where log Ajt is log TFP,  denotes first differences, and jt is the average Domar weight of
sector j in the subsample. Table 3 shows that the volatility of aggregate TFP has fallen by
more than 70% since 1984, consistent with the "Great Moderation" of aggregate volatility.
Nearly the entire decline in aggregate volatility is accounted for by a decline in the covariance
of TFP across sectors; the within-sector variances component has declined by much less.
    As we said, we interpret this result as reflecting a decline in the variance of aggregate
shocks together with a relatively stable variance of sector-specific shocks. A helpful special
case of our shock process to develop that intuition is


                                        log Ajt = log At + log Ajt ,


                                                    28
where At is an aggregate shock common to all sectors and Ajt is independent across sectors.
In this special case, the only source of covariance is the aggregate shock At , so the decline in
covariances in the decomposition (16) maps directly into a decline in Var(At ). Appendix D
performs a more general principal components analysis and yields a similar conclusion; the
volatility of the first principal component ­ the "aggregate shock" ­ declines substantially
since 1984 and accounts for the entire decline in volatility. Foerster, Sarte and Watson (2011)
and Garin, Pries and Sims (2018) make a similar argument based on the comovement patterns
of sector-level value added rather than measured productivity; the right panel of Table 3
shows that our results hold for value added as well.25
       We use the following procedure to feed realized TFP shocks into our model. First, we
estimate the persistence j using maximum likelihood over the entire sample. These persis-
tence parameters, along with the others parameters calibrated in Section 3, are sufficient
to compute the linearized decision rules in our model because those decision rules do not
depend on the covariance matrix of shocks. Second, given the values of j , we compute the
innovations to our detrended productivity shocks in the data. We simulate the decision rules
given the realized history of shocks, starting from the non-stochastic steady state in 1948.


Investment Production Frictions If we feed these measured shocks directly into our
baseline model, the model produces counterfactually large volatility in the distribution of
investment expenditures across sectors. Table 4 measures this volatility as the average change
in sector j 's total investment expenditures as a fraction of aggregate investment expenditures,
           pI
            jt Ijt                                                                pI
                                                                                   jt Ijt
E[|       N     I       |], or as the standard deviation of that change,         N     I       . The left and
          k=1 pkt Ikt                                                            k=1 pkt Ikt

middle panels of Table 4 shows that these changes are around five times larger in the model
than in the data. This result occurs because, given the linearity of the market clearing
condition (30), an investment-producing sector i sees its potential customer sectors j as
perfect substitutes. Therefore, small changes in investment demand from these purchasing
  25
     The "Great Moderation" literature has suggested two broad interpretations of this decline in aggregate
volatility. The first is good luck: aggregate shocks have simply become more volatile over time (for example,
oil shocks became less severe and less frequent). The second is good policy: either public policy (monetary
or fiscal) or private inventory management have allowed the economy to better absorb aggregate shocks. In
this paper, we simply take the decline in aggregate volatility as given, without taking a stand on why it has
occurred.



                                                     29
                                       Table 4
                  Volatility of Investment Expenditures Composition

                                          Data   Model w/o Frictions Model w/ Frictions
                        pIjt Ijt
        1000 × E[|     N       I     |]   2.0                  9.7                          2.1
                       k=1 pkt Ikt
                        I
                       pjt Ijt
         1000 ×       N      I            2.7                  14.1                         2.7
                      k=1 pkt Ikt



Notes: measures of changes in the distribution of investment expenditures across sectors. "Data" refers to
value of the statistic in the data. "Model w/o Frictions" refers to the model described in Section 3. "Model
w/ frictions" refers to the model augmented with Huffman and Wynne (1999) frictions, as described in the
main text.



sectors generate counterfactually large changes in the composition of the producing sector's
customers, and thus in the distribution of investment expenditures across sectors. In turn,
this excess volatility generates an excessively high volatility of aggregate investment to GDP.
       We introduce a simple friction to bring this excess volatility in line with the data. Fol-
lowing Huffman and Wynne (1999), we modify the market clearing condition for sector j 's
output to be
                                                   N                  N            -1

                                                                             -
                                     Qjt = Cjt +         Mijt +             Iijt        ,                (17)
                                                   i=1                i=1

where   -1 controls the degree of the investment production friction. The baseline model
from Section 3 imposed  = -1, corresponding to an infinite elasticity of substitution between
different purchasing sectors. When  < -1, investment becomes imperfectly substitutable
across purchasing sectors, capturing the idea that the types of investment goods produced
by sector i are specific to its customers j , at least in the short run.26
       We set the parameter  = -1.04 in order to match the changes in investment composition
in Table 4. Our calibrated  is similar to the value used in Huffman and Wynne (1999).
While all our quantitative results going forward use this extended version of the model,
Appendix G shows that our main results are even stronger without these additional frictions
because investment expenditures and, by Proposition 2, employment, are more responsive
  26
    Importantly, this reallocation friction (17) does not affect the theoretical results derived in Section 4.
The only difference is that now the price of investment goods has an endogenous component which reflects
the imperfect substitution of capital goods and dampens large changes in the composition of investment
production. See Appendix G for more details.



                                                          30
                                       Table 5
                    Changes in Business Cycle Patterns Since 1984

                                       Data              Model
                                Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984
                 (yt )          3.18%    1.98%     3.95%    2.42%
                (yt - lt , yt ) 0.56     0.28      0.52     -0.01
                 (lt )/ (yt )   0.83     1.01      0.90     1.03
                 (it )/ (yt )   2.25     3.10      3.78     4.11
                    hp
                 (yt   )               2.03%         1.24%         2.52%         1.80%
                (yt - lt
                    hp   hp hp
                           , yt )      0.52          0.14          0.53          0.01
                   hp      hp
                 (lt )/ (yt )          0.85          1.09          0.92          1.01
                 (ihp      hp
                   t )/ (yt )          2.41          3.50          3.86          4.04

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018).
"Data" refers to our empirical dataset. "Model" refers to model simulation starting from steady state and
feeding in realizations of measured TFP over the sample. yt is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate
employment, and it is log real aggregate investment.  denotes the first difference operator, and the hp
superscript denotes the HP-filtered series with smoothing parameter  = 6.25. To avoid endpoint bias from
the HP filter, we omit the first and last three years of data of the entire sample in computing the HP
filtered statistics.



to investment supply shocks.


5.2       Changes in Aggregate Business Cycle Patterns in Calibrated
          Model

In this subsection, we show that our model quantitatively matches a number of changes in
business cycle patterns since the early 1980s. In Section 5.3, we confirm that these results
are driven by the rising importance of sector-specific shocks to investment hubs and their
key suppliers, consistent with the theoretical discussion in Section 4.3.
       The left panel of Table 5 documents the key changes in aggregate business cycle patterns
in the data. The top panel computes the statistics on first-differenced series while the bottom
panel uses the HP filter (for both the data and the model).27 Using either procedure, the
  27
    The HP filter has the advantage of isolating business cycle frequencies, while first differences include
both high-frequency noise as well as low-frequency changes in average growth rates. The main disadvantage
of the HP filter is that its two-sided nature induces cyclical deviations that may not have been known to
agents at the time. We partially address this concern by HP-filtering both the model and data series in order
to ensure an apples-to-apples comparison. We also omit the first and last three years of data over the sample


                                                     31
volatility of GDP is approximately 40% lower in the post-1984 sample than in the pre-1984
sample -- again, consistent with the well-known Great Moderation of aggregate volatility.
The cyclicality of labor productivity, measured as the correlation of GDP per worker with
GDP, switched from being procyclical in the pre-1980s to being essentially acyclical in the
post-1980s. In addition, the volatility of employment rose by approximately 1/3 relative to
GDP over this time. Appendix H shows that this rising volatility of employment accounts
for the entire decline in the cyclicality of labor productivity; intuitively, since employment
and GDP are highly correlated in both subsamples, the time series behavior of their ratio
depends on the more volatile component.28
    Finally, the left panel of Table 5 shows that the volatility of investment relative to GDP
has also risen substantially since 1984. This finding is consistent with the idea that the
rising importance of shocks to investment hubs and their suppliers in driving aggregate
fluctuations since 1984. To our knowledge, we are the first to note the increased relative
volatility of investment over this period.
    The right panel of Table 5 shows that the model generates all of these changes in business
cycle patterns. The model matches the decline in the volatility of real GDP because TFP
shocks become less correlated over time, similar to the results in Foerster, Sarte and Watson
(2011). More novel to our study is the fact that the model's cyclicality of aggregate labor
productivity also falls over this period; using first differences, the cyclicality of labor produc-
tivity in the model falls by 0.53 compared to 0.28 in the data, while using the HP filter it falls
by 0.52 compared to 0.38 in the data. Consistent with this fact, the standard deviation of
employment relative to GDP rises similarly in the model as in the data (again, see Footnote
28). Finally, the model's relative volatility of investment also increases over time, consistent
with the rising importance of shocks to investment hubs and their suppliers.29
in order to avoid endpoint bias from the HP filter. We HP-filter the aggregate series directly, rather than
aggregating the HP-filtered sector-level series. As in Section 2, we use a smoothing parameter of  = 6.25.
  28
     One can see the source of this result using the identity (derived in Appendix H):
                                                            (lt )
                                                      1-    (yt ) Corr (yt ,t   )
                     Corr(yt , yt - lt ) =                                                 .           (18)
                                                      (lt )2       (lt )
                                                1+    (yt )2   - 2 (yt ) Corr (yt , lt )

Since output and employment are highly correlated both before and after 1984, the decline in the cyclicality
of labor productivity is driven by the increase in the relative volatility of employment.
  29
     The volatility of aggregate investment relative to GDP is somewhat higher in our model than in the


                                                     32
 Figure 7: 14-Year Forward-Looking Rolling Windows of Labor Productivity Cyclicality




Notes: 14-year forward-looking rolling windows of the cyclicality of labor productivity (e.g. 1950 data point
computes the cyclicality between 1950-1963). "Data" corresponds to aggregated version of our dataset.
"Model" corresponds to aggregated version of model simulation under measured realizations of sector-level
TFP shocks. Top panel computes the statistic using first differences: Corr(yt - lt , yt ) where yt is log
aggregate value added, lt log aggregate employment, and  denotes the first-difference operator. The
bottom panel computes the same statistic using the HP filter instead of first differences.



    Figure 7 shows that the model also matches the timing of the decline in the cyclicality of
labor productivity. We compute the dynamics of this statistic using 14-year forward-looking
rolling windows in both the data and in our model. The two series track each other quite
closely using either first differences or the HP filter. The cyclicality of labor productivity
is fairly stable until the early 1980s, at which point it drops sharply following the Volcker
recession. The cyclicality further declines in the 2008 financial crisis and its aftermath; by
the end of the sample, it has fallen by a similar amount in the model and in the data.
The correlation between the model and data's series of rolling windows is 0.76 using first
differences and 0.91 using the HP filter.
data, especially in the pre-1984 period. While in principle we could allow for adjustment costs to the accu-
mulation of capital within sector to match the overall level of volatility, we have found that these adjustment
costs generate counterfactually low volatility in the composition of investment spending across sectors and
counterfactually high comovement in investment fluctuations across sectors.


                                                      33
       More generally, Appendix G shows that the model matches the entire time series of
aggregate GDP, consumption, investment, and employment surprisingly well given that no
aggregate series were targeted in the calibration and the model does not feature nominal
rigidities or the host of other frictions emphasized in the DSGE literature. The average
correlation between model and data for these series is approximately 0.5 ­ 0.6.


5.3       Role of Investment Network and Sector-Specific Shocks in
          Driving Changing Business Cycles

We now confirm that the changes in business cycles are quantitatively driven by the rising
importance of sector-specific shocks to investment hubs and their key suppliers, as discussed
in Section 4.3. Table 6 decomposes measured productivity in sector j into an aggregate
component and a residual sector-specific component using a principal components analysis
similar to that which we perform on the data in Appendix D.30 We then assess the contri-
bution of aggregate shocks or sector-specific shocks feeding in only the relevant shocks and
setting the remaining shocks to zero.
       Consistent with the discussion in Section 4.3, aggregate shocks account for the majority of
employment fluctuations in the pre-1980s period and generate procyclical labor productivity
(as in the left panel of Figure 6). However, sector-specific shocks account for the majority of
employment fluctuations in the post-1980s period. Shocks to the investment hubs and their
suppliers drive most of these fluctuations since shocks to the other sectors have a small effect
on aggregate employment.31 Aggregate labor productivity is countercyclical in response to
these shocks, as in the right panel of Figure 6.
  30
      Specifically, we identify the aggregate shock using the first principal component Ft of the innovations
to TFP across sectors jt . We then compute sector-specific shocks as a residual of that factor using OLS.
This procedure yields the decomposition jt = Ft + ejt , where Ft is the "aggregate shock" and eit is the
"sector-specific" shock. The results in Table 6 are not additively separable because the statistics reported
are not linear and the sector-specific shocks ejt are not orthogonal to Ft for all sectors j in both pre- and
post-1984 time periods. While this approach is not the only one to decomposing aggregate vs. sector-specific
shocks in our model, we use it because it is also commonly used in the data (see, for example, Foerster, Sarte
and Watson (2011) and Garin, Pries and Sims (2018)).
   31
      Shocks to the investment hubs and their key suppliers account for more than 95% of the employment
fluctuations generated by all sectoral shocks reported here (details available upon request).




                                                     34
                                  Table 6
          Decomposing the Effects of Aggregate vs. Sectoral Shocks

                             All Shocks    Agg. Shocks Only                     Sectoral    Shocks Only
                        Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984                   Pre-1984     Post-1984
  (yt )                 3.95%      2.42%   3.45%    1.67%                       1.67%        1.40%
  (lt )                 3.55%      2.48%   2.74%    1.41%                       1.82%        1.61%
 (yt - lt , yt )        0.52       -0.01   0.85     0.78                        -0.18        -0.28
  (lt )/ (yt )          0.90       1.03    0.79     0.85                        1.09         1.14
  (it )/ (yt )          3.78       4.11    3.31     3.48                        4.44         4.52

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "Baseline" refers to the baseline model described in the main text. "Agg. shocks only"
refers to feeding in only the aggregate shocks (as identified following Footnote 30). "Sectoral shocks only"
refers to feeding in only the sector-specific shocks (again, as identified following Footnote 30).



Shocks vs. Propagation            The theoretical discussion in Section 4.3 assumed that the size
of aggregate vs. sector-specific shocks were the same in order to focus on the role of the
investment network in propagating those shocks. However, the sizes of the shocks that we feed
in from the data may change over time, which may in principle drive some of our quantitative
results. The top right panel of Table 7 shows that this is not the case. We standardize the
size of shocks in each sector to be 1% in both the pre- and post-1984 subsamples; therefore,
the only change since 1984 is that the correlation of shocks fell by the level observed in the
data. While the overall level of volatility is obviously different in this version of the model,
the relative volatility of employment and cyclicality of labor productivity change by similar
amounts as in the baseline calibration.
    The bottom left panel of Table 7 confirms that the concentrated structure of the empirical
investment network is the key propagation mechanism driving the changes in business cycle
patterns, again consistent with the discussion in Section 4.3. In this panel, we eliminate the
concentration of the network by instead assuming that  = I , i.e. each sector invests out
of its own output. Therefore, the large investment producers which we have argued drive
our results do not exist in this version of the model. In this case, the relative volatility of
employment and cyclicality of labor productivity do not significantly change since the 1980s.




                                                    35
                                Table 7
      Role of Investment Network in Driving Changing Business Cycles

    Full Model                  Pre-84 Post-84        Uniform Variances             Pre-84 Post-84

     (yt )                      3.95%      2.42%       (yt )                        1.76%      1.29%
     (lt )/ (yt )                0.90        1.03      (lt )/ (yt )                  0.88       1.03
    Corr(yt - lt , yt )          0.52       -0.01     Corr(yt - lt , yt )            0.55       0.03

    Identity Inv. Net.          Pre-84 Post-84

     (yt )                      3.16%      1.72%
     (lt )/ (yt )                0.88       0.90
    Corr(yt - lt , yt )          0.59       0.48

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "Full model" corresponds to the model described in the main text. "Identity investment
network" assumes that sectors invest using only their own output, i.e. ii = 1 for all i and ij = 0 for all
j = 1. "Uniform variances" standardizes the size of shocks to be 1% in both the pre- and post-1984 sample.



5.4     Robustness

Appendix G shows that our main results are robust to relaxing a number of simplifying
assumptions in our model.


Structural Change           So far, we have held the parameters of the economic environment
fixed in order to focus on changes in the process of sector-specific shocks. Appendix G
allows for those parameters to change over time, specifically: the share of primary inputs in
production jt , labor's share in production jt , the entries of the intermediates network ijt ,
the entries of the investment network ijt , capital depreciation rates jt , and the consumption
shares jt .
    While these parameters have indeed changed in interesting ways, Appendix G shows that
our main results in this section are robust to allowing for these changes. We incorporate these
parameter changes in two ways. First, we allow agents to have perfect foresight over the path
of these parameter changes using the approach developed in Maliar et al. (2020). Second,
we compute the average values of the parameters in the pre-1984 and post-1984 subsamples
and compute the population moments of the model corresponding to those two parameter


                                                    36
configurations. Our main results about changes in business cycle patterns continue to hold
in both of these exercises. Of course, a full analysis of the process of structural change, its
driving forces, and how much is expected by economic agents at the time is outside the scope
of our paper. The goal of these exercises is simply to show that allowing for these changes is
unlikely to overturn our results.


Non-Cobb Douglas Production and Preferences                 Appendix G also relaxes our as-
sumptions of Cobb-Douglas production and preferences by allowing for a constant elasticity
of substitution between capital, labor, and intermediate goods, as well as a constant elas-
ticity across goods in preferences. We discipline these elasticities using the estimates from
Atalay (2017) and Oberfield and Raval (2020) and show that our quantitative results are
similar in this extended model. We also solve the extended model using a second order ap-
proximation in order to capture the rich nonlinearities described in Baqaee and Farhi (2019).
This extended model produces changes in business cycle patterns very similar our baseline
analysis in the main text.


Other Robustness Checks Finally, Appendix H shows that our results are robust to a
number of other extensions. First, we vary the strength of the Huffman and Wynne (1999)
investment production frictions. Second, we allow for convex adjustment costs to capital in
order to better match the overall volatility of investment. Third, we allow for maintenance
investment in the investment network, as discussed in Footnote 7. Fourth, we allow for labor
reallocation frictions across sectors.



6    Changes in Aggregate Cycles Driven by Changes in
     Sectoral Comovement
While we believe that our explanation for the changes in business cycle patterns since the
1980s is a natural one, there are many other possible explanations as well (such as those
surveyed in the related literature section). Therefore, in this section, we document a new
empirical fact which supports a key implication of our explanation over the others: the


                                              37
                                     Table 8
                   Divergence of Aggregate and Sectoral Cycles

                                           Aggregate         Within-Sector
                    Data              Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984
                (yt )                 3.18%     1.98%    5.42%      4.29%
               (yt - lt , yt )        0.56      0.28     0.69       0.67
                (lt )/ (yt )          0.83      1.01     0.76       0.81

                                    Aggregate         Within-Sector
                   Model       Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984
                (yt )          3.95%     2.42%    5.89%      4.93%
               (yt - lt , yt ) 0.52      -0.01    0.79       0.85
                (lt )/ (yt )   0.90      1.03     0.52       0.43

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018).
"Data" refers to our empirical dataset. "Model" refers to model simulation starting from steady state and
feeding in realizations of measured TFP over the sample. yt is log real value added, lt is log employment
and  denotes the first difference operator. "Aggregate" refers to outcomes for aggregate variables.
"Within-sector" computes the statistics for each sector and then averages them weighted by the average
share of nominal value added within that sub-sample.



changes in business cycle patterns have not occurred within individual sectors of the econ-
omy but are instead due to changes in the comovement of activity across sectors. Our model
quantitatively matches this fact because shocks to investment hubs and their suppliers gen-
erate different comovement patterns across sectors than do aggregate shocks. In contrast,
most existing explanations for business cycle changes abstract from sectoral heterogeneity
and therefore do not make a prediction for this key feature of the data. We focus this section
on the cyclicality of labor productivity and relative volatility of employment because they
have attracted the most attention in the existing literature.


Sector-Level Cycles Stable Over Time                 Table 8 shows that sector-level business cycles
are stable over the postwar sample both in the data and in our calibrated model. These
within-sector business cycle statistics first compute the statistics for each sector in the econ-
omy and then average those statistics across all sectors (Appendix H shows that these findings
are robust to using various weighting schemes to compute the within-sector average and to
using the HP filter). The cyclicality of sector-level labor productivity ­ the correlation of



                                                   38
sector-level value added per worker with sector-level value added ­ and the relative volatility
of sector-level employment are essentially constant across the two sub-samples. While the
volatility of sector-level value added falls somewhat post-1984, its magnitude is about half
as large as the decline in the volatility of GDP. In our model, the sector-level patterns are
relatively stable because sector-specific shocks are the dominant source of fluctuations within
sector and the volatility of those shocks has remained stable over time.


Changes Driven by Sectoral Comovement Since the changes in the aggregate cycle
do not occur within sector, they must be driven by changes in the covariances of activity
across sectors. We formalize this argument using the following decomposition:


                                j =1 (jt ) Var (ljt )                                     Cov (ljt , lot )
                                N     l 2                              N            l  l
Var(lt )                                                               j =1   o=j   jt ot
                    t                                   +(1 - t )
Var(yt )                        j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )
                                N     y 2                             N
                                                                      j =1    o=j
                                                                                    y y
                                                                                    jt ot Cov (yjt , yot )
              variance weight
                                     variances                                      covariances
                                                                                                         (19)
where yjt is log real value added of sector j , ljt is employment of sector j , and yt and lt are
aggregate value added and employment. This decomposition, derived in Appendix H, breaks
down the variance of employment relative to the variance of GDP into two components. The
first "variances" component is the average variance of employment relative to the average
variance of value added within sectors. The second "covariances" component is the average
covariance of employment across all pairs of sectors relative to the average covariance of

                                                                    j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )/Var (yt )
                                                                    N     y 2
value added across pairs. The "variance weight" t =                                                   ensures
that the averages of these ratios add up to the ratio of aggregate variances. We focus on
the increase in the relative volatility of employment because, as we argued in Section 5, this
increase accounts for the entire decline in the cyclicality of labor productivity.
   The left panel of Table 9 shows that 85% of the increase in the relative volatility of
aggregate employment in the data is accounted for by an increase in the covariances term; in
contrast, the within-sector average variances are stable, consistent with the results in Table
8. Appendix H shows that the changes in covariances reflect two patterns in the data. First,
the covariance of value added across sectors fell in the post-1984 sample, decreasing the
volatility of aggregate GDP. Second, the covariance of employment across sectors remained


                                                  39
                                           Table 9
                       Decomposition of Relative Employment Volatility

                                       Data                                            Model
                        Pre-84 Post-84 Contribution                          Pre-84 Post-84 Contribution
                                             of entire term                                 of entire term
       Var(lt )
       Var(yt )
                         0.68      1.04          100%                         0.81   1.05       100%
     Variances           0.41      0.48           15%                         0.75   0.57        10%
    Covariances          0.72      1.19           85%                         0.82   1.15        90%
  Variance Weight        0.12      0.21                                       0.10   0.17
  ( t = N   j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )/Var (yt ))
                  y 2



Notes: results of the decomposition (19) in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample
(1984-2017). "Data" refers to our empirical dataset. "Model" refers to model simulation starting from
steady state and feeding
                      
                          in realizations of measured TFP over the sample. "Variances" refers to the
                           j =1 (jt ) Var (ljt )
                           N     l 2
variance component         N     y 2             .   "Covariances" refers to the covariance component
                           j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )
N              l
               jt l
                  ot Cov (ljt ,lot )
N
j =1
      o=j         y  y                 . "Variance weight" refers to the weighting term
  j =1   o=j   jt   ot Cov (yjt ,yot )
            N       y 2
t =         j =1 (  jt Var (yjt )/Var (yt ).
                      )                "Contribution of entire term" computes the contribution of the first
term of the decomposition (19) (in the variances row) or the contribution of the second term (in the
covariances row).



comparatively stable, stabilizing its aggregate volatility and therefore raising its volatility
relative to output.
       The right panel of Table 9 replicates this decomposition on model-simulated data and
shows that, consistent with the data, the covariance terms account for approximately 90% of
the increase in the relative volatility of employment. As in the data, this result reflects two
patterns. First, the covariance of value added falls because the covariance of productivity
shocks themselves fall. Second, the covariance of employment across sectors is stable because
employment is primarily determined by shocks to the few investment hubs and their sup-
pliers in both the pre- and post-1980s subsamples.32 Together, these two facts drive up the
relative volatility of employment and therefore drive down the cyclicality of labor produc-
tivity. Appendix H provides more details about these comovement patterns and also shows
that our model does very well in explaining covariance changes at the individual sector-pair
level.
  32
    Another reason that the covariance of employment is stable in our model is that the composition of
investment producers is similar across purchasing sectors in the economy; therefore, a shock to an investment
hub has a similar effect on most other sectors in the economy.


                                                                40
Robustness      Appendix H contains five additional pieces of analysis of this decomposition in
order to ensure that the results are robust features of the data. First, it shows that the changes
in covariance patterns we discuss are broad-based and not driven by outliers. Second, it shows
that the results also hold using the HP filter rather than first differences to detrend the
data. Third, it shows that the changes in covariances are reflected in changes in correlations,
rather than changes in variances. Fourth, it shows that the approximation inherent in the
decomposition (19) is accurate. Fifth, it shows that the results of this decomposition also
hold for a finer 450-sector disaggregation of manufacturing in the NBER-CES database.



7    Conclusion
In this paper, we have argued that the investment network plays an important role in prop-
agating sector-specific shocks to macroeconomic aggregates. Our argument had three main
components. First, we showed that the empirical investment network is dominated by four in-
vestment hubs that produce the majority of investment goods, are highly volatile at business
cycle frequencies, and are strongly correlated with the aggregate cycle. Second, we embed-
ded this concentrated network into a standard multisector business cycle model and showed
that shocks to the investment hubs and their key suppliers have large effects on aggregate
employment and drive down labor productivity. Third, we measured sector-level productiv-
ity shocks in the data, fed them into the model, and found that shocks to investment hubs
accounted for a large and increasing share of aggregate fluctuations. We also showed that
this shift accounts for the decline in the cyclicality of aggregate labor productivity and other
changes in business cycle patterns since the early 1980s.
    Appendix I briefly studies the implications of this concentrated investment network for
investment stimulus policies such as the bonus depreciation allowance. We model these poli-
cies as an equal subsidy for investment purchases across sectors; however, their effects on
production ­ and therefore employment ­ are primarily concentrated in the investment hubs
and their intermediate suppliers. Therefore, the sparseness of the investment network distorts
a broad-based stimulus into something which more closely resembles industrial policy.
    In order to isolate the role of the investment network in our analysis, we embedded it


                                               41
into a purposely simple multisector real business cycle model. A natural next step would be
to add the rich set of nominal and real rigidities which the DSGE literature has argued are
relevant for business cycle analysis. We have also kept our quantitative exercise simple by
focusing on sector-level productivity shocks measured as a simple Solow residual. While we
do not think that the role of the investment network as a propagation mechanism is specific
to productivity shocks ­ other non-technology shocks may have similar effects ­ another
next step would be to understand what drives the variation in our measured shocks, and
incorporate other shocks into the model as well.



References
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012): "The
  network origins of aggregate fluctuations," Econometrica, 80(5), 1977­2016.

Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2017): "Microeconomic origins
  of macroeconomic tail risks," American Economic Review, 107(1), 54­108.

Ascari, G., L. Phaneuf, and E. Sims (2019): "Can New Keynesian Models Survive the
  Barro-King Curse?," .

Atalay, E. (2017): "How important are sectoral shocks?," American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 9(4), 254­80.

Bachmann, R. (2012): "Understanding the Jobless Recoveries After 1991 and 2001," .

Baqaee, D. R., and E. Farhi (2019): "The macroeconomic impact of microeconomic
  shocks: beyond Hulten's Theorem," Econometrica, 87(4), 1155­1203.

         (2020): "Productivity and misallocation in general equilibrium," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 135(1), 105­163.

Barnichon, R. (2010): "Productivity and unemployment over the business cycle," Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 57(8), 1013­1025.



                                            42
Barro, R. J. (2019): "Double-counting of investment," Discussion paper, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Barro, R. J., and R. G. King (1984): "Time-separable preferences and intertemporal-
  substitution models of business cycles," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4), 817­
  839.

Basu, S., J. Fernald, J. Fisher, and M. Kimball (2013): "Sector-specific technical
  change," Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006): "Are technology improvements
  contractionary?," American Economic Review, 96(5), 1418­1448.

Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1991): "Homework in macroeconomics:
  Household production and aggregate fluctuations," Journal of Political economy, 99(6),
  1166­1187.

Berger, D. (2012): "Countercyclical restructuring and jobless recoveries," .

Bigio, S., and J. La'o (2020): "Distortions in production networks," The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 135(4), 2187­2253.

Carvalho, V. M., and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2019): "Production networks: a primer,"
  Annual Review of Economics, 11.

Fernald, J. G., and J. C. Wang (2016): "Why has the cyclicality of productivity
  changed? What does it mean?," Annual Review of Economics, 8, 465­496.

Foerster, A. T., A. Hornstein, P.-D. G. Sarte, and M. W. Watson (2020):
  "Aggregate Implications of Changing Sectoral Trends," Discussion paper.

Foerster, A. T., P.-D. G. Sarte, and M. W. Watson (2011): "Sectoral versus Aggre-
  gate Shocks: A Structural Factor Analysis of Industrial Production," Journal of Political
  Economy, 119(1), 1­38.




                                            43
Fort, T., and S. Klimek (2018): "The Effects of Industry Classification Changes on US
  Employment Composition," Discussion paper, US Census Bureau, Center for Economic
  Studies.

Galí, J., and L. Gambetti (2009): "On the sources of the great moderation," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 26­57.

Galí, J., and T. Van Rens (2020): "The vanishing procyclicality of labor productivity,"
  The Economic Journal (forthcoming).

Garin, J., M. J. Pries, and E. R. Sims (2018): "The relative importance of aggregate and
  sectoral shocks and the changing nature of economic fluctuations," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(1), 119­48.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (2000): "The role of investment-specific
  technological change in the business cycle," European Economic Review, 44(1), 91­115.

Hamilton, J. D. (2018): "Why you should never use the Hodrick-Prescott filter," Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 100(5), 831­843.

Hornstein, A., and J. Praschnik (1997): "Intermediate inputs and sectoral comovement
  in the business cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(3), 573­595.

Horvath, M. (2000): "Sectoral shocks and aggregate fluctuations," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 45(1), 69­106.

House, C. L., A.-M. Mocanu, and M. D. Shapiro (2017): "Stimulus effects of invest-
  ment tax incentives: Production versus purchases," Discussion paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Huffman, G. W., and M. A. Wynne (1999): "The role of intratemporal adjustment costs
  in a multisector economy," Journal of monetary Economics, 43(2), 317­350.

Hulten, C. R. (1978): "Growth accounting with intermediate inputs," The Review of
  Economic Studies, 45(3), 511­518.


                                            44
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): "Investment shocks and
  business cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2), 132­145.

Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2014): "The global decline of the labor share," The
  Quarterly journal of economics, 129(1), 61­103.

         (2019): "Accounting for factorless income," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 33(1),
  167­228.

Kim, K., and Y. S. Kim (2006): "How important is the intermediate input channel in ex-
  plaining sectoral employment comovement over the business cycle?," Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 9(4), 659­682.

Koenders, K., and R. Rogerson (2005): "Organizational dynamics over the business
  cycle: a view on jobless recoveries," Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis, 87(4),
  555.

Maliar, L., S. Maliar, J. B. Taylor, and I. Tsener (2020): "A tractable framework
  for analyzing a class of nonstationary Markov models," Quantitative Economics, 11(4),
  1289­1323.

McDaniel, C. (2007): "Average tax rates on consumption, investment, labor and capital
  in the OECD 1950-2003," Manuscript, Arizona State University, 19602004.

McGrattan, E. R. (2020): "Intangible capital and measured productivity," Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 37, S147­S166.

McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott (2014): "A reassessment of real business cycle
  theory," American Economic Review, 104(5), 177­82.

McGrattan, E. R., and J. A. Schmitz Jr (1999): "Maintenance and repair: Too big to
  ignore," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Quarterly Review-Federal Reserve Bank of
  Minneapolis, 23(4), 2.

Meade, D. S., S. Rzeznik, and D. Robinson-Smith (2003): "Business Investment by
  Industry in the US Economy for 1997," Survey of current business, 83(11), 18­70.

                                           45
Oberfield, E., and D. Raval (2020): "Micro Data and Macro Technology," Econometrica
  (forthcoming.

Rogerson, R. (1988): "Indivisible labor, lotteries and equilibrium," Journal of monetary
  Economics, 21(1), 3­16.

Rossi-Hansberg, E., and M. L. Wright (2007): "Establishment size dynamics in the
  aggregate economy," American Economic Review, 97(5), 1639­1666.

Sato, K. (1976): "The meaning and measurement of the real value added index," The
  Review of economics and Statistics, pp. 434­442.

vom Lehn, C. (2020): "Labor market polarization, the decline of routine work, and tech-
  nological change: A quantitative analysis," Journal of Monetary Economics, 110, 62­80.

Winberry, T. (2020): "Lumpy Investment, Business Cycles, and Stimulus Policy," Amer-
  ican Economic Review (forthcoming).




                                           46
A     Construction of Dataset and the Investment Net-
      work
This Appendix describes the details of our data set and our construction of the investment
network.


A.1     Data Sources

Our analysis of business cycle fluctuations uses a dataset of gross output, intermediate inputs,
value added, employment, and investment for 37 non-government, non-farm sectors over the
1948 - 2018 sample. We define sectors using NAICS codes, resulting in the 37-sector partition
in Table 1. Data on nominal and real measures of gross output, intermediate inputs, and
value added are taken from the GDP by Industry database, while data on nominal and real
investment expenditures are from the BEA Fixed Asset database.
    The main challenge in compiling this dataset is constructing consistent measures of sector-
level employment over the entire 1948 - 2018 sample. Starting in 1998, we observe sector-
level employment in NIPA Table 6.4D, which reports the total number of full-time and
part-time employees by sectors defined according to NAICS codes. Before 1998, the BEA
Industry Accounts provide historical employment data converted to NAICS codes for 1948-
1997. However, this data is only available for 17 out of the 37 sectors that we consider prior to
1977; the remaining sectors are in manufacturing, which the BEA collapses into broad durable
and non-durable sectors over this time period. Fortunately, the BEA provides disaggregated
manufacturing employment in SIC codes over this period in NIPA Tables 6.4B and 6.4C. We
convert these data to the NAICS classification using the Fort and Klimek (2018) crosswalk.
We ensure there is not a discontinuity at the 1977 breakpoint by cumulating the growth rates
from the converted data in each sector to compute the levels of employment in the pre-1977
period rather than relying on the levels in the raw data.




                                               47
                                      Table A.1
                         Investment Flows Table Visualization
                                            Investment Purchasers
                                      Mining Utilities Construction                      ···    Total Production
                         Mining
 Investment              Utilities
 Producers             Construction
                             .
                             .
                             .
                 Total Expenditures


A.2       The Investment Network

Our investment network records the share of new investment expenditures of sector j that
were purchased from sector i for each pair of sectors (i, j ) and for each year t in our sample.
While the BEA capital flows tables provide some relevant information in some years, those
tables are limited in three key ways for our analysis. First, they are only available for seven
of the 72 years from 1947-2018: 1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1992 and 1997.33 Second, they
are not consistently defined over time because they use different vintages of SIC or NAICS
codes. Finally, and most importantly for our analysis, the BEA tables do not include all of
intellectual property; in fact, the 1997 table is the only one which records any intellectual
property at all, but even that only records software (which was a third of all intellectual
property investment in that year). To our knowledge, our investment network is the only
version of the capital flows tables that is consistent with modern national accounting practices
regarding intellectual property.34
       We construct our investment networks in order to overcome these limitations, but oth-
erwise try to follow the BEA methodology as closely as possible.35 To help explain our ap-
proach, Table A.1 visualizes the investment flows table, whose (i, j )th entry records the total
investment expenditures by sector j purchased from sector i in a given year. Summing across
columns for each row in this table generates total production of investment by each sector,
  33
     Only the 1982, 1992, and 1997 tables are currently published on the BEA website, but older tables can
be obtained from archived issues of the Survey of Current Business.
  34
     We have found that the presence of intellectual property is the key difference between the BEA 1997
capital flows table and our measured investment network in that year. Specifically, intellectual property
makes up more than a quarter of total investment spending in the vast majority of sectors in which our
network is significantly different from the BEA's capital flows table.
  35
     McGrattan (2020), particularly the replication materials, provide useful information on details regarding
the BEA methodology.

                                                     48
while summing across rows for each column generates total investment expenditures for each
sector. The investment network simply divides each column j of this table by total expen-
ditures in that sector in order to compute expenditure shares. We construct the investment
network in three steps: (i) separately construct the investment flows tables for residential
investment, non-residential structures, non-residential equipment, and intellectual property,
(ii) aggregate those four investment flows tables to total investment, and (iii) rescale them
to compute the aggregate investment network. Steps (ii) and (iii) are straightforward matrix
operations, so we focus this appendix to explaining how we perform step (i).
   Unfortunately, there is no publicly available data on the pairwise investment flows be-
tween producers and purchasers necessary to fill in each element of Table A.1. Instead, we
will estimate these pairwise flows using the following data which the BEA does provide:

  (i) Total investment expenditures by sector for each year from Table 3.7 of the Fixed
     Assets data (the "total expenditures" row in Table A.1).

 (ii) Total production by sector for each year from the annual use tables from the Input-
     Output database (the "total production" column in Table A.1). Before 1997, these
     tables separately record the total production of structures (both residential and non-
     residential), equipment (both residential and non-residential), and intellectual prop-
     erty. After 1997, the tables record the total production of residential investment, non-
     residential structures, non-residential equipment, and intellectual property.

 (iii) Aggregate residential structures and residential equipment expenditures for each year
     from NIPA Tables 5.4.5 and 5.5.5. Because we assume that the real estate sector is the
     sole purchaser of residential investment ­ following the BEA's methodology ­ there is
     no need for detailed residential investment expenditure data by sector.

 (iv) Sector-level investment expenditure on 33 different types of assets for each year:
     residential structures, residential equipment, two types of non-residential structures
     (mining and all other), four different intellectual property assets, and 25 different
     equipment assets. We construct this data from the expenditures on residential struc-
     tures and equipment described in point (iii) above and detailed data for Fixed Assets


                                             49
         by Industry, which provides expenditures on the other types of assets (available at
         https://apps.bea.gov/national/FA2004/Details/Index.htm).

  (v) Sector-level detail on the production of individual equipment assets for the years 1997-
         2018 (available at https://www.bea.gov/products/industry-economic-accounts/
         underlying-estimates), and 1987 and 1992 in SIC codes (available at https://
         www.bea.gov/industry/historical-benchmark-input-output-tables), which we
         convert to NAICS codes using the crosswalk in Fort and Klimek (2018).

       Our approach primarily utilizes asset-level expenditure data to estimate the individual
entries in Table A.1. We estimate those pairwise investment flows as

                                                     A
                                                                exp
                                            Iijt =         iat Iajt ,                                     (20)
                                                     a=1


                                                                              exp
where Iijt is the (i, j )th element of the investment flows table in year t, Iajt is expenditures
by sector j on capital asset a in year t, and iat represents the fraction of capital asset a
produced by sector i in year t.36 The key assumption in equation (20) is that the the mix of
sectors producing a given asset a is the same for all sectors j which purchase that asset, i.e.
that iat is independent of the purchasing sector j . The BEA also makes this assumption in
constructing their capital flows tables.
  36
     To be consistent with input-output methodology, our investment network represents expenditures on new
investment, not used or scrap transactions. However, the Fixed Assets investment expenditures data used
               exp
to construct Iajt  in (20) does include net purchases of used assets, which often enter recorded investment
expenditure as a negative value. Thus, the reported expenditures may understate total expenditures on new
assets. In terms of measured investment expenditures, the addition of net used transactions is only a concern
for equipment assets; for structures and intellectual property, net used transactions are negligible. We adjust
total investment spending from the Fixed Assets data to eliminate used and scrap transactions as follows:
   · For all equipment assets aside from autos, we scale up investment expenditures uniformly across
     sectors in order to match the total production of new assets. In 1997-2018, the scaling factor ensures
     that total expenditures equals total production of that asset as reported in sector-level detail on
     the production of individual equipment assets. Before 1997, we use the median scaling factor from
     1997-2018. Overall, this correction is non-negligible only for trucks and aircraft.
   · For autos, we scale up expenditures on autos in the rental/leasing sector in order to be consistent
     with the observation in Meade, Rzeznik and Robinson-Smith (2003) that net sales of used autos are
     primarily from that sector to private households (the rental/leasing sector is part of real estate in our
     37 sector partition). We again choose the scaling factor to ensure that total expenditures on autos
     equals total expenditures in 1997-2018 (when production data is available), and choose the median
     scale factor from that period for the pre-1997 data (when the production data is not available).



                                                      50
       The main challenge in our measurement procedure is to estimate the collection of iat
­ which is called a bridge file ­ across assets a, sectors i, and years t. The remainder of
this subsection describes how we construct these annual bridge files iat separately for non-
residential structures, intellectual property, residential investment, and equipment.


Non-Residential Structures

We assume that all non-residential structures are produced by the construction sector except
for mining structures, which we assume are produced by the mining sector. Therefore, for
a = non-residential non-mining structures, we set iat = 1 if i = construction and zero
otherwise. For a = non-residential mining structures, we set iat = 1 if i = mining and zero
otherwise. This allocation rule is consistent with how the BEA constructs the capital flows
tables.37


Intellectual Property

We have data on four types of intellectual property assets: prepackaged software, own and
custom software, research and development, and artistic originals. We allocate the production
of these assets to sector i based on the BEA practices described in McGrattan (2020).

  (i) We assume that own and custom software is produced by the professional/technical ser-
         vices sector, i.e. for a = own and custom software, iat = 1 if i = professional/technical
         services and zero otherwise.

 (ii) We assume that R & D investment is also produced by the professional/technical
         services sector, i.e. for a = R & D investment, iat = 1 if i = professional/technical
         services and zero otherwise.

 (iii) We assume that artistic originals are produced by the information sector (which in-
         cludes radio & TV communication and motion picture publishing) and the arts &
  37
    McGrattan (2020) follows this rule as well. In 1997-2018, the construction and mining sectors produce
99.9% of non-residential structures investment net of brokers' commissions on structures (which are excluded
from our investment network following the BEA's methodology for the 1997 capital flows table).




                                                    51
       entertainment services sector. We assume that artistic originals is the only type of in-
       tellectual property produced by the arts & entertainment sector, and therefore estimate
       its production of artistic originals as its total production of intellectual property from
       the Input-Output tables. Hence, for a = artistic originals and i = arts & entertain-
                                 prod
                               Iait               prod
       ment, we set iat =      N     exp   where Iait  is the total production of intellectual property
                               j =1 Iajt
                                                   N     exp
       by i = arts & entertainment and             j =1 Iajt   are total economy-wide expenditures on
       artistic originals. We then set iat = 1 - i at for i = information (where i = arts &
       entertainment) and iat = 0 for all other i.

 (iv) Finally, we assume that all pre-packaged software is produced by the information
       sector. However, we must also take into account the fact that the wholesale trade,
       retail trade, and transportation & warehousing sectors play a role in delivering new pre-
       packaged software to customers (these delivery expenses are called margin payments).38
       We compute the margin payments on pre-packaged software as the total production of
       intellectual property for those sectors as recorded in the Input-Output Tables. Hence,
                                                                                       prod
                                                                                     Iait
       for a = pre-packaged software and i = information, we set iat =               N     exp   where i 
                                                                                     j =1 Iajt

       {wholesale trade, retail trade, transportation & warehousing } and              N     exp
                                                                                       j =1 Iajt     is total
       economy-wide expenditure on pre-packaged software. We then set iat = 1-                   k   akt for
       i = information and k  {wholesale trade, retail trade, transportation & warehousing}.
       Finally, we set iat = 0 for all other sectors i.


Residential Investment

Residential investment is the sum of residential structures and residential equipment (such as
appliances or other consumer durables owned by landlords and included in residential leases).
As described above, the BEA directly reports the total production of residential investment
by sector in the Input-Output Tables between 1997-2018. However, that production data
also includes margin payments on used residential structures transactions, which we need to
  38
    We assume that pre-packaged software is the only intellectual property product with margin payments
because that is the case in the benchmark 2007 and 2012 input-output tables, which has detailed observa-
tions on margin payments (available at https://www.bea.gov/products/industry-economic-accounts/
underlying-estimates).



                                                     52
eliminate from our investment network. Our approach to estimating these margin payments
for the 1997-2018 period depends on the sector:

  (i) We assume that some sectors ­ real estate, finance/insurance, and legal services (part of
         professional/technical services) ­ only produce margin payments on residential struc-
         tures and not on residential equipment.39 For these sectors, we assume that 13.2%
         of their production of residential structures corresponds to margin payments on new
         transactions, based on the estimated fraction of real estate broker margins that were
         for new residential structure investment (as used in the 1997 BEA capital flows data
         and reported in Meade, Rzeznik and Robinson-Smith (2003)).

 (ii) Other sectors produce margin payments for both residential structures and equipment
         (wholesale trade, retail trade, and transportation & warehousing). For these sectors, we
         estimate their total margin payments as the sum of their total production of residen-
         tial equipment (corresponding to margin payments on residential equipment, observed
         in detailed equipment production data) and 13.2% of their production of residential
         structures (corresponding to margin payments on new residential structures, assumed
         to be the remainder of these sectors' total production of residential investment).

       Unfortunately, the BEA does not separately report production of residential investment
by sector prior to 1997. Our procedure to estimate residential investment in this period
depends on the sector:

  (i) We assume some sectors (wood products manufacturing, finance/insurance and pro-
         fessional/technical services) produce residential structures but do not produce non-
         residential structures or residential equipment in the post-1997 data.40 We therefore
         estimate these sectors' total production of residential investment as their reported to-
         tal production of structures pre-1997. We then eliminate margin payments on used
         transactions following the same procedure described in the previous paragraph.
  39
     This assumption is validated by the fact that these sectors do not contribute to the production of total
equipment (residential + non-residential) in the pre-1997 production data.
  40
     This assumption is validated by the fact that these sectors report zero production of any equipment
investment pre-1996 and no production of non-residential structures post-1997 in the Input-Ouput tables.



                                                     53
 (ii) We estimate the other sectors' production of residential investment using the following
       procedure.

         · Residential structures: in the 1997-2018 period, we can infer sector-level produc-
            tion of residential structures directly in the Input-Output Tables (given that we
            separately observe production of residential equipment in the detailed data de-
            scribing production of equipment over this period). In the pre-1997 period, when
            we do not observe production, we estimate it as the average share of residential
            structures produced by that sector in the 1997-2018 data times the aggregate
            spending on residential structures in a given year t < 1997.

         · Residential equipment: we follow a similar procedure as for residential structures;
            given observed sector-level production of residential equipment for later years,
            we use the average share produced by each sector times aggregate spending on
            residential equipment. Because we have detailed data on the sectoral production
            of residential equipment for the years 1987 and 1992 as well, for years t < 1987,
            we use 1987 data on the shares of sectoral production times the aggregate time
            series for residential equipment spending. For years between 1987 and 1992, we
            use a moving average of the residential equipment production shares from the
            1987 and 1992 bridge files, and for years between 1992 and 1997, we use a moving
            average of the data in 1992 and 1997.

   Since these procedures define the bridge files iat recursively, we do not write out their
formulas here but rather refer the interested reader to the replication packet.


Non-Residential Equipment

Constructing the bridge files for equipment assets is the most involved task because there
are 25 detailed types of equipment assets reported in the Fixed Asset data. We describe our
procedure separately for three time periods which have different data availability from the
BEA:

  (i) 1997 - 2018: The BEA already publishes detailed data on the production of individual


                                              54
       equipment assets by each sector, i.e. we observe iat from the data directly.

 (ii) 1987 and 1992: The BEA publishes bridge files for each of these assets in 1987 and
       1992, but the sectors correspond to SIC codes rather than NAICS codes. Therefore,
       we convert these bridge files from SIC to NAICS using the Fort and Klimek (2018)
       crosswalk.41

 (iii) Remaining years: in the years for which we have no publicly available bridge files, we
       interpolate the existing bridge files and re-scale the interpolation so that it matches
       the total production of equipment investment by sector from the input-output data.
       To understand our procedure, first note that the total production of equipment capital
       by sector i is:
                                               prod                 exp
                                              Iit   =          iat Iat  ,                              (21)
                                                           a
              exp
       where Iat  is total expenditures on equipment asset a in year t (from the Fixed Assets
       data), Iit is the production of all equipment assets by sector i (from the input-output
       data), and iat is our bridge file to be estimated.

       We initialize our estimate of the bridge file, iat as either the bridge data from the
       last available year or a moving average of the two nearest bridge files. This estimate
                                                                            prod      exp
       iat may not satisfy the relationship (21) given our observations of Iit   and Iat  .
                        prod
                       Iit
       Let it =              exp   denote the ratio of true equipment production of sector i to its
                      a iat Iat
                       

       production implied by the bridge file estimate. We use it to arrive at our final estimate
       of the bridge file:
                                                            it iat
                                              iat =        N
                                                                         .                             (22)
                                                           j =1  jt  jat

       Equation (22) ensures that the total investment production in each sector i implied by
       the bridge file is equal to total investment production in the data. The key assumption
  41
    If the converted bridge file implies that a sector produces an equipment asset that the sector is not
observed to produce in the detailed equipment production data in the years 1997-2018, we modify the
conversion of NAICS to SIC sectors such that this sector does not produce that good in the final converted
bridge file. However, these older bridge files only contain limited detail on margin sectors, making careful
conversion to NAICS sectors infeasible. In order to ensure that we do not have a discontinuous break in
margin payments by each sector at 1997, we take the total reported margins for each asset in these older
bridge files and multiply them by the share of margins produced by each margin sector for that asset from
the detailed equipment bridge files in 1997-2001.


                                                      55
      is that the production of assets a by sector i always occur in proportion to iat .


Additional Networks

Alternative sectoral disaggregation          While we use a 37-sector disaggregation in the
main text, we can also incorporate the agriculture, state/local government, and federal gov-
ernment sectors. The agriculture sector can be incorporated following the same steps as
above without modification. We incorporate government sectors by using the Input-Output
tables directly because investment by federal and state/local governments is a final use.
Thus, for each year in our data, each sector's contribution to final production of government
investment is directly observable in the data. We do not incorporate these sectors in the
main text in order to focus on the private nonfarm economy.
   We can also disaggregate the mining and real estate sectors more finely than in the main
text. In particular, we can split the mining sector into oil & gas extraction, support activ-
ities for mining, and other mining, and we can split the real estate sector into real estate
and rental/leasing services. We do not use these additional sectors in our baseline analysis
because the way investment purchases and expenditures are allocated across these sectors is
unusual (e.g., most of investment purchases by mining are produced by the support activ-
ities for mining sector, and the purely real estate sector is largely owner-occupied housing
imputations). However, our results are robust to using this more detailed partition of sectors
for the private non-farm economy.


Capital Rental Services       We also construct a capital rental services network, defined as
the fraction of capital rental service expenditures by sector j , Rjt Kjt , purchased from all
other sectors i in the economy in year t. This rental services network may be useful for
at least two reasons. First, as described in Footnote 8, it is consistent with the national
accounting procedure described in Barro (2019). Second, the rental services network may be
used to incorporate sectoral linkages in capital services in a static model.
   As with the investment network, the rental services network combines rental expenditures
                         a a
of sector j on asset a, Rt Kjt , with bridge files to infer from which sectors those assets were
                       a a
purchased. We compute Rt Kjt using data on the nominal capital holdings of each sector j

                                              56
for each asset a in each year t, Pta Kjt
                                      a
                                         from the BEA Fixed Assets data.42 We then combine
                                                                a
                                                               Rt
that series with a time series for the real rental rate         a,
                                                               Pt
                                                                     which we construct following the
approach in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019):

                 Rta
                       1 + tx   (1 + tx      a
                                       -1 )Pt-1                                       tk t
                                                                                         a
                     =                             (1 + (1 - tk )rt ) - (1 - t
                                                                             a
                                                                               )-                     (23)
                 Pta   1 - tk     (1 + tx )Pta                                       1 + tx

where tx is the tax rate on investment, tk is the tax rate on capital income, rt is a measure
of the real rate of return on capital, Pta is the price of a new unit of capital (investment)
                     a
of asset type a, and t is the depreciation rate of asset a. We follow the same broad steps
as Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019) (on their more aggregated data) in order to measure
these objects:

  (i) Real interest rate rt : measured as the nominal rate of return on 10 year Treasuries
         net of expected inflation (measured as a five year moving average of observed PCE
         inflation) plus a 3% risk premium (which avoids negative values of the rental rate for
         particular sectors).

 (ii) Price Pta : directly observed in NIPA tables 5.4.4, 5.5.4, and 5.6.4.

 (iii) Taxes tx and tk : directly from McDaniel (2007), which have been updated through
         2017.
                                                                             a
                                                                            Rt
We then take a seven-year moving average of the real rental rate             a
                                                                            Pt
                                                                                 in order to smooth out
high-frequency variations; Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019) use a five-year moving average,
which leaves more noise in our disaggregated data.
       We use the same bridge files iat constructed above to allocate the production of new
rental services for asset a to various sectors i. Our key assumption is that the composition
of sectors which produce new capital of asset a is the same as the composition of sectors
which produced the existing capital stock in the past as well. This assumption may fail if the
sectors producing a particular capital asset a have substantially changed over time, but that
is unlikely to be an important issue for two reasons. First, we use a fairly detailed partition
  42
    We assume that the rental rate of a given capital asset is specific to the asset a, not to the sector j
renting it. This assumption is consistent with BEA data showing that the price of capital assets is almost
identical for the same asset across sectors.

                                                    57
of capital assets a whose production patterns have not changed much over time. Second,
the assets for which production has changed the most, such as computers and electronic
equipment, also have the highest depreciation rates, implying that our bridge files for new
investment correspond to a large fraction of the existing capital stock as well. That said,
we also provide each of our equipment bridge files year-by-year, so other researchers can
relax our assumption by cumulating the pairwise purchases of investment over time using
the perpetual inventory method.43
       Given this modular approach, other researchers can construct rental services by asset in
different ways -- for example, reflecting a different formulation of the rental rate -- and
combine them with our bridge files to build their own rental services network. We provide
networks with and without taxes (given that our model does not include taxes) as well as a
network using rental rates net of depreciation.44 Figure A.1 plots the heatmap of our gross
rental services table without taxes and shows that it is very similar to our investment network
considered in the main text; the network with taxes and the network using net rental rates
is similar to this one.


A.3        Additional Analysis of Investment Network

This subsection presents two pieces of additional analysis of the investment network refer-
enced in Section 2 of the main text.


Changes in Network Over Time                        Figure A.2 compares the heatmaps of the investment
network in the pre and post 1984 samples. Our four investment hubs are the primary sup-
pliers of investment goods in each subsample. The main difference across subsamples is that
professional/technical services accounts for a larger share of investment production in the
post-1984 period.
  43
     We do not make a correction for used goods when building the rental services tables because this
correction is significantly more complex when considering the stock of all capital and not the period flows
of investment.
  44                                                                                                  Ra
     In the case of the net rental services matrix, net rental rates are measured without taxes, with P t
                                                                                                        a =
                                                                                                        t
    a
  Pt
   Pt
     -1
     a     (1 + rt ) - 1 . We add an additional two percentage point risk premium and smooth changes in asset
            a
          Pt -1
prices,    Pta ,   using a five year moving average in order to avoid negative net rental rates.



                                                           58
                    Figure A.1: Heatmap of Empirical Rental Services Network


                                                                                                      0.7




                                                                                                      0.6




                                                                                                      0.5




                                                                                                      0.4




                                                                                                      0.3




                                                                                                      0.2




                                                                                                      0.1




                                                                                                       0




Notes: heatmap of empirical gross rental services network (without taxes). Entry (i, j ) computes share of
total rental expenditures by sector j that are produced by sector i, averaged over the 1947 - 2018 sample.



       We can further understand these changes by separately considering the investment net-
works for residential, non-residential structures, non-residential equipment, and intellectual
property investment. For both residential investment and non-residential structures, the in-
vestment network is almost identical pre- and post-1984. However, Figure A.3 shows that the
non-residential equipment and intellectual property networks have changed over time, reflect-
ing the rise of IT; the equipment network places greater weight on computer manufacturing
and professional/technical services, while the intellectual property network places greater
weight on information. There have also been large changes in the composition of investment
goods across these four broad categories. Pre-1984, the combination of residential invest-
ment and non-residential investment accounted for 54% of private investment; post-1984,
that share has fallen to 43%.45 Simultaneously, the share of intellectual property investment
in total private investment rose from 9% to 21%. The combination of these changes account
  45
       This decline is roughly 20 percentage points between 1948 to 2018, and even larger in some sectors.


                                                      59
                Figure A.2: Heatmaps of Investment Network, Pre/Post 1984


                                                                                                0.7




                                                                                                0.6




                                                                                                0.5




                                                                                                0.4




                                                                                                0.3




                                                                                                0.2




                                                                                                0.1




                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                0.7




                                                                                                0.6




                                                                                                0.5




                                                                                                0.4




                                                                                                0.3




                                                                                                0.2




                                                                                                0.1




                                                                                                 0




Notes: Heatmaps of the investment network ij are constructed as described in the main text. The (i, j )
entry of each network corresponds to parameter ij , i.e., the amount of sector i's good used in sector j .
The pre-84 network corresponds to the years 1947-1983 and the post-84 network corresponds to the years
1984-2018.




                                                    60
Figure A.3: Heatmaps of Equipment and Intellectual Property Investment Networks,
Pre/Post 1984
                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                           0.7




                                                                                                                   0.7

                                                           0.6



                                                                                                                   0.6

                                                           0.5


                                                                                                                   0.5


                                                           0.4

                                                                                                                   0.4



                                                           0.3

                                                                                                                   0.3




                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                   0.2




                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                   0.1




                                                            0                                                       0




                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                           0.7




                                                                                                                   0.7

                                                           0.6



                                                                                                                   0.6

                                                           0.5


                                                                                                                   0.5


                                                           0.4

                                                                                                                   0.4



                                                           0.3

                                                                                                                   0.3




                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                   0.2




                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                   0.1




                                                            0                                                       0




Notes: Heatmaps of the non-residential equipment and intellectual property investment networks are
constructed from the bridge files as described in Appendix A.2. The pre-84 network corresponds to the
years 1947-1983 and the post-84 network corresponds to the years 1984-2018.



for the changes in the investment network over time.


Concentration of the Investment Network Table A.2 shows that the investment net-
work is significantly more concentrated than the intermediates input-output network, mea-
sured using two metrics of network skewness.46 Carvalho and Tahbaz-Salehi (2019) discuss
both of these metrics; intuitively, they compute a measure of centrality for each sector, which
determines how important of a supplier it is to other sectors, and then compute the skewness
of these centrality measures across sectors. A highly skewed set of centrality measures indi-
cates that the network is dominated by a small number of highly important sectors. Across
     46
          We describe our measurement of the intermediates network, which follows standard procedure, in Section
3.



                                                         61
                                   Table A.2
               Skewness of Investment and Intermediates Networks

                               Eigenvalue Centrality Weighted Outdegree
         Investment network             3.32                2.70
         Intermediates network          1.42                0.68

Notes: Eigenvalue centrality is defined as the eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue of the
matrix. The weighted outdegree is defined as the sum over columns of the network matrix. Skewness of
each of these centrality measures is computed as the sample skewness.


                                      Table B.1
                   Volatility of Activity, Hubs vs. Manufacturing

                    Investment Hubs    Non-Hubs    Non-Hub Manuf.
                    Pre-84 Post-84  Pre-84 Post-84 Pre-84 Post-84
             (yst ) 9.13% 9.18%     6.63% 5.51%    9.14% 6.97%
             (lst ) 6.14% 4.83%     3.81% 3.14%    5.12% 3.77%

Notes: standard deviation of business cycle component of sector-level value added or employment. yst is
logged real value added in sector s, lst is logged employment in sector s, and  denotes the first difference
operator. "Investment hubs" compute the unweighted average the value of these statistics over s =
construction, machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles manufacturing, and professional/technical services.
"Non-hubs" compute the unweighted average over the remaining sectors. "Non-hub manufacturing"
computes the average over manufacturing sectors other than machinery and motor vehicles. "Pre-1984"
performs this analysis in the 1948 - 1983 subsample and "post-1984" performs this analysis in the 1984 -
2018 subsample.



both measures of centrality, the investment network is on average roughly two to three times
more skewed than the intermediates input-output network.



B      Additional Results on Descriptive Evidence of In-
       vestment Hubs
This appendix present three pieces of additional analysis regarding the cyclical behavior
of investment hubs referenced in Section 2 in the main text. First, Figure B.1 presents
the correlogram between sector-level value added and aggregate GDP rather than aggregate
employment as in Figure 2. Consistent with Figure 2, hubs are more correlated with aggregate
GDP than are non-hubs, and this difference between hubs is larger in the post-1984 sample.

                                                    62
        Figure B.1: Correlogram of Sector-level Value Added with Aggregate GDP


          0.8                                                   0.8


          0.6                                                   0.6


          0.4                                                   0.4


          0.2                                                   0.2


            0                                                         0


          -0.2                                                  -0.2
              -2            -1        0       1       2             -2         -1       0       1       2



Notes: correlation of value added at sector s in year t + h, yst+h , with aggregate employment in year t,
yt . Both yst+h and yt are logged and  denotes the first-difference operator. The x-axis varies the lead/lag
h  {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2}. "Investment hubs" compute the unweighted average the value of these statistics over
s = construction, machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles manufacturing, and professional/technical
services. "Non-hubs" compute the unweighted average over the remaining sectors. "Pre-1984" performs this
analysis in the 1948 - 1983 subsample and "post-1984" performs this analysis in the 1984 - 2018 subsample.




Figure B.2: Correlogam of Sector-level Value Added with Aggregate Employment, Hubs
vs. Manufacturing


                   0.8                                         0.8

                   0.6                                         0.6

                   0.4                                         0.4

                   0.2                                         0.2

                     0                                           0

                   -0.2                                        -0.2

                   -0.4                                        -0.4
                       -2        -1       0       1   2            -2     -1        0       1       2




Notes: correlation of log real value added in sector s in year t + h, yst+h , with log aggregate employment in
year t, lt .  denotes the first difference operator. The x-axis varies the lead/lag h  {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2}.
"Investment hubs" compute the unweighted average the value of these statistics over s = construction,
machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles manufacturing, and professional/technical services. "Non-hubs"
compute the unweighted average over the remaining sectors. "Non-hub manufacturing" computes the
average over manufacturing sectors other than machinery and motor vehicles. "Pre-1984" performs this
analysis in the 1948 - 1983 subsample and "post-1984" performs this analysis in the 1984 - 2018 subsample.




                                                          63
     Second, we address the concern that the empirical behavior of investment hubs is driven
by the fact that two of four hubs are manufacturing sectors, and that manufacturing may
be more cyclical than other sectors for reasons outside our model. We present two pieces of
evidence against this concern. First, Table B.1 shows that non-hub manufacturing sectors
are less volatile than investment hubs. Although they are more volatile than non-hub non-
manufacturing sectors, we show in Section 4 and Appendix F that this result is consistent
with our model because durable manufacturing sectors are key suppliers to investment hubs.
Second, Figure B.2 shows that the correlation of non-hub manufacturing sectors with aggre-
gate employment is close to that of the other non-hubs and lower than the corresponding
correlation of the investment hubs.



C       Equilibrium Conditions
This appendix collects the equilibrium conditions of our model.


Households            We simplify the household's problem in two ways. First, the intratemporal
                                                                                                                j
                                                                                                         pjt
consumption allocation decision implies that pjt Cjt = j Ptc Ct , where Ptc = N
                                                                              j =1                       j
                                                                                                                    is
the price index of the consumption bundle. We take the price of the consumption bundle
PtC = 1 as our numeraire. Second, the intratemporal investment allocation decision for sector
                                                                         ij
                                                                  pit
j implies that pit Iijt = ij pI               I    N
                              jt Ijt , where pjt = i=1            ij
                                                                              is the price index of the investment
bundle for sector j .
     With these simplifications, the household's problem is

                                                          N                                               N
   max           E0          (log Ct - Lt )
                             t
                                              s.t. Ct +          pI
                                                                  jt   (Kjt+1 - (1 - j )Kjt )  Wt Lt +          rjt Kjt .
Ct ,Kjt+1 ,Ljt
                      t=0                                 j =1                                           j =1


The first order conditions for this problem are

                                   pI
                                    jt         1
                                       =  Et                jt+1 (1 - j )
                                                   rjt+1 + pI                                                   (24)
                                   Ct         Ct+1
                                         Wt
                                    =       .                                                                   (25)
                                         Ct



                                                      64
Firms     Before solving the firm's profit maximization problem, we note that its cost-minimization
problem with respect to intermediate input mix implies that pit Mijt = ij pM
                                                                           jt Mjt , where
                    ij
              pit
pM    N
 jt = i=1     ij
                         is the price index of the materials bundle for sector j . The profit maxi-
mization problem is then


                                 max          pjt Qjt - Wt Ljt - rjt Kjt - pM
                                                                            jt Mjt .
                              Ljt ,Kjt ,Mjt


                                    j
                             1-j              1-j
where Qjt = Ajt Kjtj Ljt                Mjt         .
    The first order conditions for this problem are

                                                                      pjt Qjt
                                               Wt = j (1 - j )                                          (26)
                                                                       Ljt
                                                              pjt Qjt
                                               rjt = j j                                                (27)
                                                               Kjt
                                                                   pjt Qjt
                                              pM
                                               jt       = (1 - j )         .                            (28)
                                                                    Mjt

    Note that constant returns to scale implies


                                    Wt Ljt + rjt Kjt + pM
                                                        jt Mjt = pjt Qjt .                              (29)


Therefore, the accounting definition of nominal value added is simply pjt Qjt - pM
                                                                                 jt Mjt =

wt Lt + rjt Kjt , which is by definition pY
                                          jt Yjt .

    To obtain real value added, we use the Divisia index definition, which differentiates the
accounting definition of nominal value added holding prices fixed:


                                                                jt dYjt = pjt dQjt - pjt dMjt
                                                               pY                     M



                               jt Yjt d log Yjt = pjt Qjt d log Qjt - pjt Mjt d log Mjt
                              pY                                       M


                                         j d log Yjt = d log Qjt - (1 - j )d log Mjt
                                       1
                         d log Yjt =     d log Ajt + j d log Kjt + (1 - j )d log Ljt
                                       j

                                                                                                1
                                                                                                       1-j
    Integrating this expression yields that real value added is given by Yjt = Ajtj Kjtj Ljt                 .


                                                               65
Market Clearing         Output market clearing for sector j ensures that gross output is used
for consumption, investment, or an intermediate in production:

                                                    N               N
                                  Qjt = Cjt +            Ijit +         Mjit .                      (30)
                                                   i=1            i=1


Using the firms' first order conditions for optimal investment and intermediates purchases,
we can rewrite this condition to avoid the need to keep track of each intermediate purchase
and consumption:

                                         N                    N
                              j Ct             ji pI
                                                   it Iit           (1 - i )ji pit Qit
                        Qjt =      +                      +                                         (31)
                              pjt        i=1
                                                 pjt          i=1
                                                                          pjt


D        Details of Model Calibration
This appendix presents additional details on our model's calibration. As discussed in the
main text, we choose all of the parameters other than the shock process so that the model's
steady state corresponds to the average of the postwar U.S. economy. We then feed in the
measured productivity shocks from the data.


D.1        Steady State Parameters

Figure D.1 plots our calibrated primary input shares j for each sector j . We calibrate the
share of intermediate inputs in production, 1 - j , using the BEA input-output database.
Given the Cobb-Douglas structure of our production function, the shares j are pinned down
by the ratio of value added to gross output at the firm level. We obtain this ratio for each
year in our 1947-2018 sample and then compute their average value over time.
       Figure D.2 plots the calibrated labor shares 1 - j for each sector, averaged over 1947
- 2018.47 We correct for the fact that sector-level compensation in the BEA data does not
include self-employed income by multiplying sectoral compensation by one plus the ratio
of self-employed employment to total part-time and full-time employment in the sector.48
  47
     For years prior to 1987, we convert SIC based data to NAICS using the crosswalk in Fort and Klimek
(2018).
  48
     This operation implicitly assumes that average compensation for self-employed workers is the same as


                                                     66
                         Figure D.1: Calibrated Value Added Shares j


                  0.8


                  0.7


                  0.6


                  0.5


                  0.4


                  0.3


                  0.2


                  0.1


                   0
                             M rnitu rt
                           C ch tals




                               Pr ape l




                                           s
                           M Metals
                    Fa rim M o t
                      br a in od




                            Pr es FI

                                   M ch
                                    m m




                                           T




                                    E in
                                           T
                                       TW




                                  rv m
                              Se cco ts
                            Pe in r



                                   as al




                                         lth
                             El put ry




                                   /T e
                            ed e s




                             Fu nsp s




                                  H duc
                            Fo sc Mre
                                od fg
                                 Te Mfg




                                  Ad mt




                                          er
                                           g
                                  C til




                                    pa le




                                          fo
                              Ve tric s




                             C ole g




                                   O es
                            Tr hic al




                                  P re
                                          s




                                       tic
                          at M al




                               a le
                                ec er




                               of tat
                                        o
                                       in




                               tr tin




                                        R
                                       W
                                       U
                                     on




                                      m



                          od A Ar
                               Pl ic
                               Ap xti




                               he u
                                       e




                                      In




                                     th
                                      e



                                    ea



                                     ic
                                      g
                        ic ry er
                                    in




                             om in
                                  W
                   M




                                i




                               l
                              a




                            ea
                          R




                       Fo
                      P




Notes: Values for the value-added shares j are computed as the ratio of value added to gross output in
each sector, averaged across the entire sample, 1947-2018.



We then compute the labor share as the ratio of adjusted compensation to value added in
that sector minus indirect taxes and subsidies. Our results are also robust to making no
adjustments for self-employment.
    Figure D.3 plots our calibrated depreciation rates, j , which are equal to the average
implied depreciation rate reported in the Fixed Assets database from 1947-2018. Figure D.4
plots our calibrated Cobb-Douglas preference parameters weighting consumption in different
sectors' output, j . We measure j as the share of total consumption expenditures purchased
from sector j .
non-self-employed workers. The BEA data on self-employment by sector covers a coarse set of sectors, so
we apply the self-employment to employment ratio to each sector based on the finest available sector in the
self-employed data. The one exception is for the management of companies and enterprises, for which we
assume that there is no self-employment. If we allowed for self-employment in that sector, the implied labor
share often exceeds one.




                                                    67
                          Figure D.2: Calibrated Labor Shares 1 - j


                  1

                 0.9

                 0.8

                 0.7

                 0.6

                 0.5

                 0.4

                 0.3

                 0.2

                 0.1

                  0
                            M rnitu rt
                          C ch tals




                              Pr ape l




                                          s
                          M Metals
                   Fa rim M o t
                     br a in od




                           Pr es FI
                                          T




                                  M ch
                                   m m




                                   E in
                                          T
                                      TW




                                 rv m
                             Se cco ts
                           Pe in r



                                  as al




                                        lth
                            El put ry




                                  /T e
                           ed e s




                            Fu nsp s




                                 H duc
                           Fo sc Mre
                               od fg
                                Te Mfg




                                 Ad mt




                                         er
                                          g
                                 C til




                                   pa le




                                         fo
                             Ve tric s




                            C ole g




                                  O es
                           Tr hic al




                                 P re
                                         s




                                      tic
                         at M al




                              a le
                               ec er




                              of tat
                                       o
                                      in




                              tr tin




                                       R
                                      W
                                      U
                                    on




                                     m



                         od A Ar
                              Pl ic
                              Ap xti




                              he u
                                      e




                                     In




                                    th
                                     e



                                   ea



                                    ic
                                     g
                       ic ry er
                                   in




                            om in
                                 W
                  M




                               i




                              l
                             a




                           ea
                         R




                      Fo
                     P




Notes: Values for the labor share 1 - j are computed from sectoral data on compensation (adjusted for
self-employment) divided by value added (with indirect taxes and subsidies removed), averaged across all
years in the data, 1947-2018.



D.2     Measured Sector-Level Productivity Series

We measure sector-level TFP using the Solow residual approach. In particular, we compute
TFP for sector j in year t as


           log Ajt = log Qjt - jt jt log Kjt - jt (1 - jt ) log Ljt - (1 - jt ) log Mjt ,


where the factor shares vary over time in order to capture changes in the production technol-
ogy that are outside our model (our results are robust to fixing the factor shares over time).
Annual sector value added, employment, and intermediates are measured as described in
Appendix A. We construct the capital stock for each sector in each year using the perpetual
inventory method using the nominal year-end capital stock for each sector in 1948 as our
starting point (from BEA Fixed Assets data). We then use the annual implied deprecia-
tion rates and real quantities of investment for each sector to iterate forward the capital
accumulation process and generate a time series of capital for each sector.


                                                   68
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1




                                                                                                                                               0.02
                                                                                                                                                      0.04
                                                                                                                                                             0.06
                                                                                                                                                                    0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.16




                                                                                                                              M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                 in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                  in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                       g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ng
                                                                                                                                  U                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                                             C til                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C til
                                                                                                                                on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          on
                                                                                                               Fa Prim M Wo st                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fa Prim M Wo st
                                                                                                                 br a in od                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  br a in od
                                                                                                                   ic ry er                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ic ry er
                                                                                                                     at M al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     at M al
                                                                                                                       ed e s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ed e s
                                                                                                                      M Metals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M Metals
                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                      C ch tals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C ch tals
                                                                                                                        om in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       om in
                                                                                                                                  e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                        El put ry                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   El put ry
                                                                                                                           ec er                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ec er
                                                                                                                         Ve tric s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ve tric s
                                                                                                                       Tr hic al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tr hic al
                                                                                                                          a le                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a le
                                                                                                                        Fu nsp s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fu nsp s
                                                                                                                                   o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                        M rnitu rt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M rnitu rt
                                                                                                                           i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                       Fo sc Mre                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fo sc Mre
                                                                                                                           od fg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       od fg
                                                                                                                            Te Mfg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Te Mfg
                                                                                                                          Ap xti                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ap xti
                                                                                                                               pa le                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pa le
                                                                                                                             P re                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P re
                                                                                                                          Pr ape l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pr ape l
                                                                                                                       Pe in r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pe in r




69
                                                                                                                          tr tin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tr tin
                                                                                                                        C ole g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C ole g
                                                                                                                          he u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        he u
                                                                                                                               m m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m m
                                                                                                                          Pl ic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pl ic
                                                                                                                              as al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       as al




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rate from BEA Fixed Assets data, averaged from 1947-2018.
                                                                                                                                  tic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tic
                                                                                                                                       s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                  W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                      T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                      T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                  TW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TW
                                                                                                                     R           In                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R           In
                                                                                                                       ea            f o                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ea            f o
                                                                                                                          l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                       Pr es FI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pr es FI
                                                                                                                          of tat                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of tat
                                                                                                                              /T e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /T e
                                                                                                                                 e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                              M ch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M ch
                                                                                                                                 g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                                             Ad mt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ad mt
                                                                                                                                 m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                               E in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E in
                                                                                                                             H duc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H duc
                                                                                                                               ea                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ea
                                                                                                                                    lth                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure D.3: Calibrated Depreciation Rates j




                                                                                                                  Fo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fo
                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure D.4: Calibrated Consumption Shares j
                                                                                                                     od A Ar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     od A Ar
                                                                                                                         Se cco ts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Se cco ts
                                                                                                                             rv m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rv m
                                                                                                                                ic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ic
                                                                                                                              O es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O es
                                                                                                                                th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          th
                                                                                                                                     er                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          er




     expenditures on each sector's goods or services, averaged over the entire sample 1947-2018.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Notes: Values for sector-level depreciation rates j are taken as each sector's average implied depreciation




     Notes: Values for consumption preference j are constructed as the fraction of total nominal consumption
                              Figure D.5: Detrending Sector-Level Data


                0.25                                         0.5

                 0.2
                                                             0.4
                0.15
                                                             0.3
                 0.1

                0.05                                         0.2

                  0
                                                             0.1
               -0.05
                                                              0
                -0.1

               -0.15                                        -0.1
                       1960      1980     2000                     1960      1980      2000




Notes: The figure reports log sector level TFP for the Construction and Machinery Manufacturing sectors,
normalized to zero in the year 1948. We also report a fitted polynomial trend lines for polynomials of order
1, 2, and 4, estimated via OLS.



       We detrend our model using a log-polynomial trend because log-linear trends provide
a poor fit to sector-level TFP. Figure D.5 plots the time series of sector-level TFP for
two example sectors, construction and machinery manufacturing. Construction TFP evolves
nonlinearly over time; a third or fourth order polynomial trend is required to capture these
nonlinearities.49 In contrast, machinery manufacturing evolves more linearly, but a poly-
nomial trend continues to fit better than a linear one. We choose a fourth order trend for
the main text in order to balance these nonlinearities against overfitting the data. However,
we show in Appendix G that our main results are robust to using lower-order polynomi-
als for detrending. Figure D.6 plots the persistence parameters j , which we estimate using
maximimum likelihood on detrended log-TFP.


Interpreting changes in productivity over time using principal components In
the main text, we interpreted the decline in the correlation of TFP across sectors as reflect-
ing a decline in the variance in the volatility of aggregate shocks which affect all sectors
  49
     We do not present the third order trends in this figure for parsimony, but they are generally more similar
to fourth order trends than to the second order trends.


                                                      70
                       Figure D.6: Calibrated Persistence Parameters j


                   1

                 0.9

                 0.8

                 0.7

                 0.6

                 0.5

                 0.4

                 0.3

                 0.2

                 0.1

                   0
                            M rnitu rt
                          C ch tals




                              Pr ape l




                                          s
                          M Metals
                   Fa rim M o t
                     br a in od




                           Pr es FI

                                  M ch
                                   m m




                                          T




                                   E in
                                          T
                                      TW




                                 rv m
                             Se cco ts
                           Pe in r



                                  as al




                                        lth
                            El put ry




                                  /T e
                           ed e s




                            Fu nsp s




                                 H duc
                           Fo sc Mre
                               od fg
                                Te Mfg




                                 Ad mt




                                         er
                                          g
                                 C til




                                   pa le




                                         fo
                             Ve tric s




                            C ole g




                                  O es
                           Tr hic al




                                 P re
                                         s




                                      tic
                         at M al




                              a le
                               ec er




                              of tat
                                       o
                                      in




                              tr tin




                                       R
                                      W
                                      U
                                    on




                                     m



                         od A Ar
                              Pl ic
                              Ap xti




                              he u
                                      e




                                     In




                                    th
                                     e



                                   ea



                                    ic
                                     g
                       ic ry er
                                   in




                            om in
                                 W
                  M




                               i




                              l
                             a




                           ea
                         R




                      Fo
                     P




Notes: Persistence parameters j of sector-level TFP are estimated from detrended TFP using maximum
likelihood.



in the economy. We now provide further support for this interpretation using a principal
components decomposition similar to Garin, Pries and Sims (2018). Performing that prin-
cipal components exercise requires us to estimate a full rank covariance matrix for TFP
pre- and post-1984, which we cannot do with 37 sectors and less than 37 years of data in
each time period. We therefore collapse our data down to 30 sectors by condensing all non-
durable manufacturing sectors into one sector and then perform the principal components
decomposition on log TFP growth for 30 sectors pre- and post-1984.50
    Table D.1 reports the results of this principal components exercise. The first principal
component ­ which can be loosely interpreted as the aggregate shock ­ accounts for 75%
of the variance of aggregate TFP in the pre-1984 sample, but only 35% of the variance in
the post-1984 sample. Furthermore, the variance of the residual component ­ which can be
loosely interpreted as the sector-specific shocks ­ declines by much less over time.
   50
      We could have alternatively collapsed a different set of sectors, but we prefer this approach because:
(i) aggregating within non-durable manufacturing does not affect the investment hubs or their key suppli-
ers, (ii) many non-durable manufacturing sectors are small, (iii) and the aggregated sector of non-durable
manufacturing is more intuitive than aggregates of alternative sets of service sectors.


                                                    71
                                     Table D.1
                   Principal Components Analysis of Measured TFP

             Sample period      1000Var( log At )                    Due to 1st component Residual
               1949-1983              0.41                                0.31 (75%)      0.10 (25%)
               1984-2017              0.09                                0.03 (35%)      0.06 (65%)

Notes: the aggregate shock is equal to the vector product of the loadings associated with the first principal
component with the vector of sector-level TFP. We then regress aggregate TFP on this constructed
aggregate shock and report the explained sum of squares and R2 (the variance attributable to the 1st
component) and the sum of squared errors (the variance attributable to the residual, interpreted as sectoral
shocks).



E     Proofs
This appendix proves the three propositions in Section 4.


Proof of Proposition 1            Plug in the definition of sector-level real value added Yjt (omitting
capital, because it is fixed upon impact) to the Divisia index to get

                                   N
                                            pY
                                             jt Yjt              1
                    d log Yt =                                     d log Ajt + (1 - j )d log Ljt .                       (32)
                                  j =1
                                            PtY Yt               j


    The intermediates first order condition (28) and the zero profit condition (29) imply that
                                                                                         pY
                                                                                          jt Yjt
j is equal to the ratio of value added to gross output: j =                              pjt Qjt
                                                                                                 .   Therefore, the weight on
                              pY
                               jt Yjt pjt Qjt          pjt Qjt
TFP in the sum (32) is        PtY Y pY Y
                                    t jt jt
                                                   =   PtYY
                                                             t
                                                                 ­ the Domar weight.
    The labor first order condition (26) can be rearranged to (1 - j )j pjt Qjt = Wt Ljt . But
again, the zero profits condition implies that j pjt Qjt = pY
                                                            jt Yjt , so this condition becomes
                                                                                                               pY Yjt   Wt Ljt
(1 - j )pY
         jt Yjt = Wt Ljt . Divide this expression by nominal GDP to get (1 - j ) P Y Yt =
                                                                                  jt
                                                                                                                         YY .
                                                                                                                        Pt   t
                                                                                                                t
                                                                                    pY Yjt
Then sum over sectors j to get 1 - t                                N
                                                                    j =1 (1   - j ) Pjt
                                                                                      YY
                                                                                         t
                                                                                           =     Wt Lt
                                                                                                  YY ,
                                                                                                 Pt  t
                                                                                                         the aggregate labor
                                                                                     t
                                                           Ljt
share. Then multiply this expression by                    Lt
                                                                 and combine with the previous expression to get
         L       Wt Ljt                  pY
                                          jt Yjt
(1 - t ) Ljt
           t
             =    YY
                 Pt   t
                          = (1 - j )     PtYY
                                               t
                                                   Lt
                                                   Ljt
                                                       .
    Plugging all this into the expression for real GDP growth (32) gives

                                  N
                                                pjt Qjt                                   Ljt
                   d log Yt =                                d log Ajt + (1 - t )             d log Ljt .
                                 j =1
                                                PtY Yt                                    Lt


                                                                   72
                                                                                                    pjt Qjt
Under a first-order approximation fluctuations in either the Domar weight                           PtYY
                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                              or the
                              L
employment share (1 - t ) Ljt
                            t
                              multiply TFP growth or employment growth, which are zero
in steady state. This insight yields the result in Proposition 1.


Proof of Proposition 2            The market clearing condition for sector j in terms of over-
                                             N                       N
all expenditures is pjt Qjt = pjt Cjt +      i=1   pjt Ijit +        i=1   pjt Mjit . Due to the Cobb-Douglas
production functions, sector i's expenditures on intermediates from sector j is simply pro-
portional to sector i's total sales: pjt Mjit = (1 - i )ji pit Qit . Similarly, sector i's expenditures
                                                                                                    ki
                                                                                              pkt
on investment goods from sector j is pjt Ijit = ji pI               I    N
                                                    it Iit , where pit = k=1                  ki
                                                                                                         is the price
index for investment (derived in Appendix C). Therefore, total expenditure on sector j is

                                            N                    N
                      pjt Qjt = pjt Cjt +         ji pI
                                                      it Iit +         (1 - i )ji pit Qit .                     (33)
                                            i=1                  i=1


   For notational convenience, define
                                                                                              
                          p1t Q1t           p C                                     p1t I1t
                                            1t 1t                                            
                              .
                              .                 .
                                                .                                      .
                                                                                       .     
                 Qt =         .     , Ct =      .             , and It =               .     .
                                                                                             
                          pN t Qnt          pN t Cnt                                pN t Int


Then the market clearing condition (33) can be written in matrix form as Qt = Ct +  It +
 Qt , where  is the investment network matrix. Solve out this expression for Qt to get

                                                      -1
                                    Qt = (I -  )           Ct +  It .


Writing this equation for element j , dividing by aggregate consumption Ct , and noting that
(I -  )-1 is the Leontief inverse yields Proposition 2 in the main text.




                                                     73
Proof of Proposition 3              Using the first order conditions for the profit maximization
problem, equations (26)-(28)), we can write the price of each sector j 's final good as:

                                          j j                      (1-j )j                   1-j
                       1      rjt                     Wt                             pM
                                                                                      jt
                pjt =
                      Ajt     j j                 (1 - j )j                        1 - j
                                                                                     N
                                                                                                  ij   1-j
                                          j j                      (1-j )j                  pit
                        1     rjt                     Wt                      
                                                                                     i=1    ij
                                                                                                       
                   =
                       Ajt    j j                 (1 - j )j                             1 - j

                                                 ij
                                   N       pit
using the fact that pM
                     jt =          i=1     ij
                                                      .
   Taking the log of both sides gives us:

                                                                                    N
       log pjt = - log Ajt + j j log rjt + (1 - j )j log Wt +                             (1 - j )ij log pit + j
                                                                                    i=1

                                                                                   1-j 
                                                                              ij
                                                                   N     1
                                                  (1-j )j
                             j j
                                                            
                                                                   i=1   ij
                                                                                       
where j = log          1
                       j j
                                        1
                                     (1-j )j                          1-j              .

   To assess the direct effect of a TFP shock on output prices, we totally differentiate the
above expression, holding fixed any response of the rental rates or wages, obtaining:

                                                               N
                             d log pjt = -d log Ajt +                (1 - j )ij d log pit
                                                               i=1


Or in matrix notation,


                                         d log pt = -d log At +  d log pt

                                         d log pt = -L d log At


where d log pt is an N × 1 vector of sector-level prices and d log At is the vector of sector-level
productivity.
                                                                                                                      ij
                                                                                                          N     pit
   To relate this to the investment price index, we use the fact that pI
                                                                       jt =                               i=1   ij
                                                                                                                           and




                                                          74
thus:

                                                
                                     d log pI
                                            t =  d log pt

                                             = -(L) d log At


                                                            mt = -
                                                                         N
In non-matrix notation, this implies the result that d log pI            i=1   im d log Ait , yielding
the proposition in the text.



F       Additional Results For Section 4
This appendix describes additional results mentioned in Section 4 of the main text.


F.1     Relationship to Investment-Specific Shock Literature

The role of investment hub shocks in driving fluctuations in our model is reminiscent of
the large literature on investment-specific technology shocks (see, for example, Greenwood,
Hercowitz and Krusell (2000) or Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2010)). This litera-
ture typically works with two-sector models in which one sector produces only consumption
goods and the other only produces investment goods with no intermediate goods connec-
tions between them. Of course, our model provides a richer sectoral disaggregation to bring
the model to the data. It also shows that the correct notion of the "investment producers"
includes the key suppliers of investment hubs in the Leontief-adjusted investment network.
    An equally important but more subtle issue is that the investment-specific shock litera-
ture struggles to generate positive comovement between the consumption- and investment-
producing sectors because it abstracts from intermediate goods. To help understand this
issue, rewrite equation (12) without the intermediates network:

                                 N              
                                            pI
                                             m Im
                   d log Ljt =         jm                   mt Imt - d log Ct ,
                                                     d log pI
                                 m=1
                                            p   
                                             j Qj


which is the same as (12) in the main text except that the Leontief-adjusted investment
network is equal to the raw network:  = . Following the same logic in the main text, only


                                                75
Figure F.1: Elasticity of Aggregate Employment to Sectoral Shocks Without Intermediates
Network
                 0.9

                 0.8

                 0.7

                 0.6

                 0.5

                 0.4

                 0.3

                 0.2

                 0.1

                  0
                                M rnitu rt
                              C ch tals




                                     Pa rel




                                              s
                              M Metals
                       Fa Prim M Wo st
                         br a in od




                               Pr es FI

                                      M ch
                                       m m




                                              T




                                       E in
                                              T
                                          TW




                                     rv m
                                 Se co ts
                               Pe rin per



                                      as al




                                            lth
                                El put ry




                                      /T e
                               ed e s




                                Fu nsp s




                                     H duc
                               Fo sc Mre
                                   od fg
                                    Te Mfg




                                     Ad mt




                                             er
                                              g
                                     C til




                                       pa le




                                             fo
                                 Ve tric s




                                C ole g




                                      O es
                               Tr hic al




                                          tic
                             at M al




                                  a le
                                   ec er




                                  of tat
                                           o
                                          in




                                  tr tin




                                           R
                                          W
                                          U
                                        on




                                         m



                             od A Ar
                                  Pl ic
                                  Ap xti




                                  he u
                                          e




                                         In




                                        th
                                         e



                                       ea



                                        ic
                                         g
                           ic ry er
                   in




                                om in




                                      c
                  M




                                  P
                                   i




                                  l
                                 a




                               ea
                             R




                          Fo
Notes: reduced-form elasticities of aggregate employment Nt to sector-specific shocks Ait in a version of the
model without intermediate goods (i.e. j = 0 for all j ). For each sector, we simulate the model with
 (log Ait ) = 1% shocks to that sector only. The bars plot the volatility of aggregate employment  (log Nt ).
Investment hubs are highlighted in red.



employment in the investment hubs will meaningfully fluctuate over time because the other
sectors have a small role in producing investment goods (i.e. jm is small for non-hub sectors
j ). In addition, only shocks to the investment hubs will generate employment fluctuations
because shocks to other sectors have a small effect on aggregate investment supply.
       Figure F.1 illustrates these issues in the version of our model without the intermediates
network. Analogously to Figure 5, the figure computes the elasticity of aggregate employ-
ment with respect to a sector-specific shock Ait in each sector. Only the shocks to the
investment hubs, highlighted in red, have a meaningful impact on aggregate employment.
Furthermore, their effect on aggregate employment is primarily limited to employment in
the hubs themselves.51
  51
    The fact that employment comovement between hubs and non-hubs approaches zero in this example,
rather than being negative, reflects our use of an infinite Frisch elasticity   . With finite Frisch  , an
increase in an investment hub sector also increases the marginal disutility of supplying labor to non-hub
sectors, which would decrease employment in those sectors and generate negative comovement. See Kim and
Kim (2006) for further discussion of the role of the Frisch elasticity  in determining sectoral comovement.



                                                     76
                                      Table F.1
               Volatility of Activity, Hubs vs. Intermediate Suppliers

                       Investment Hubs    Suppliers                           Others
               Data    Pre-84 Post-84  Pre-84 Post-84                     Pre-84 Post-84
                (yst ) 9.13% 9.18%     8.03% 6.72%                        5.94% 4.90%
                (lst ) 6.14% 4.83%     6.04% 4.04%                        2.70% 2.69%

               Model Pre-84          Post-84        Pre-84 Post-84        Pre-84 Post-84
                (yst ) 12.92%        9.63%          9.02% 7.03%           5.57% 4.93%
                (lst ) 9.37%         6.65%          5.93% 4.28%           1.68% 1.18%

Notes: standard deviation of business cycle component of sector-level value added or employment. yst is
logged real value added in sector s, lst is logged employment in sector s, and  denotes the first difference
operator. "Investment hubs" compute the unweighted average the value of these statistics over s =
construction, machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles manufacturing, and professional/technical services.
"Suppliers" computes the weighted average over the non-hub sectors of durable manufacturing, wholsesale
trade, and transportation & warehousing. "Others" computes the unweighted average over the sectors not
classified as investment hubs or suppliers. "Pre-1984" performs this analysis in the 1948 - 1983 subsample
and "post-1984" performs this analysis in the 1984 - 2018 subsample.



       Our model solves these comovement issues through the intermediates network; as dis-
cussed in the main text, intermediates connections to the investment hub generate em-
ployment fluctuations throughout the economy.52 In contrast, the investment-specific shocks
literature uses other nominal or real rigidities to overcome the negative comovement problem.
       Another debate in this literature concerns how to measure investment-specific technology
shocks. One approach is to use the price of investment goods relative to consumption goods;
however, this price series is only weakly correlated with the aggregate cycle, so it is difficult to
generate large business cycle fluctuations with it. In our model, investment-specific shocks can
be directly measured as the productivity at investment hub sectors and their key suppliers.
Section 5 shows that these shocks generate substantial cyclical fluctuations.


F.2       Supporting Evidence for Mechanism in the Data

We present supporting evidence for the role of the key suppliers to investment hubs discussed
in 4. Table F.1 shows that the key suppliers to investment hubs are more volatile over the
  52
    See Hornstein and Praschnik (1997) and Ascari, Phaneuf and Sims (2019) for related models which solve
the "Barro and King (1984) curse" using roundabout production.



                                                    77
Figure F.2: Correlogram of Sector-level Value Added with Aggregate Employment, Hubs
vs. Intermediate Suppliers


                 0.8                                           0.8

                 0.6                                           0.6

                 0.4                                           0.4

                 0.2                                           0.2

                  0                                              0

                -0.2                                           -0.2

                -0.4                                           -0.4
                    -2     -1      0       1        2              -2   -1     0       1       2




Notes: correlation of log real value added in sector s in year t - h, yst+h , with log aggregate employment in
year t, lt .  denotes the first difference operator. The x-axis varies the lead/lag h  {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2}.
"Investment hubs" compute the unweighted average the value of these statistics over s = construction,
machinery manufacturing, motor vehicles manufacturing, and professional/technical services. "Intermediate
Suppliers" computes these statistics for the remaining durable manufacturing sectors, wholesale trade, and
transportation & warehousing. "Non-hubs" computes the unweighted average over the remaining sectors.
"Pre-1984" performs this analysis in the 1948 - 1983 subsample and "post-1984" performs this analysis in
the 1984 - 2018 subsample.



business cycle than other non-hub sectors, consistent with the role of the Leontief-adjusted
investment network in propagating shocks. The model provides a good fit for the behavior
of these sectors, especially for employment. The table also shows that the suppliers are less
volatile than the hubs themselves, again consistent with the model. Figure F.2 shows that
the key suppliers to investment hubs are more correlated with the aggregate business cycle
than other non-hub sectors, consistent with their role in propagating sector-specific shocks
to aggregates.


F.3     Cobb-Douglas Capital Accumulation

We now show that employment is constant in the version of the model in which we replace
the standard linear capital accumulation rule, Kjt+1 = (1 - j )Kjt + Ijt , with a Cobb-Douglas
one:
                                                             1-j j
                                            Kjt+1 = Kjt         Ijt .                                    (34)




                                                        78
While this alternative rule (34) is inconsistent with national accounting practice, and thus
not suitable for a quantitative model, it is nonetheless useful in explaining how investment
drives our results. In particular, we will show that the Cobb-Douglas form (34) implies
that investment expenditure is proportional to total income, which in turn implies that
sector-specific shocks generate exactly offsetting income and substitution effects which leave
employment unchanged.53
      The alternative capital accumulation rule changes the Euler equation for capital (24) into

               pI
                jt Ijt 1          1                 pjt+1 Qjt+1 (1 - j ) pI
                                                                          jt+1 Ijt+1
                           =  Et                j j            +                                  .
                Ct j Kjt+1       Ct+1                  Kjt+1       j        Kjt+1

which can be rearranged into

                       pI
                        jt Ijt             pjt+1 Qjt+1            pI
                                                                   jt+1 Ijt+1
                               =  Et j j j             + (1 - j )             .                           (35)
                        Ct                    Ct+1                   Ct+1

      We now guess and verify that the household's valuation of output and investment are
                                                           pI
                                                            jt Ijt
                                                                     and Q
                                                                                pjt Qjt
constant over time. Denote those constants as Ij =           Ct           j =     Ct
                                                                                        .   The Euler equation
(35) relates these two objects through

                                                   j j j
                                         Ij =                Q ,                                          (36)
                                                1 -  (1 - j ) j

                         j j j
Now define Bj =         1- (1-j )
                                    and B to be the matrix with Bj on the diagonals and zero
off-diagonal.
      We now plug (36) into the expression for the household's value of output (11) in order
to solve for Q       
              j and Ij . We will write the market clearing condition in matrix form using the

notation                                                                
                                         Q           
                                         1           1                  
                                         .           .                  
                                    Q =  ..  and  =  .
                                                     .                  .
                                                                        
                                         Q N         N

Using this notation, and plugging in our guesses, the household's value of output from (11)
 53
      We thank Matt Rognlie for pointing this property out to us in the one-sector RBC model.



                                                    79
becomes
                                         Q = L +  L B Q ,

                                                                 
where the second term on the right-hand side uses the fact that Ij = Bj Qj from (36). Solving

this equation for Q yields


                                        Q = (I -  L B )-1 L
                                                
                                                      ( L B ) L
                                                              s
                                            =                                                            (37)
                                                s=0


Equation (37) shows that the household's valuation of output equals the discounted sum of
its value of consumption, taking into account the ability to transfer resources over time using
investment.
       The only condition we need to verify is that our guessed equilibrium is consistent with
constant labor supply. Given our growth-consistent preferences, we indeed have that Lj =
j (1-j ) 
    
        Qj    is constant over time.
       Hence, the Cobb-Douglas capital accumulation equation (34) implies that investment --
and the investment network -- are irrelevant for aggregate dynamics beyond their impact on
the steady state Domar weights. Intuitively, the Cobb-Douglas capital accumulation equation
implies that investment expenditures are proportional to total income, which in turn is
proportional to gross output. Therefore, sector-specific shocks generate equal-sized income
and substitution effects, just as in the model without investment.
       Our full model with the linear capital accumulation rule breaks this irrelevance result
by increasing the elasticity of the capital stock with respect to current investment.54 In this
case, changes in current investment have a larger effect on the capital stock, breaking the
result that investment expenditures are proportional to output. This property allows the
household's valuation of output, and therefore employment, to fluctuate over time.


Relationship to Full Depreciation                It is well-known that the one-sector RBC model,
with the standard linear capital accumulation rule, admits a closed-form solution with con-
  54
    Of course, with the linear accumulation rule, that elasticity becomes infinite; more generally, we conjec-
ture that increasing the elasticity beyond the Cobb-Douglas case will generate fluctuations in employment.


                                                      80
                    Figure F.3: Stationary Distribution of Domar Weights




                                              p Q
Notes: average values of the Domar weights E[ P
                                              jt jt
                                                Y   ] in the model (the steady state) and the data
                                               t Yt
(averaged over the entire sample 1948-2018).



stant employment in the case of full depreciation. The discussion above makes clear that
full depreciation is just a special case of the Cobb-Douglas capital accumulation rule (34)
with j = 1; indeed, it is the only value of j for which the linear and Cobb-Douglas capital
accumulation rules are the same.


F.4     Other Analysis Mentioned in Main Text

This subsection collects a number of miscellaneous results referenced in Section 4.


Distribution of Domar weights Figure F.3 shows that the model fits the stationary
distribution of Domar weights fairly well. In the model, a sector's Domar weight is equal to
its role in supplying consumption and investment goods. The Domar weights at investment
hubs are not abnormally large because investment is a smaller fraction of overall spending
than consumption.



                                                    81
            Figure F.4: Cyclicality of Labor Productivity Due to Sectoral Shocks

                  1

                 0.8

                 0.6

                 0.4

                 0.2

                  0

                -0.2

                -0.4

                -0.6

                -0.8

                  -1
                            M rnitu rt
                          C ch tals




                                 Pa rel




                                          s
                          M Metals
                   Fa Prim M Wo st
                     br a in od




                           Pr es FI

                                  M ch
                                   m m




                                          T




                                   E in
                                          T
                                      TW




                                 rv m
                             Se cco ts
                           Pe rin per



                                  as al




                                        lth
                            El put ry




                                  /T e
                           ed e s




                            Fu nsp s




                                 H duc
                           Fo sc Mre
                               od fg
                                Te Mfg




                                 Ad mt




                                         er
                                          g
                                 C til




                                   pa le




                                         fo
                             Ve tric s




                            C ole g




                                  O es
                           Tr hic al




                                      tic
                         at M al




                              a le
                               ec er




                              of at
                                        o
                                       in




                              tr tin




                                       R
                                      W
                                      U
                                    on




                                     m



                         od A Ar
                              Pl ic
                              Ap xti




                              he u
                                       e




                                     In




                                    th
                                     e



                                   ea



                                    ic
                                     g
                       ic ry er
                                   in




                            om in




                                     t
                  M




                              P
                               i




                              l
                             a




                           ea
                         R




                      Fo
Notes: cyclicality of labor productivity, Corr(log Yt - log Lt , log Yt ) in response to sector-specific shocks
Ait ). For each sector, we simulate the model with  (log Ait ) = 1% shocks to that sector only. Investment
hubs are highlighted in red.



Cyclicality of Labor Productivity Due to Sectoral Shocks                                  Subtracting aggregate
employment from our expression for real GDP in Proposition 1, the impact effect of a sector-
specific shock Ait on aggregate labor productivity LPt is

                                     N                                   N           
                                            pj Qj                               Lj
                       d log LPt =                     d log Ajt -                      d log Ljt
                                     j =1
                                            PY Y                         j =1
                                                                                L

All else equal, higher aggregate TFP increases labor productivity because it increases the
productivity of all factors; on the other hand, higher aggregate employment decreases labor
productivity because of decreasing returns to scale in labor (which implies that the aggregate
capital share  > 0). Hence, shocks which increase weighted employment  d log Lt by more
than the sector's steady state Domar weight (which determines the response of aggregate
TFP) will decrease labor productivity.
    Figure F.4 shows that shocks to nearly all of the investment hubs and their intermediate
suppliers decrease labor productivity. The figure plots the cyclicality of aggregate labor


                                                         82
productivity in response to 1% sector-specific shocks to each sector in isolation. Shocks to
investment hubs and their suppliers generally increase aggregate employment substantially
more than their sectors' Domar weights to decrease labor productivity. The exceptions are
professional/technical services, wholesale trade, and transportation & warehousing in the
right of the figure. While these sectors have sizeable effects on employment, the sectors
are also well-connected in the intermediates network and therefore also have large Domar
weights.


Numerical Exploration of Sectoral Investment Response to Shocks                                     We now pro-
vide numerical comparative statics to understand the mapping from sectoral shocks to the
                                                          pI
                                                           t It
                                                                          pI
                                                                           jt Ijt
household's valuation of aggregate investment,             Ct
                                                                  =   j
                                                                          Ct
                                                                                    (Proposition 2 shows how em-
ployment responds to changes in the household's valuation of investment). Figure F.5 plots
the elasticity of the household's valuation of aggregate investment in response to sector-
specific shocks to each sector. The blue bars show that this elasticity is very similar to the
elasticity of aggregate employment in response to the shocks plotted in Figure 5 in the main
text, consistent with Proposition 2.55
       Figure F.5 also shows that the distribution of these elasticities across sectors is primarily
determined by the Leontief-adjusted investment network. In particular, the grey bars in
Figure F.5 plot the elasticities in which all these other parameters are set equal to the
average value across sectors.56 In this case, variation in these elasticities is solely determined
by heterogeneity in the Leontief-adjusted investment network. The blue and grey bars are
fairly similar, consistent with the idea that heterogeneity in the Leontief-adjusted investment
network is the primary source of differences across sectors. The main exception is the effect
of a shock to construction, which is also shaped by the low depreciation rate of residential
structures and the abnormally high capital share in real estate (detailed results available
  55
       Given the result of Proposition 2, we can write changes in aggregate employment as dLt =          j   dLjt =
                 pI
                  mt Imt           pI
                                    mt Imt
  j     jm d
        m           Ct    = md        Ct     j jm . The result that the numerical response of aggregate em-
ployment is proportional to the numerical response of the aggregate household's valuation of investment,
          pI
           t It
dLt = d C    t
                will obtain if the row sums of jm are the same across sectors. This is exactly true in the
case where there are no intermediate goods, since in that case, the Leontief-adjusted network is equal to the
investment network, whose rows sum to 1 by construction.
  56
     The parameters are depreciation rates (j ), capital shares (j ), value added shares of gross output (j ),
the persistence of TFP shocks (j ), and consumption shares (j ).


                                                     83
Figure F.5: Elasticity of Household's Valuation of Aggregate Investment to Sectoral Shocks
               3



             2.5



               2



             1.5



               1



             0.5



               0
                         M rnitu rt
                       C ch tals




                              Pa rel




                                       s
                       M Metals
                Fa Prim M Wo st
                  br a in od




                        Pr es FI

                               M ch
                                m m




                                       T




                                E in
                                       T
                                   TW




                              rv m
                          Se co ts
                        Pe rin per



                               as al




                                     lth
                         El put ry




                               /T e
                        ed e s




                         Fu nsp s




                              H duc
                        Fo sc Mre
                            od fg
                             Te Mfg




                              Ad mt




                                      er
                                       g
                              C til




                                pa le




                                      fo
                          Ve tric s




                         C ole g




                               O es
                        Tr hic al




                                   tic
                      at M al




                           a le
                            ec er




                           of tat
                                     o
                                    in




                           tr tin




                                    R
                                   W
                                   U
                                 on




                                  m



                      od A Ar
                           Pl ic
                           Ap xti




                           he u
                                    e




                                    n




                                 th
                                  e



                                ea



                                 ic
                                  g
                    ic ry er
                                in




                         om in




                                  I




                               c
               M




                           P
                            i




                           l
                          a




                        ea
                      R




                   Fo
                                                                                         pI I
Notes: reduced-form elasticities of the household's valuation of aggregate investment, C
                                                                                       t t
                                                                                        t
                                                                                           to sector-specific
shocks Ait . For each sector, we simulate the model with  (it ) = 1% shocks to that sector only. The bars
                                                                            pI I
plot the volatility of household's valuation of aggregate investment  (log C t t
                                                                              t
                                                                                 ) divided by the volatility of
sector-specific TFP  (log Ait ). The grey bars show this elasticity where all non-network parameters are set
to the mean across sectors.



upon request).



G      Additional Results on Changing Business Cycles
We now provide several additional results referenced in Section 5 of the main text.


G.1      Investment Production Frictions

In this subsection, we detail how the investment production frictions from Section 5 impact
the equilibrium conditions of our model and then show that our results are robust to varying
the strength of these frictions.




                                                      84
Equilibrium conditions       The investment production frictions change the output market
clearing condition to be:

                                                  N                        N          -1

                                                                                -
                            Qjt = Cjt +                 Mijt +                 Iijt                          (38)
                                                  i=1                  i=1


                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                           N    -
Define the total production of investment goods by sector j as Zjt =                       i=1 Ijit        . Then
the intratemporal investment allocation decision becomes:

                                                        1+
                                             Zjt
                                       pit                      = ij pI
                                                                      jt Ijt                                 (39)
                                             Iijt

The corresponding cost-minimization problem implies that the price index of a new unit of
investment for sector j is now:

                                       N                 ij N                   (1+)ij
                                                 pit                  Zit
                             pI
                              jt   =                                                                         (40)
                                       i=1
                                                 ij           i=1
                                                                      Ijt

Therefore, the price of purchasing an investment good is now specific to the producer-
purchaser pair; an increase in investment demand from a given sector will put upward
pressure on its price index for investment goods, dampening fluctuations in investment.
   Importantly, this extension of the model does not change the results in any of the propo-
sitions presented in Section 4. Proposition 1 only relies on the definition of value added,
which is unaffected by this friction. Proposition 2 does rely on the resource constraint, which
has now been modified, but that modification does not change those results; to see this fact,
note that we can solve for Zjt using equation (40) above:

                                                       N            -1

                                                              -
                                       Zjt =                 Ijit
                                                       i=1
                                                       N                       -1

                                                             ji pIit Iit
                                             =                     1+
                                                   i=1
                                                             pjt Zjt
                                                  N
                                                         ji pI
                                                             it Iit
                                             =
                                                  i=1
                                                           pjt


                                                           85
                                 Table G.1
         Robustness with Respect to Investment Production Frictions

                      Baseline         No Frictions      Large Frictions
                 Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )          3.95%    2.42%     3.97%    2.64%     3.86%     2.38%
 (yt - lt , yt ) 0.52     -0.01     0.38     -0.31     0.57      0.10
  (lt )/ (yt )   0.90     1.03      0.93     1.13      0.88      1.00
  (it )/ (yt )   3.78     4.11      5.63     9.22      3.74      4.16

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "Baseline" refers to the baseline model described in the main text, which uses
 = -1.04. "No Reallocation Frictions" refers to the model without reallocation frictions, i.e.  = -1.
"Large Reallocation Frictions" refers to the model with  = -1.5.



This result, together with equation (17), implies that we can still write the resource con-
straint as in equation (33) in the proof for Proposition 2. Essentially, because investment
expenditures by each sector remain Cobb-Douglas over each intermediate investment good
and markets are competitive, the expenditures on each intermediate investment good remain
proportional to total expenditure.
    Finally, the result in Proposition 3 is also unchanged as long as the conditions for isolating
the direct effect of TFP shocks on investment prices are extended to include holding fixed
investment production and expenditures.


Robustness to varying               In our baseline results, we set the parameter  = -1.04 to
match movements in the distribution of investment expenditures across sectors. Table G.1
that without these frictions (setting  = -1), investment is more volatile than in the base-
line model, especially in the post-1984 sample. This excess volatility in turn implies higher
volatility of employment by (12), so the cyclicality of labor productivity falls by nearly 0.7
and becomes countercyclical in the post-1984 sample. On the other hand, Table G.1 shows
that increasing  to -1.5 does not materially impact our primary findings. Taken together,
these results indicate that while breaking the perfect substitutability matters for our results,
the precise degree of imperfect substitutability does not.




                                                    86
G.2        Time Series Fit of the Model

We now show that the model provides a good fit to the observed time series of real GDP,
aggregate employment, aggregate investment, and aggregate consumption. No features of
these series were targeted in our calibration; instead, we simply fed in the realized series
of sector-level TFP shocks and let the model endogenously produce these macroeconomic
outcomes.
       Figure G.1 plots the first-differenced series and Figure G.2 plots the HP-filtered ones.
In both cases, the fit is impressive; the average correlation between the model's and data's
series is 0.5 - 0.6.57 Importantly, aggregate consumption comoves with the business cycle,
which is a challenge in models primarily driven by shocks to investment; as we discuss
in Appendix F, our model generates comovement through the intermediates network. The
model fits the first-differenced series less well than the HP-filtered series in the post-1980s
sample due to changes in average growth rates over time. In particular, the model predicts
robust recoveries following the post-1980s recessions which did not materialize in the data
because the average growth rate fell over this period. The HP filter eliminates this change
in trend growth, bringing the model closer to the data.


G.3        Structural Change

Our baseline analysis focuses on how changing shock structure has changed observed busi-
ness cycles by holding the parameters of the economy fixed over time. However, there have
been substantial trend changes in many of these parameters over time: the decline in man-
ufacturing, the rise of services, the rise of intellectual property products, and the decline in
labor share, to name a few. While a full analysis of the impact of these structural changes on
business cycle fluctuations is beyond the scope of this paper, we present two complementary
exercises to show that our results are robust to accounting for structural change impacting
the parameters of our model.
  57
    The weakest correlation between model and data is in employment, although this largely seems to be
due to a timing difference in the model and the data; if the model time series is shifted one time period
forward, the correlation between model and data is much higher.




                                                   87
         Figure G.1: Aggregate Time Series in Model and Data: First Differences




Notes: time series of aggregate GDP, employment, investment, and consumption in the model and the
data. Each series has been logged and first-differenced.




                                                 88
             Figure G.2: Aggregate Time Series in Model and Data: HP Filter




Notes: time series of aggregate GDP, employment, investment, and consumption in the model and the
data. Each series has been logged and HP filtered with smoothing parameter  = 6.25. To avoid endpoint
bias from the HP filter, we omit the first and last three years of data of the entire sample.



                                                 89
Transition Path Our first exercise allows for the structural parameters to change smoothly
over time along a perfect foresight transition path. In particular, we assume that, starting
in 1948, agents become aware of the trend path of all structural parameters of the economy
over the 1948-2018 period.58 We further assume that these trends continue through 2043 and
then gradually converge to their new steady state by 2068.59
       We solve for the equilibrium over this path using a variant of the solution algorithm
developed in Maliar et al. (2020). This algorithm assumes that, while agents have perfect
foresight over the changes in the parameters of the economy, there is still uncertainty over
the realization of TFP shocks each period. We first solve for policy functions for log capital
at T , when parameter changes have ceased and the economy is stationary. We then iterate
backwards, solving for the policy functions in T - 1, taking the policy function in period T
as given. We iterate over this procedure until we have policy functions for the entire sample
(vom Lehn (2020) implements this algorithm in a similar way). We assume that the initial
condition of the economy is the steady state corresponding to the parameter values observed
in the year 1948.
       We use a Smolyak grid of points to solve for the decision rules. Given the size of our state
space, we limit ourselves to a first-order Smolyak grid and approximate the policy function
for the log of capital as linear in the state variables. For tractability, and given that our
policy functions for capital are log-linear, we assume that certainty equivalence holds and
evaluate expectations with a first-order quadrature. We solve for the capital accumulation
policy functions in each period and then feed in the time series of measured TFP shocks
used in our baseline analysis.60
  58
     We identify the trends in parameter values using a fourth-order polynomial, consistent with our approach
to detrending TFP in Section 5. Since the consumption share, investment network, and intermediate network
parameters must sum to 1, we do not compute trends for those parameters directly. Instead, we first compute
trends in the levels of consumption expenditures, intermediates expenditures, and investment expenditures,
and then compute expenditure shares based on those trends.
  59
     We project forward these trends conservatively, on the basis of linear trends for the moving averages of
parameters for the last 5, 10, 15, or 20 years of data, selecting which yields the smallest trend growth in
absolute value. We do this to minimize the likelihood of extreme trends following the last year of observed
data.
  60
     We set the parameter governing the investment production frictions to  = -1.3 because the changes
in parameter values increase the volatility of investment. Our approximated decision rules imply negative
investment in 1% of observations, which is inconsistent with our investment production frictions. In these
cases, we set investment to 10% of the depreciated capital stock in that period; our results are robust to
varying this boundary value.


                                                     90
                                   Table G.2
               Allowing for Structural Change via Transition Path

                                 Baseline Model                    Structural Change
                               Pre-1984 Post-1984                  Pre-1984 Post-1984
                (yt )          3.95%     2.42%                     4.57%    2.10%
               (yt - lt , yt ) 0.52      -0.01                     0.50     0.05
                (lt )/ (yt )   0.90      1.03                      0.89     1.02
                (it )/ (yt )   3.78      4.11                      5.43     4.66

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "Baseline" corresponds to the model described in the main text. "Structural change"
corresponds to the results from the transition path exercise. "No shocks" corresponds to the results from
the transition path exercise where there are no shocks and all fluctuations are due to the trend changes in
model parameters.



    Table G.2 shows that our main results continue to hold along this transition path: the
cyclicality of labor productivity falls by 0.45 (compared to 0.53 in the baseline) and the
relative volatility of employment rises by 0.13 (the same as in the baseline). The main
difference from our baseline result is that the relative volatility of investment is higher than
in the baseline analysis, reflecting the fact that our forward-looking agents change their
investment decisions in response to changes in the path of structural parameters (as well as
the simple fact that nonlinearities in the solution method increase volatility as well).


Simulation Exercises          While the previous exercise allowed for smooth changes in struc-
tural parameters over time, it relied on strong assumptions regarding how firms adjust to
these parameter changes, including an unrealistic degree of foresight on the part of agents.
Our second exercise sidesteps these issues by simply simulating the model separately for
parameterizations corresponding to the pre- and post-1984 period. In particular, instead of
feeding in the realized time series of sectoral TFP shocks as in the main text, we estimate
the covariance matrix of these shocks separately for the pre vs. post 1984 subsamples and
compute population moments from those two estimates. The main challenge with this exer-
cise is that we cannot estimate a full-rank covariance matrix with 37 sectors and less than 37
years of data both pre- and post-1984 subsamples. Therefore, following the same procedure
described for the principal components analysis in Appendix D, we collapse our data to 30

                                                    91
                                     Table G.3
                   Allowing for Structural Change via Simulation

                           Baseline Model                 Simulation            Structural Change
                         Pre-1984 Post-1984          Pre-1984 Post-1984         Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                  3.95%     2.42%             3.63%     2.13%            4.07%    2.04%
 (yt - lt , yt )         0.52      -0.01             0.76      0.42             0.80     0.43
  (lt )/ (yt )           0.90      1.03              0.83      0.92             0.83     0.92
  (it )/ (yt )           3.78      4.11              3.54      3.79             3.76     3.71

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "Baseline" corresponds to the model described in the main text with 37 sectors.
"Simulation" corresponds to the simulation exercises based on estimated covariance matrices for 30 sectors.
"Structural change" corresponds to the simulation exercises, where model parameters are estimated
separately for the pre-1984 and post-1984 period.



sectors by aggregating all non-durable manufacturing sectors into a single sector. We then
estimate the covariance matrix of innovations to TFP separately for each subsample and
simulate the model for 10,000 periods for each subsample, discarding the first 100 periods
in each case. The middle panel of Table G.3 shows that, if we hold all the structural pa-
rameters fixed over time, this simulation approach generates similar changes in aggregate
business cycle patterns to feeding in the realized series as in the main text.
    The right panel of Table G.3 allows for the following structural parameters to differ in
the pre- and post-1984 simulations: the investment network (ij ), the intermediates network
(ij ), depreciation rates (j ), capital shares (j ), the share of primary inputs in production
(j ), the persistence of TFP shocks (j ), and the consumption shares (j ). We compute
the average value of these parameters separately for the pre vs. post 1984 subsamples and
compute simulated moments given the covariance matrix of shocks estimated as above. The
right panel of Table G.3 shows that our key outcomes of interest do not change very much
relative to the simulation benchmark when we allow for these changes. The main exceptions
are that the model no longer generates an increase in the volatility of investment over time
and implies a somewhat larger decline in the volatility of GDP.




                                                    92
G.4        Non-Cobb Douglas Production and Preferences

While our baseline analysis imposed Cobb-Douglas production and utility functions for an-
alytical tractability, we now show numerically that our results are robust to allowing for
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) functional forms. Specifically, we generalize the
production function to become
                                                                                         y
                                         1       y -1                          y -1      y -1
                                                                       1
                                                        + (1 - j ) Mjt
                                         y       y                             y
                              Qjt = j Yjt                              y
                                                                                                          (41)


where                                                                                     k
                                             1     k -1                    1     k -1     k-1
                                                          + (1 - j )j Ljt
                                             k     k                       k     k
                            Yjt = Ajt j Kjt                                                               (42)

and                                                                         m
                                                   N                        m-1
                                                          1     m -1
                                    Mjt =                 m
                                                        ij Mjt  m
                                                                                     .                    (43)
                                                  i=1

We assume that productivity shocks affect the primary inputs because, as shown in Sato
(1976), there would otherwise not exist a unique function for real value added. Therefore,
in these exercises, we feed in productivity measured as value added net of primary inputs
(rather than measured as gross output net of all inputs as in the main text).
       We also generalize the consumption aggregate which enters utility to be:

                                                                           c
                                                   N                       c-1
                                                           1    c -1
                                       Ct =                c
                                                          j Cjt c
                                                                                 .                        (44)
                                                   j =1


       We choose values for the elasticities of substitution from Oberfield and Raval (2020) and
Atalay (2017). We set the elasticity of substitution between consumption goods to c = 0.75,
which is on the low end of the range of values considered in Oberfield and Raval (2020) (0.75-
1.15).61 We set the elasticity between intermediate inputs to Atalay (2017)'s preferred value
m = 0.1. We set the elasticity between primary inputs and intermediates to the midpoint of
the range of estimates in Oberfield and Raval (2020) (0.6-1), i.e., y = 0.8. Finally, we set the
  61
     We choose the low end of this range because Oberfield and Raval (2020) looks at finely disaggregated
manufacturing industries, which have greater similarity, and thus potentially a higher degree of substitutabil-
ity, than the 37 sectors we consider covering the entire private non-farm economy.



                                                           93
                                    Table G.4
                  Allowing for Non-Cobb Douglas Functional Forms

                                CD               All CES              c only
                        Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984  Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                 3.89%    2.79%     4.31%     2.94%     3.87%     2.79%
 (yt - lt , yt )        0.52     -0.15     0.30      -0.38     0.54      -0.14
  (lt )/ (yt )          0.90     1.05      0.96      1.08      0.89      1.04
  (it )/ (yt )          3.78     4.09      3.73      4.17      3.79      4.11
                              k only              y only              m only
                        Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984  Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                 4.43%    2.98%     3.85%     2.76%     3.86%     2.79%
 (yt - lt , yt )        0.24     -0.35     0.50      -0.20     0.55      -0.12
  (lt )/ (yt )          0.97     1.08      0.90      1.06      0.89      1.04
  (it )/ (yt )          3.71     4.01      3.81      4.13      3.77      4.14
                          CD (2nd order)   All CES (2nd order) Ident Inv., CES, 2nd
                        Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984  Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                 3.87%    2.74%     4.38%     3.07%     3.71%     2.23%
 (yt - lt , yt )        0.52     -0.11     0.29      -0.43     0.57      0.45
  (lt )/ (yt )          0.89     1.04      0.96      1.10      0.92      0.92
  (it )/ (yt )          3.98     4.45      3.98      4.52      2.78      2.76

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "CD" corresponds to the baseline model, but instead measuring productivity shocks as
value added net of primary inputs rather than gross output net of all inputs. "All CES" corresponds to the
model with all functional forms (as described in the text) allowed to be CES. "c only" corresponds to only
having a CES nest in consumption aggregation. "k only" corresponds to only having a CES nest in capital
and labor. "v only" corresponds to only having a CES nest between value added and intermediates. "m
only" corresponds to only having a CES nest in intermediate bundling. "CD (2nd order)" corresponds to
solving the model using a 2nd order approximation when using value added based measures of TFP. "All
CES (2nd order)" corresponds to solving the model with a second order approximation with all functional
forms are CES, as described in the text. "Ident Inv., CES, 2nd" corresponds to solving the model with a
second order approximation with all functional forms are CES and where the investment network is set to
the identity matrix.



elasticity between capital and labor to Oberfield and Raval (2020)'s midrange of k = 0.6.62
Given these parameter values, we then re-calibrate the share parameters in the production
function in order to match the expenditure shares in the model's steady state to the data.
       Table G.4 reports a number of results using these alternative functional forms. First, for
the sake of comparability, the top left panel shows the results from our baseline Cobb-Douglas
  62
    We have also tried using Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)'s estimate k = 1.25 and found that this
higher elasticity does not substantially impact our results (available upon request).


                                                    94
model are very similar when we measure productivity as value added net of primary inputs
(which we must do in the CES case given (42)).63 Second, the top middle panel shows that
allowing for the CES production and utility functions barely affect the changes in business
cycle statistics over time; for example, the cyclicality of labor productivity declines by 0.64
with CES functional forms compared to 0.61 with Cobb-Douglas. However, the overall level
of employment and GDP volatility is higher with the CES functional forms, consistent with
the idea that complementarity amplifies overall volatility.
       The next four panels of Table G.4 decompose the role of each elasticity of substitution in
isolation, and show that the higher volatility of the CES model is driven by the complemen-
tarity between capital and labor. This finding indicates that, in the CES model, investment
fluctuations have a large impact on labor demand, which mirrors our main result in the
Cobb-Douglas model that they have a large impact on labor supply.
       Finally, the bottom panels of Table G.4 investigate the role of nonlinearities by computing
a second-order approximation of the model.64 Baqaee and Farhi (2019) show how a second-
order approximation allows the model to capture rich substitution patterns which exist with
CES production functions. However, we find that these nonlinearities do not have a large
effect on the changes in aggregate fluctuations on which we focus in this paper. In fact, with
an identity investment network, there is almost no change in aggregate fluctuations, as was
the case in the first-order Cobb-Douglas specification of the main text.


G.5        Other Robustness Checks

Adding Other Frictions              We now show that our results are robust to allowing for frictions
to reallocating labor across sectors and to accumulating capital within sectors. The labor
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                      +1    +1
reallocation frictions we consider modify the disutility of labor to become                     j   Ljt
                                                                                                      



(as in Horvath (2000)), which implies that workers are imperfect substitutes across sectors.
  63
       Of course, the two notions of productivity are theoretically isomorphic under Cobb-Douglas production:
            1
            
Ajt = Ajt  j
             where Ajt is TFP measured as value added net of primary inputs and Ajt is measured as
gross output net of all inputs. However, this relationship may not hold in the data if production is not
Cobb-Douglas or there is measurement error.
  64
     We need to specify the covariance matrix of TFP shocks in order to solve for the decision rules because
certainty equivalence does not hold in a second-order approximation. We use the sample covariance matrix
for our measured innovations to TFP for the entire period 1948-2018.


                                                      95
                                      Table G.5
                      Robustness with Respect to Other Frictions

                               Baseline                   Labor Reallocation Convex AC only
                         Pre-1984 Post-1984               Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                  3.95%    2.42%                   3.63%    2.21%     3.75%    2.27%
 (yt - lt , yt )         0.52     -0.01                   0.71     0.33      0.70     0.36
  (lt )/ (yt )           0.90     1.03                    0.83     0.95      0.83     0.94
  (it )/ (yt )           3.78     4.11                    3.49     3.81      3.56     3.88
                         All Capital Frictions
                         Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                  3.59%    2.19%
 (yt - lt , yt )         0.72     0.40
  (lt )/ (yt )           0.81     0.93
  (it )/ (yt )           3.54     3.90

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "Baseline" refers to the baseline model described in the main text. "Labor reallocation"
refers to adding labor reallocation frictions from Horvath (2000). "Convex AC only" refers to adding only
quadratic capital adjustment costs without investment production frictions (i.e. setting  = -1). "All
Capital Frictions" corresponds to including both investment production frictions and convex adjustment
costs.



We set the value of  = 4.5 to match the volatility of employment relative to GDP in the
pre-1984 period. The capital adjustment costs modify the capital accumulation equation in
each sector to take the following form:

                                                                            2
                                                                Ijt
                          Kjt+1   = (1 - j )Kjt + Ijt -             - j         Kjt                     (45)
                                                        2       Kjt

We calibrate the size of adjustment costs  to match the volatility of investment within
sectors using a decomposition for aggregate investment variance like the one for employment
in Equation (19), in a model without investment production frictions (i.e.  = -1). This
generates a value of  = 0.5. We also consider results where we use this value for the
adjustment costs and include investment production frictions with  = -1.04.
    Table G.5 shows that including these frictions does not significantly impact our main
findings. While both of sets of frictions decrease the relative volatility of employment ­ and
therefore increase the overall cyclicality of labor productivity ­ the cyclicality still falls over


                                                     96
                                   Table G.6
               Robustness with Respect to Maintenance Investment

                                    Baseline      12.5% Maintenance
                               Pre-1984 Post-1984 Pre-1984 Post-1984
                (yt )          3.95%    2.42%     3.51%    2.10%
               (yt - lt , yt ) 0.52     -0.01     0.70     0.33
                (lt )/ (yt )   0.90     1.03      0.82     0.95
                (it )/ (yt )   3.78     4.11      4.02     4.38

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. "Baseline" refers to the baseline model described in the main text, which uses
 = -1.04. "12.5% maintenance" adjusts the investment network to allow for an additional 12.5% of
investment expenditures to be purchased from within each sector.



time by as much in the data.


Maintenance As discussed in footnotes 4 and 7, some previous studies using the 1997
BEA capital flows table were forced to make a correction to the investment network in order
to ensure the model is invertible.65 A motivation for this correction is to account for "mainte-
nance investment" that may be a large part of investment activity but which is not accounted
for in the BEA data (see McGrattan and Schmitz Jr (1999)). However, a key challenge in
adjusting for maintenance is that the mix of sectors which produce this maintenance invest-
ment is not observable in the data. One extreme assumption is that maintenance is produced
by the same mix of sectors as the new investment recorded in our investment network; in this
case, the investment network would not change. The opposite extreme assumption is that all
maintenance investment is produced using own-sector output. We follow Foerster, Sarte and
Watson (2011) and assume that 50% of maintenance investment is produced proportionally
to the investment network process and 50% is produced using own-sector resources. Given
that McGrattan and Schmitz Jr (1999) identify maintenance expenditures to be, on average,
30% as big as new investment in national accounts (and thus roughly 20-25% of a combi-
nation of all new and maintenance investment), we account for maintenance investment by
adding a correction to the diagonal amounting to 12.5% of total investment. Table G.6 shows
  65
    In numerical simulations we have done, it appears a key reason this correction may be necessary is
because TFP shocks are assumed to follow a random walk.


                                                    97
                                     Table G.7
               Robustness with Respect to Other Levels of Detrending

                           Baseline     (4th order)  2nd order trend                    5th order trend
                           Pre-1984      Post-1984  Pre-1984 Post-1984                Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                    3.95%         2.42%      3.75%    2.30%                    3.88%     2.66%
 (yt - lt , yt )           0.52          -0.01      0.66     0.23                     0.47      0.07
  (lt )/ (yt )             0.90          1.03       0.85     0.98                     0.92      1.01
  (it )/ (yt )             3.78          4.11       3.65     3.95                     3.87      4.07

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log real GDP, lt is log aggregate employment, it is log real aggregate investment, and  denotes the first
difference operator. Different columns present results for different degrees of the polynomial trend that we
take out of measured TFP before feeding it into the model. "Baseline (4th order)" refers to the baseline
model described in the main text, detrends using a fourth-order polynomial. "2nd order trend" refers to
using a quadratic trend and "5th order trend" refers to using a 5th order polynomial.



that with this adjustment to the investment network our results continue to hold. The fact
that each sector now uses its own output for investment somewhat weakens the strength of
the investment hubs, but quantitatively, the model still generates a sizable decrease in the
correlation of labor productivity and aggregate GDP.


Detrending           As discussed in the main text, we detrend measured TFP using a log-polynomial
trend before feeding it into our model. Table G.7 shows that our main results are robust to
using a second-order or fifth-order polynomial trend, rather than a fourth-order one as in
the main text.66



H         Changes in Aggregate Cycles Driven by Changes in
          Sectoral Comovement
This Appendix contains additional results referenced in Section 6 in the main text.
  66
       Our results are very similar when using a third-order trend as well; we omit those results for parsimony.




                                                        98
H.1      Proof of Footnote 28

We first show that the decline in the cyclicality of aggregate labor productivity is entirely
accounted for, in a statistical sense, by the increase in the volatility of employment relative to
the volatility of output (as shown in equation Footnote 28 in the main text). Of course, the
definition of the correlation between labor productivity and output is Corr(yt , yt - lt ) =
Cov (yt ,yt -lt )
 (yt ) (yt -lt )
                    where yt denotes logged and GDP and lt is logged aggregate employment (the
proof also holds for logged and HP filtered data). Using the linear properties of covariance
and rearranging, we can write this as:

              Cov (yt , yt - lt )        Cov (yt , yt )      Cov (yt , lt )
                                  =                      -                     =
               (yt ) (yt - lt )        (yt ) (yt - lt )  (yt ) (yt - lt )
   (yt )       (lt )                          (yt )         (lt )
           -            Corr(yt , lt ) =                1-        Corr(yt , lt )
 (yt - lt )  (yt - lt )                   (yt - lt )        (yt )

   We can write  (yt - lt ) as:


            (yt - lt ) =         (yt )2 +  (lt )2 - 2Cov (yt , lt )
                                                         2
                                              (lt )                (lt )
                            =  (yt ) 1 +                     -2               Corr(yt , lt )
                                              (yt )                (yt )

   Combining this expression with the previous one yields:

       (yt )               (lt )                                  1-    (lt )
                                                                        (yt )
                                                                              Corr(yt , lt )
                       1-        Corr(yt , lt )      =
     (yt - lt )            (yt )                             1+    (lt )2
                                                                            - 2 (lt )
                                                                                      Corr(yt , lt )
                                                                   (yt )2       (yt )


which is expression (18) in the main text. This expression makes clear that the correlation of
labor productivity with GDP depends only on two statistics: the correlation between output
and employment (Corr(yt , lt )) and the relative standard deviation of employment and
       (lt )
GDP (  (yt )
             ).
   Table H.1 shows that the correlation of employment and GDP is stable over time; there-
fore, the rising volatility of employment relative to GDP accounts for the entire decline in
the cyclicality of labor productivity. Intuitively, since GDP and employment are so highly
correlated, the time series behavior of their ratio just depends on which component is more


                                                99
                                  Table H.1
            Components of Aggregate Labor Productivity Cyclicality

                                                         Pre-1984 Post-1984
                           Corr(yt - lt , yt )             0.56     0.28
                           Corr(yt , lt )                  0.80     0.83
                           Corr(yt , lt ) only             0.56     0.56
                            (lt )/ (yt )                   0.83     1.01
                            (lt )/ (yt ) only              0.56     0.30

Notes: decomposition of the cyclicality of labor productivity in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and
post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt is log aggregate value added, lt is log aggregate employment, and  is the
first-difference operator. "Corr(yt , lt ) only" computes the cyclicality of labor productivity from (18)
using the actual value of Corr(yt , lt ) in each subsample but holding fixed  (lt )/ (yt ) at its value in
the pre-1984 subsample. " (lt )/ (yt ) only" computes labor productivity from (18) using the actual
value of  (lt )/ (yt ) in each subsample but holding fixed Corr(yt , lt ) at its value in the pre-1984
subsample.



volatile.


H.2     Robustness of business cycle moments

We now show that the aggregated and within sector business cycle moments from Table
8 are robust to various choices in the statistical methodology. Table H.2 show that those
results, in both the model and the data, continue to hold using the HP filter rather than first
differences to detrend the data. Table H.3 shows that the average value of the within sector
statistics is similar when using fixed weights or no weights, compared to using time-varying
weights (as in the main text).


H.3     Derivation of Decomposition (19)

To derive the decomposition presented in equation (19), we start by decomposing the variance
of aggregate employment into within-sector variances and between-sector covariances. We
take a first-order Taylor approximation of aggregate employment growth, which yields

                                                   N
                                           lt            l
                                                         jt ljt
                                                  j =1




                                                   100
                                        Table H.2
                           Changes in Business Cycles, HP Filter

                       Data               Aggregated                 Within-Sector
                                     Pre-1984 Post-1984          Pre-1984 Post-1984
                    (yt )            2.03%      1.24%            3.27%      2.62%
                   (yt - lt , yt )   0.52       0.14             0.63       0.66
                    (lt )/ (yt )     0.85       1.09             0.83       0.77
                     Model                Aggregated                 Within-Sector
                                     Pre-1984 Post-1984          Pre-1984 Post-1984
                    (yt )            2.52%      1.80%            3.66%      3.22%
                   (yt - lt , yt )   0.53       0.01             0.78       0.82
                    (lt )/ (yt )     0.92       1.01             0.55       0.47

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log value added and lt is log employment. "Aggregated" aggregates value added across sectors using a
Tornqvist index weighted by nominal value added shares, aggregates employment as the simple sum,
HP-filters both series with smoothing parameter  = 6.25, and computes the statistics. "Within-sector"
HP-filters each sector-level series with smoothing parameter  = 6.25, computes the statistics, and then
averages them weighted by the average share of nominal value added within that sub-sample. To avoid
endpoint bias from the HP filter, we omit the first and last three years of data of the entire sample in
computing these figures.




                                 Table H.3
       Within-Sector Business Cycle Statistics with Different Weights

                         Time-Varying (Baseline)                Fixed Weights                  Unweighted
                         Pre-1984 Post-1984                   Pre-1984 Post-1984           Pre-1984 Post-1984
  (yt )                  5.42%    4.29%                       4.98%    4.62%               6.90%    5.90%
 (yt - lt , yt )         0.69     0.67                        0.68     0.69                0.76     0.76
  (lt )/ (yt )           0.76     0.81                        0.78     0.78                0.66     0.63

Notes: business cycle statistics in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample (1984-2018). yt
is log value added, lt is log employment, and it is log investment. "Baseline" first-differences each variable,
computes the statistics, and then averages them weighted by the average share of nominal value added
within that sub-sample. In "Fixed Weights," we use each sector's value added share averaged for the entire
sample window to weight sectoral moments both pre- and post-1984. In "Unweighted," we construct
moments as the simple mean across all sectors.




                                                     101
      l
where jt is the average share of sectoral employment in the aggregate for the time period
studied, lt is log aggregate employment, and ljt is log sector-level employment. The approx-
imation reflects the facts that the log of the sum is not equal to the sum of the logs and
                l
that the shares jt are not constant over time. Given this linear expression for aggregate
employment, standard rules of variance and covariance imply the following decomposition
of aggregate employment variance:

                                 N                         N
                  Var(lt )              l 2
                                       (jt ) Var(ljt ) +              l
                                                                      jt l
                                                                         ot Cov (ljt , lot )
                                j =1                       j =1 o=j


       We perform a similar decomposition for aggregate GDP, and then we consider the ratio
of these two decompositions.67 This ratio is given by:


                                                  j =1 (jt ) Var (ljt )
                                                  N      l 2
            Var(lt )
                     
            Var(yt )       j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt ) +
                           N       y 2                    N
                                                          j =1      o=j jt ot Cov (yjt , yot )
                                                                         y y


                                                      o=j jt ot Cov (ljt , lot )
                                             N               l    l
                                             j =1
                          + N
                               j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt ) +                 o=j jt ot Cov (yjt , yot )
                                      y 2                      N           y y
                                                               j =1


       This expression can be rewritten as:


                        j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt ) j =1 (jt ) Var (ljt )
                        N     y 2             N     l 2
        Var(lt )
                 
        Var(yt )            Var(yt )          j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )
                                              N     y 2


                                o=j jt ot Cov (yjt , yot )                           ot Cov (ljt , lot )
                           N         y y                       N                  x l
                           j =1                                j =1         o=j   jt
                    +
                                    Var(yt )                  N
                                                              j =1          o=j
                                                                                  y y
                                                                                  jt ot Cov (yjt , yot )


                                                                       j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )/Var (yt ),
                                                                       N     y 2
       And then, defining the "variance weight" as t =                                                     we
obtain the final relationship (19) in the main text.


H.4        Additional Quantitative Results

Accuracy of the Decomposition                 Table H.4 shows that the approximate decomposition
(19) is accurate in our data. In particular, the relative variance and the standard deviation
  67
    Since aggregate GDP is obtained via a Tornqvist index, log changes in GDP are already given as a
weighted sum of log changes in sectoral value added. Thus, the approximation only reflects the fact that the
weights are not constant over time.


                                                    102
                                        Table H.4
                              Accuracy of the Decomposition

                                                                   Pre-84   Post-84
                     Actual, variance                              0.68     1.02
                     Approximation, variance                       0.68     1.04
                     Actual, standard deviation                    0.83     1.01
                     Approximation, standard deviation             0.83     1.02

Notes: variance and standard deviation of real GDP to aggregate employment. "Actual" refers to the actual
values of those statistics in the aggregate data. "Approximation" refers to the right-hand side of the
decomposition (19).


                                     Table H.5
                   Average Pairwise Correlations, Model vs. Data

                                   Data                                  Model
                           Employment Value added                Employment Value added
             Pre-1984         0.50        0.29                      0.98        0.32
             Post-1984        0.49        0.17                      0.95        0.14
             Difference      -0.01       -0.12                     -0.03       -0.18

Notes: average pairwise correlations x                             x
                                      in (46). "Pre-1984" computes  in the 1948-1983 subsample and
                        x
"post-1984" computes  in the 1984-2017 subsample. "Data" refers to the data and "Model" to the model.



of employment implied by the decomposition are close to their actual values in the data.


Changes in Comovement Patterns In the main text, we asserted that the comovement
of value added across sectors fell in the post-1980s data but the comovement of employment
did not. We now support this assertion by computing the change in the average correlation
of value added and employment growth across pairs of sectors:

                                  N
                                  i=1
                                         N
                                         j =i+1     j Corr(xjt , xjt |t   )
                                                  x x
                                                  i
                          x
                                                  N     N        x x
                                                                                                    (46)
                                                  i=1   j =i+1   i j

where xjt is either employment or value added and j are value added or employment shares.
    Table H.5 shows that the correlation of value added falls nearly in half, generating most
of the decline in the covariances in the decomposition (19); in contrast, the correlation of
employment is essentially stable, generating the stability of the between sector covariances

                                                    103
                Figure H.1: Scatterplot of Changes in Sector-Pair Covariances
                                        10-3
                                 2



                                 1



                                 0



                                 -1



                                 -2



                                 -3



                                 -4
                                   -4          -3   -2    -1   0     1       2
                                                                          10-3




Notes: This figure plots changes in the covariance for each pair of sectors (j, o) in our dataset. The
horizontal axis computes the change in the covariance of value added Cov (yjt , yot ) in the post-1984 sample
(1984-2018) relative to the pre-1984 sample (1948-1983). Each point is weighted by the product of the two
sector-pair's average nominal value added share over the whole sample. The blue solid line is the OLS
regression line. Employment and value added are in log first differences.



as well.68 To our knowledge, our model is the only explanation for the declining cyclicality
of aggregate labor productivity that is consistent with these facts in the data.


Sector Pair Covariance Changes                      In the main text, we asserted that the changes in
covariance patterns are broad-based and not driven by outliers. We illustrate these patterns
in Figure H.1, which provides a scatter plot of the change in employment and value added
covariances for each sector pair. The covariance of value added declines for most pairs of sec-
tors in the data. Further, while there is substantial heterogeneity in changes in the covariance
of employment, these changes are generally of a smaller magnitude than the changes in value
added covariance. The figure also shows that these patterns are not driven by outliers but
are occurring across many sector pairs.
  68
    The fact that the correlation of employment across sectors is higher in our model than the data is driven
by our choice of an infinite Frisch elasticity   ; this assumption implies that the marginal disutility of
labor supply is constant, so an increase in one sector's employment does not affect the incentives to supply
labor to other sectors. With a finite Frisch elasticity  < , an increase in one sector's employment increases
the disutility of supply labor to other sectors, decreasing the level of employment comovement. However,
allowing for a finite Frisch still implies that the correlation of employment across sectors is constant over
time (details available upon request).




                                                         104
  Figure H.2: Model Fit of Sector-Pair Level Cov (ljt , lot ) - Cov (yjt , yot ) (R2 = 53%)
                                  10 -3
                        12


                        10


                         8


                         6


                         4


                         2


                         0


                        -2


                        -4


                        -6
                             -8           -6   -4   -2   0     2   4   6     8     10      12
                                                                                        10 -3



Notes: model fit to sector-pair (j, o) value of Cov (ljt , lot ) - Cov (yjt , yot ), where Cov (ljt , lot ) is the
covariance of log first differenced employment in the post-1984 sample relative to the pre-1984 sample, and
Cov (yjt , yot ) is the covariance of log first differenced value added in the post-1984 sample relative to the
pre-1984 sample. Horizontal axis is the value of that statistic in the data while the vertical axis is the value
in the model. The solid line is the regression line across all sectors, which has an R2 of 0.53. The dashed
line is the 45-degree line. In the plot, circle size is proportional to the product of the pair's share of value
added over the entire sample.



Model Fit to Covariance Changes across Sector Pairs We now show that the model
also matches changes in covariance patterns across individual sector pairs well. We summarize
the sector-pair level change with the "diff-in-diff" Cov (ljt , lot ) - Cov (yjt , yot ). On average,
this object is positive because employment covariances change by less than the value added
covariances, and larger values correspond to a larger divergence between employment and
value added covariances over time. We plot this diff-in-diff in the data and in the model in
Figure H.2. Although neither of these objects were targeted in the calibration, the model
explains 50% of the cross-sectional variation in the data.69
  69
    The weighted regression line for the data and the model is slightly less steep than the 45-degree line (a
regression coefficient of 0.85), indicating that the magnitude of the differences in differences is slightly larger
in the model than in the data. However, even the R2 of the 45-degree line remains high at R2 = 0.33.




                                                             105
                                      Table H.6
             Decomposition of Relative Employment Volatility, NBER-CES

                                                             Pre-84 Post-84            Contribution
                                                                                       of entire term
                                          Var(lt )
                                          Var(yt )
                                                               0.37           0.57         100%

                                    Variances         0.33       0.21                       1.4%
                                   Covariances        0.37       0.60                      98.6%
                                 Variance Weight      0.03       0.06
                                 ( t = N  j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )/Var (yt ))
                                                y 2



Notes: results of the decomposition
                                  
                                    (19) using NBER-CES data for 462 manufacturing sectors. "Variances"
                                              j =1 (jt ) Var (ljt )
                                              N     l 2
refers to the variance component              N     y 2             .   "Covariances" refers to the covariance component
                                              j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )
N              l
               jt l
                  ot Cov (ljt ,lot )
N
j =1
      o=j         y  y                 . "Variance weight" refers to the weighting term
  j =1   o=j   jt   ot Cov (yjt ,yot )
            N       y 2
t =         j =1 (  jt Var (yjt )/Var (yt ).
                      )            "Contribution of entire term" computes the contribution of the first
term of the decomposition (19) (in the variances row) and the contribution of the second term (in the
covariances row). Real value added is constructed using the gross output price deflator.



Decomposition in Finer Disaggregation of Manufacturing                                              Table H.6 shows that
our results hold using a finer disaggregation of sectors within the manufacturing sector only.
These data are from the NBER-CES database, which covers 462 manufacturing sectors from
1958-2011.70 We still observe at this finely disaggregated level that the rise in the relative
variance of employment to GDP is almost exclusively due to changes in the covariance of
activity across sectors.


Equal Weights in the Decomposition                                       Since our decomposition (19) is weighted by
sector size, the changes over time may be driven by changes in the distribution of weights
rather than changes in comovement patterns. However, H.7 shows that this is not the case;
the results are nearly identical if we use constant, equal weights over time.


HP Filter             Table H.8 shows that the decomposition results are robust to using the HP
filter rather than first-differences.
  70
    There are seven sectors which we omit because they report zero employment at some point in the sample
frame.




                                                                        106
Table H.7
Decomposition of Relative Employment Volatility, Equal Weights

                                   Baseline                                 Equal Weights
                        Pre-84 Post-84 Contribution                  Pre-84 Post-84 Contribution
                                         of entire term                             of entire term
       Var(lt )
       Var(yt )
                         0.68     1.04       100%                     0.72    0.94      100%
     Variances           0.41     0.48        15%                     0.45    0.41       11%
    Covariances          0.72     1.19        85%                     0.76    1.06       89%
  Variance Weight        0.12     0.21                                0.12    0.19
  ( t = N   j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )/Var (yt ))
                  y 2



Notes: results of the decomposition (19) in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample
(1984-2018). "Baseline" refers to the decomposition from the main text. "Equal weights" sets all the
          y     l
weights jt  = jt   = 1.




                                  Table H.8
          Decomposition of Relative Employment Volatility, HP Filter

                              First Differences                              HP Filter
                        Pre-84 Post-84 Contribution                  Pre-84 Post-84 Contribution
                                         of entire term                             of entire term
       Var(lt )
       Var(yt )
                         0.68     1.04       100%                     0.72   1.09       100%
     Variances           0.41     0.48        15%                     0.48   0.49        13%
    Covariances          0.72     1.19        85%                     0.75   1.25        87%
  Variance Weight        0.12     0.21                                0.11   0.20
  ( t = N   j =1 (jt ) Var (yjt )/Var (yt ))
                  y 2



Notes: results of the decomposition (19) in the pre-1984 sample (1948 - 1983) and post-1984 sample
(1984-2017). "First differences" refers to first differencing the data as in the main text. "HP filter" refers to
using HP-filtered data. To avoid endpoint bias with the HP filter, we eliminate the first and last three
years of the sample.




                                                      107
                                        Table I.1
                       Effects of 1% Investment Purchase Subsidy

                                            Baseline        No intermediates
                             it              6.52%                5.25%
                             nt              1.85%                1.59%
                             nhubs
                               t             4.63%                5.06%
                             nnon-hubs
                               t             1.21%                0.48%

Notes: effect of a one-time subt = 0.01 shock to the stimulus policy shock described in the main text.
"Baseline" refers to full model and "No intermediates" refers to model without intermediate goods (i.e.
j = 1 for all sectors j ). it is the percentage change in aggregate investment, nt is the percentage
change in aggregate employment, nhubs  t    is the percentage change in employment at the investment hubs,
and nnon-hubs
        t        is the percentage change  in employment at the non-hubs.



I         Implications of Network for Stimulus Policy
The analysis in the main text focused on how the investment network propagates sector-
specific productivity shocks; in this appendix, we briefly study how it propagates investment
stimulus policies, such as investment tax credits or the bonus depreciation allowance. We
model investment stimulus as an exogenous shock to the cost of capital:


                                              (1 - subt ) × jt ,                                           (47)


where jt is the marginal cost of producing investment goods and subt is the policy shock.
Winberry (2020) shows that a number of actual policies map into this reduced-form shock.71
We assume that the policy shock is financed from outside the economy in order to focus on
how it affects investment incentives.72
         Table I.1 shows that the investment stimulus increases employment in many sectors of
the economy. A 1% subsidy shock increases aggregate investment by more than 6%. Most
of this increased investment is produced by investment hubs, whose employment increases
by about 4.6%. Employment at non-hubs also increases by about 1.2% in order to supply
    71
      The key intuition behind this result is that, without financial frictions, the present value of tax savings
per unit of investment is a sufficient statistic to capture the effects of these policies on investment.
   72
      Of course, the equilibrium of our model is efficient. We think it nevertheless provides useful insights
about the positive effects of these policies, which will be important forces in a normative exercise using
richer models in which the policies may be welfare-improving.



                                                      108
                   Figure I.1: Distributional Effects of Investment Stimulus




Notes: effect of a one-time subt = 0.01 shock to the stimulus policy shock described in the main text. Each
bar plots the change in employment at that particular sector, divided by the change in aggregate
employment. The sum of all the bars equals 100% of the change in aggregate employment. Red bars are the
investment hubs' response in our baseline model, blue bars are the non hubs' response in our baseline
model, and transparent grey bars are the responses in a version of the model in which we eliminate the
investment network by assuming all investment is done out of own-sector output.



intermediates to the investment hubs through the Leontief-adjusted investment network. The
right column of Table I.1 shows that, without these linkages from the intermediates network,
employment at the non-hubs increases by about half as much.73
       Figure I.1 shows that the effects of the stimulus shock on employment are unevenly
distributed across sectors of the economy. Nearly half of the increase in aggregate employment
is concentrated in the four investment hubs because they produce the majority of investment.
There is also a sizable increase in employment in the key suppliers to investment hubs.
However, the sectors which do not supply intermediates to the hubs see virtually no change
in their employment.
  73
    The fact that non-hubs' employment increases even without the intermediates network reflects the fact
that they also produce some investment goods.


                                                   109
                   Figure I.2: Distributional Effect of Investment Stimulus




Notes: effect of a one-time subt = 0.01 shock to the stimulus policy shock described in the main text. Each
bar plots the percentage change in employment at that particular sector. Red bars are the investment hubs'
response in our baseline model, blue bars are the non hubs' response in our baseline model, and
transparent grey bars are the responses in a version of the model in which we eliminate the investment
network by assuming all investment is done out of own-sector output.



    Figure I.1 also shows that, in a counterfactual version of the model without the investment
network (setting  = I ), the effect of the policy is more uniformly distributed across sectors.
Without the investment network, the service sectors (in the right of the plot) account for a
larger share of the aggregate response than the non-service sectors. This result simply reflects
the fact that service sectors are larger and therefore mechanically account for a larger share of
employment fluctuations; Figure I.2 shows that the percentage change in employment within
sectors, which is not mechanically related to size, is fairly uniformly distributed across sectors
in the model without the investment network.




                                                   110
