                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE IMPACT OF EXPANDING PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE ON
                     SAFETY NET PROGRAM PARTICIPATION:
                 EVIDENCE FROM THE ACA MEDICAID EXPANSION

                                         Lucie Schmidt
                                      Lara Shore-Sheppard
                                          Tara Watson

                                      Working Paper 26504
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26504


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We are grateful to the Russell Sage Foundation for financial support and to Nadine Nichols at the
U.S. Department of Agriculture and to Brian Stacy at the World Bank for data. Louisa Abel,
Mary Beth Dato, Casey DeLano, Huy Nguyen, and Ahna Pearson provided excellent research
assistance. Michael L. Anderson offered useful guidance on standard errors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Expanding Public Health Insurance on Safety Net Program Participation: Evidence
from the ACA Medicaid Expansion
Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 26504
November 2019
JEL No. I13,I38

                                           ABSTRACT

The expansion of public insurance eligibility that occurred with the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Medicaid expansions may have spillover effects to other public assistance programs. We explore
the impact of the ACA on two large safety net programs: the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). We use a county border-pair
research design, examining county-level administrative measures of EITC and SNAP
participation in contiguous county pairs that cross state lines where the county on one side of the
border experienced the Medicaid expansion and the county on the other side did not. This
approach allows us to focus narrowly on differences arising from the ACA Medicaid expansion
choice, implicitly controlling for local economic trends that could affect safety net participation.
Our results suggest that the Medicaid expansion increased participation in SNAP, and possibly in
the EITC, in counties that expanded relative to nearby counties that did not expand. We
corroborate and extend these results using individual level data from the American Community
Survey (ACS). Our results show that access to one safety net program may increase take-up of
others.

Lucie Schmidt                                    Tara Watson
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Williams College                                 Williams College
201 Schapiro Hall                                24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267                           Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER                                         and NBER
lschmidt@williams.edu                            tara.watson@williams.edu

Lara Shore-Sheppard
Department of Economics
Williams College
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
lshore@williams.edu
I. Introduction

The safety net is a nexus of public programs addressing a partially overlapping set of needs and

serving a partially overlapping set of beneficiaries. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) expanded

the availability of one such program, Medicaid, to individuals who were previously categorically

ineligible and to individuals who had been categorically eligible such as parents, but at lower

means-tested income limits. Given connections across programs, the expansion of public

insurance eligibility may have had spillover effects to other forms of public assistance. In this

paper we explore the impact of expanded Medicaid access through the ACA on participation in

the two most widely used and broadly available non-health safety net programs: the Earned

Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP).

Understanding how participation in EITC and SNAP increases or decreases as the result of

public health insurance expansions contributes to the policy evaluation of the ACA and could

inform future state and federal expansion decisions.

       EITC and SNAP are two of the most important components of the U.S. safety net. The

EITC, a refundable tax credit targeting low-income workers, is the largest cash assistance

program for the non-elderly in the United States, with 26.7 million recipients in 2013 (Nichols

and Rothstein 2016). SNAP (formerly known as Food Stamps) provides food assistance to more

than one out of seven Americans (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2016). In addition to having large

numbers of recipients, spending on both programs is substantial, with federal expenditures of

$63 billion for the EITC in 2013 (Nichols and Rothstein 2016) and SNAP expenditures of $74.2

billion in 2014 (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2016). Both EITC and SNAP are also notable

because unlike many U.S. safety net programs, they have no categorical requirements such as

age, presence of children, or disability status, although their eligibility standards do depend




                                                                                                    1
somewhat on such criteria. Nevertheless, they are in principle available to anyone, and thus when

Medicaid expanded under the ACA to low-income non-disabled workers, including those

without children, individuals newly eligible for Medicaid may well have been in a position to

qualify for, or were already participating in, these programs.

       Expansion of Medicaid eligibility has several potential impacts on participation in the

EITC and SNAP. First, individuals may be induced to reduce their income below the Medicaid

income limit to qualify for Medicaid, potentially increasing eligibility for means-tested

programs. Alternatively, the newly increased income limit relative to previous limits for some

groups could allow individuals to have more earnings while still qualifying for Medicaid,

potentially changing cash and food program eligibility and participation. Finally, expanding

Medicaid access may draw individuals' attention to the existence of other public programs or

reduce the marginal cost of enrolling in additional programs while enrolling in Medicaid.

       The interconnected nature of safety net program eligibility and receipt makes examining

the impacts on other programs an important aspect of evaluating the effect of changes in program

eligibility. However, there has been relatively little work on the impact of recent Medicaid

expansions on cash and food program participation. Baicker et al. (2014) analyze the Oregon

Medicaid Experiment, in which permission to apply for Medicaid was randomly assigned among

a set of low-income adults. They find no effects of Medicaid expansion on Temporary

Assistance to Needy Families receipt, but they find small positive effects on the probability of

SNAP receipt. Burney, Boehm, and Lopez (2018) use a state difference-in-difference




                                                                                                   2
specification and report positive impacts of the ACA Medicaid expansion on SNAP. To our

knowledge, no other work examines how the ACA Medicaid expansions affected EITC receipt. 1

       In this paper, we exploit the fact that the Supreme Court decision of June 2012 made the

Medicaid expansion optional for the states, but we focus on identification of the effect of the

Medicaid expansion by comparing changes in county-level measures of EITC and SNAP

participation in contiguous county pairs that cross state lines where the county on one side of the

border experienced the Medicaid expansion and the county on the other side did not. This

approach allows us to focus narrowly on differences arising from the ACA Medicaid expansion

choice, abstracting from potential heterogeneity in trends across broader geographic areas. We

also exploit preexisting differences in Medicaid generosity across states.

       Using this county border pair method, we begin by presenting evidence of increases in

insurance coverage due to the ACA Medicaid expansion. The county-level data are obtained

from the Census Bureau's Small Area Health Insurance Estimates (SAHIE) program. We find

positive insurance impacts that are of magnitudes similar to those found by other authors using

state difference-in-difference and state synthetic control methods (Kaestner et al. 2017,

Courtemanche et al. 2017).

       For our main analyses of EITC and SNAP, we use county-level data on the number of tax

returns claiming the EITC from the Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income and county-

level data on the number of SNAP participants reported to the US Department of Agriculture (for

a subset of states). Our estimates for the EITC are fairly imprecise, but are suggestive of small




1
 In related work, Chatterji, Liu, and Yörük (2019) examine the effect of the ACA's dependent
care provision on family structure and program participation. They find that coverage for young
adults under the age of 26 reduces single parenthood and reduces participation in SNAP, TANF,
and WIC.


                                                                                                    3
increases in the number of returns with an EITC claim per 100 working adults as a result of the

Medicaid expansion. For SNAP, we find that the Medicaid expansion led to a statistically

significant increase in participation. This is consistent with results from the Oregon experiment

(Baicker et al. 2014).

       We examine some of the mechanisms behind these results and explore heterogeneity in

the impacts of the expansion using individual-level American Community Survey (ACS) data on

SNAP participation, imputed EITC eligibility, and various labor supply measures. This

supplemental analysis uses a Public-Use Microdata Area (PUMA)-pair design, since county of

residence is not identified in the public-use data. Our ACS analysis confirms significant effects

of the Medicaid expansion on health insurance coverage and SNAP participation. We find little

evidence of labor supply-related changes in SNAP eligibility in the population, suggesting that

information and/or transaction costs may be the main explanation for the observed association

between Medicaid eligibility and SNAP participation. Our results suggest a small increase in

imputed EITC eligibility and a small increase in the labor supply of single parents on the

extensive margin. Overall, our results indicate that access to one safety net program may increase

participation in others, highlighting the important connections across the safety net.



II. Background

       The 2010 Affordable Care Act was arguably the most important piece of health care

legislation in a generation. It aimed to reduce uninsurance by mandating that individuals obtain

health insurance, by improving the functioning and regulation of the private market, and by

significantly expanding access to public health insurance through Medicaid. In particular, it

sought to expand eligibility for Medicaid to all those under 138% of the poverty line,




                                                                                                    4
representing a major change in most states. The change was especially pronounced for non-

disabled adults without dependents who had been largely excluded from the program. In 2012,

the Supreme Court ruled that states could not be compelled to participate in the Medicaid

expansion, leading to substantial variation in the extent and timing of Medicaid expansions

across states. Many states expanded in January 2014, but some expanded earlier or later, and 14

states have not (as of October 2019) changed their Medicaid eligibility limits.

       As noted above, many individuals affected by the Medicaid expansion are potentially

eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit. The federal EITC provides a subsidy to low-income

workers, with a subsidy rate of 40 percent on income below the maximum level. The structure of

the EITC is shown graphically in Figure 1a for single adults with and without children and in

Figure 1b for married couple families. The amount of the credit rises as a family's income rises

(the "phase-in") until the maximum credit has been attained, at which point the amount of the

credit stays constant as income rises (the "plateau"). Above a cutoff amount of income, the

amount of the credit falls as income increases (the "phase-out") until the credit falls to zero. The

maximum amount of the credit depends on the number of children in the family (zero, one, two,

or three or more), and the earned income limit varies depending on filing status (single/head of

household or married filing jointly). In 2014, for example, the maximum credit was $496 for a

family with no qualifying children, $3,305 with one qualifying child, $5,460 with two qualifying

children, and $6,143 with three or more qualifying children, and the earned income limit ranged

from $14,590 for a single individual with no children to $52,427 for a married couple with three

or more children (Internal Revenue Service 2013). Participation in the program among eligible

taxpayers is relatively high, with overall take-up rates estimated to be between 75 and 79 percent

(Nichols and Rothstein 2016), although take-up rates vary according to demographics, family




                                                                                                   5
structure, and position on the EITC schedule (Jones 2014), and lack of full take-up of the EITC

remains a concern among policymakers (see National Conference of State Legislatures 2018;

Internal Revenue Service 2019). Many states also supplement the EITC, generally by providing

additional support for those in the Federal EITC eligibility range.

       Many of the possible interactions between expanded Medicaid eligibility and EITC

receipt arise from interactions between eligibility and labor market decisions of workers. These

decisions may be either on the extensive margin (enter or leave the labor market) or on the

intensive margin (work more or fewer hours conditional on working at all). The likely impacts

also differ by whether the individual is single or married and by the presence or absence of

children. In Figures 1a and 1b the dotted vertical lines indicate the typical ACA Medicaid

expansion income cutoff of 138 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL) relative to the EITC

schedule for each group.

       Single and married parents had a route onto Medicaid prior to the ACA, but in most

states needed to have very low incomes to qualify. Some parents may have chosen to stay out of

the labor force to obtain health insurance; single parents were probably more likely to be on this

margin. With higher Medicaid income eligibility threshold post-expansion, parents could enter

the labor force without losing Medicaid coverage. As shown for single parents (the top three

schedules in Figure 1a) and married parents (the top three schedules in Figure 1b), labor supply

entry that allowed Medicaid eligibility in expansion states likely would put parents squarely in

the range of EITC receipt.

       There is also an incentive for parents earning just above the Medicaid eligibility cutoff of

138 percent of the federal poverty line to reduce their earnings. However, the position of 138

percent of FPL on the EITC schedule for individuals with children indicates that those near the




                                                                                                     6
Medicaid cut-off would be eligible for EITC benefits in any case. Thus, a modest reduction in

labor supply would not lead to a change in EITC eligibility for parents. In sum, any EITC

response from parents would likely stem from labor force entry increasing EITC participation,

and any such effect likely would be concentrated among single parents.

       The predicted effect of the ACA on EITC participation for individuals without children is

different. Prior to the ACA, non-disabled non-elderly single or married adults without children

were typically ineligible for Medicaid at any income. We therefore would not expect the ACA to

induce labor force entry for this group. On the other hand, childless individuals who would be

earning above 138 percent of FPL in the absence of expanded Medicaid have an incentive to

work less to qualify for Medicaid in expansion states. Because EITC benefits for single or

married individuals with no children phase out to zero below the Medicaid eligibility cutoff (see

Figures 1a and 1b), childless individuals who reduce labor supply to qualify for expanded

Medicaid could enter the EITC eligibility range. Individuals without children who would

otherwise exceed the Medicaid eligibility limit and choose to exit the labor force altogether

would experience no change in EITC eligibility­they would not be eligible in either case. Thus,

the most likely response for non-parents, if any, would be an increase in EITC stemming from a

reduction in labor supply on the intensive margin.

       In addition to labor market-related effects on EITC, there may be information/transaction

costs reasons for a change in EITC returns. Workers with low incomes who would not normally

file may learn about EITC benefits or be nudged to file taxes when enrolling in Medicaid. In

Figures 1a and 1b, dashed vertical lines indicate the tax-filing threshold for the various groups.

The threshold at which an individual or family is required to file taxes is in all cases below the

expanded Medicaid eligibility cutoff. It is also possible that changes in labor supply induced by




                                                                                                     7
the ACA put a low-income worker in a position on the EITC schedule where it is worth the effort

to file a return, even if that worker would have been eligible previously.

       Unlike the EITC, the structure of SNAP is that of a traditional means-tested transfer

program: food benefits (awarded in the form of Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) cards that can

be used to purchase food from grocery stores) are highest among families with no earnings and

are reduced at a 30 percent rate as earnings rise. To be eligible, a household must have gross

monthly income below 130 percent of the poverty level and "countable" assets below $2,250

(Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2016). SNAP is one of the few safety net programs that is available

to any low-income household and is not limited to certain groups, although nonworking,

nondisabled adults up to age 49 without children are limited to three months of benefits within a

three-year period (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2016). Similar to the EITC, overall take-up rates

are relatively high for a safety net program--75 percent in 2010--but they vary across states and

groups of individuals within states (Cunnyngham 2012).

       Some of the potential mechanisms whereby expanded eligibility for Medicaid may affect

SNAP participation operate through the labor market. In particular, individuals previously

ineligible for Medicaid have an incentive to work less in order to reduce their income below the

new Medicaid income limit, which would lead to an increase in SNAP eligibility and

participation. Alternatively, individuals who had been eligible for Medicaid previously although

at a lower income limit have an incentive to work more, since the higher income limit could

allow more earnings while still allowing the individual to qualify for Medicaid. This incentive

could reduce SNAP participation if individuals work enough to lose eligibility for SNAP (though

this is unlikely given the similar income thresholds for SNAP and Medicaid) or reduce the

amount of SNAP benefits such that it is no longer worth the administrative hassle to participate.




                                                                                                    8
       In addition, there is the possibility of an information/transaction costs channel connecting

Medicaid eligibility and SNAP participation: gaining access to Medicaid may increase

individuals' awareness of the possibility of eligibility for SNAP. Often, government offices or

non-governmental organizations that assist with Medicaid enrollment offer information about or

assistance with applications for SNAP, for example. Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2018) show

that information and assistance can increase SNAP enrollment.

       In sum, if expanded Medicaid access has an impact on EITC participation, the predicted

direction would be to increase it. For SNAP, predicted effects on eligibility and participation

conditional on eligibility are ambiguous, with the most likely impacts being positive. The effect

of Medicaid eligibility expansion on safety net participation is ultimately an empirical question.

In the next section, we describe our empirical strategy.



III. Empirical Approach

       As in most studies of the ACA Medicaid expansion, we use variation in Medicaid

eligibility resulting from the June 2012 Supreme Court decision making the Medicaid expansion

optional to the states. Unlike most other studies, however, we analyze county-level data and

compare changes in EITC receipt and SNAP participation within contiguous county pairs that

cross state lines, where one county is in a state that expanded while the other is in a state that did

not. 2 This is the same empirical approach laid out in our previous work examining the impact of

the ACA Medicaid expansion on SSI and SSDI applications (Schmidt, Shore-Sheppard, and

Watson 2019). Relative to a state difference-in-difference approach, the county-border design




2
 This approach was pioneered in studies of the employment effects of state minimum wages (see
Dube, Lester, and Reich 2010, 2016).


                                                                                                     9
has the advantage that counties that border each other are more likely to share similar labor

markets, are more likely to be affected by the same local trends, and are more likely to share

macroeconomic shocks than are counties that do not share a common border (Allegretto et al.

2013; Dube, Lester, and Reich 2016). 3

       This county border pair approach allows us to focus narrowly on differences arising from

the ACA Medicaid expansion choice by comparing changes over time in outcomes from counties

on either side of a state border. In this approach, the identifying assumption is that the change in

the outcome of interest in the county in the non-expanding state is a reasonable counterfactual

estimate for how the outcome of interest would have changed in its neighboring county across

the border if the Medicaid expansion had not occurred.

       Figure 2 illustrates the variation we use in our empirical approach: the sub-state divisions

shown are counties, and contiguous border county pairs that differed in their Medicaid expansion

status as of April 2014 are highlighted. In 2014, there were 488 contiguous county pairs in which

one county was in a state that had adopted the Medicaid expansion and the other in a state that

had not, out of a total of 1195 contiguous county pairs. There are also two sources of variation

used in our analysis that are not shown in Figure 2. First, a few states had already expanded

eligibility for Medicaid to some nondisabled adults prior to the ACA expansion, so the ACA

expansion increased eligibility for Medicaid more in some states than in others. 4 Second, states



3
  One possible concern with this identification strategy is that individuals might migrate across
county lines in order to obtain Medicaid. However, evidence to date suggests that any such
migration is likely to be minimal. Goodman (2017) finds no evidence of a migration response to
the ACA Medicaid expansion at the public-use microdata area (PUMA) level, consistent with
findings by Schwartz and Sommers (2014) for earlier health insurance expansions.
4
  California rolled out its early Medicaid expansion on a county-by-county basis. We include this
variation, which results in additional discordant pairs on the California state border prior to 2014;
beginning in 2014, all states bordering California also expand, so these pairs are no longer
discordant at that point.


                                                                                                   10
varied in when, as well as in whether, they expanded Medicaid. The modal expansion date (21

states) was January 1, 2014, but some states began to expand starting in 2010 and other states did

not expand until later in 2014 or in later years. 5 Our analysis considers expansions through 2016.

       More formally, consider the following specification estimated on a sample of all counties

in the continental U.S. for the period 2010-2016:

                  (1)

where yct denotes the various outcomes of interest (described in detail in the Data section below)

for county c in time t, where t denotes year. NoncategoricalLimits(c)t denotes the Medicaid

noncategorical income limit, that is, the baseline income limit that applies to adults whether or

not they have children or disabilities (measured as a percentage of the poverty line) in effect in

county c in state s for the majority of year t. Using the actual Medicaid income limit has the

advantage that we incorporate information on the generosity of Medicaid eligibility prior to

Medicaid expansion, thereby exploiting the fact that some policy changes were larger than

others. The vector Xct includes time-varying controls such as demographic characteristics, and c

and t are county and time fixed effects, included to account for unmeasured heterogeneity in

outcomes across space and time that may be correlated with expansion status. This equation

corresponds to the difference-in-differences approach used in the ACA Medicaid expansion

literature thus far, although it has typically been estimated at the state level or individual level

with state and year fixed effects rather than at the county level.

       The identifying assumption implicit in this approach is that after removing county-

specific and time-specific fixed effects, outcomes in expansion and non-expansion counties


5
  Of 1195 contiguous county border pairs, 746 have discordant values for the non-categorical
income limit at some point between 2010 and 2016. The number of discordant pairs by this
definition ranges from 109 in 2010 to 562 in 2014.


                                                                                                       11
would be changing in the same way over time if the expansion had not occurred. We estimate

this model using our county-level data, clustering our standard errors at the state level to account

for the fact that the variation in expansion status is at the state level. Depending on the outcome,

we weight by county working age population or total population to account for the substantial

variation in population size across counties.

       One empirical challenge in the ACA Medicaid expansion literature is that there is a

strong geographic correlation in which states chose to expand, and our outcomes of interest may

be trending differently in different parts of the country. To deal with this, we use the discordant

state border county approach described above. We limit the sample to contiguous border counties

and restructure the data so that each county-county pair-year is one observation. Then we

estimate a modified version of equation (1):

               (2)                                                                  .



where the subscript p denotes a county-pair and pt is a pair-specific time effect (instead of a

national time effect). The use of the pair-specific time effect means that we are using only

variation in expansion status within each contiguous border county pair and controlling for local

economic shocks that impact both members of the county pair in a given year. The identifying

assumption is thus that a difference in expansion status within a contiguous border county pair is

not correlated with time-varying unobservables that affect one member of the cross-border pair

but not the other. In other words, we implicitly assume that within a pair the outcome in the

county with the expansion would have changed in the same way as in the non-expansion county

if the expansion had not occurred. Because of the data restructuring, some county-years are

observed more than once because they border multiple counties. We re-weight, ensuring that the




                                                                                                  12
weights across county-county-pair-year observations within a county-year sum to the county

population. We cluster standard errors by state and adjust to account for duplicated observations.

       Because model (2) is only relevant to counties on state borders, the models in equations

(1) and (2) are estimated on different samples. As a check, we estimate the differences-in-

differences model of equation (1) on the restructured subsample of counties used in the

estimation of equation (2). This check is useful in determining the effect of a different sample as

well as the impact of the loss of statistical power resulting from moving to a smaller number of

counties.



IV. Data

       We obtain the data for our analysis from a number of different sources, with our primary

outcomes of interest coming from administrative data. Recipients claim the EITC via income tax

filing, and the Internal Revenue Service reports the number of returns filed in each county in

each year with the Earned Income Credit as part of the Statistics of Income administrative

records of individual income tax returns (Forms 1040). We use data for the 2010-2016 tax years

(filed in 2011-2017). We adjust for county size by denominating the count of returns by

estimates of the working age (18-64) population from the Census Bureau, and multiply by 100 to

get the number of EITC returns per 100 working age adults. In our EITC regressions, we include

controls for the percent non-Hispanic black and the percent Hispanic in the county obtained from

the Census Bureau.

       For SNAP, we use data on the number of recipients by county from the US Department

of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service National Data Bank. These data are reported

biannually, in January and July, and we use the January counts for 2011-2017 to describe




                                                                                                 13
participation at the end of the prior year. Some states only report SNAP participation at the state

level, so we are unable to use county-level data for the states of Connecticut, Idaho, Maine,

Massachusetts, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New York, Oregon, Rhode

Island, Utah, Vermont, Washington, West Virginia, and Wyoming. We adjust for county size by

denominating the count of SNAP participants with total population estimates in each county

from the US Census Bureau, and multiply by 100 to get a SNAP participation rate per 100

residents. We include the same demographic controls as in the EITC regressions. As a

robustness check, we control for whether the county had a waiver of the time limits usually

applying to able-bodied adults without dependents in the SNAP program (ABAWD waiver). 6

       Health insurance coverage data at the county level are available from the Census

Bureau's Small Area Health Insurance Estimates (SAHIE) program, which produces estimates of

the fraction with and without health insurance coverage by income group at the county level. 7

The SAHIE estimates are model-based, incorporating information from the American

Community Survey, federal tax return data, data on Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program

caseloads, Medicaid and Children's Health Insurance Program caseloads, Census population

estimates, County Business Patterns, and the 2010 Census.

       We determine the noncategorical Medicaid income eligibility levels applying to all adults

following Medicaid expansion from a variety of sources. Prior to the ACA, parents could receive

Medicaid if their incomes were below the parental eligibility limit, and a very few states had

limited eligibility for non-parents. After the ACA-related Medicaid expansions, income limits



6
  The ABAWD variables are generated by triangulating data from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, state websites, and data generously
shared by Brian Stacy at the World Bank.
7
  While we would also like to examine Medicaid caseloads, unfortunately such data are not
publicly available at the county level.


                                                                                                 14
were raised for adults regardless of parental or disability status in a number of states. In our

empirical work, we focus on the maximum noncategorical income limit--the limit facing able-

bodied non-parents. Our primary sources for Medicaid income eligibility levels are reports

published by the Kaiser Family Foundation (Cohen Ross et al. 2009, Heberlein et al. 2011,

Heberlein et al. 2012, Heberlein et al. 2013, Brooks et al. 2015, Brooks et al. 2016, Kaiser

Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured 2013) and the Urban Institute's TRIM3 program

rules database supplemented by information from state plan amendments available from the

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and state websites.

       Our county level control variables include the share of the county population that is non-

Hispanic black and Hispanic from the Census Bureau. In robustness checks, we also control for

the unemployment rate, which we obtain from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area

Unemployment series. We determine which counties are contiguous using two files from the

Census Bureau, a 2015 county adjacency file, which lists all adjacent counties, regardless of type

of adjacency, and a county adjacency file from 1991 which gives the type of adjacency. We

adjust the 2015 county-pair list to keep only counties that share a common land border or that are

separated by a body of water but connected by a bridge or boat. 8

       Table 1A presents summary statistics for the overall samples for EITC (top panel) and

SNAP (bottom panel). The EITC data (which includes all states) indicate that on average there

are just over 14 returns claiming the EITC per 100 working age adults, although counties range

from 0 returns to over 51 per 100 adults. Medicaid eligibility expansion to non-parent, non-

disabled families was in effect in 32 percent of the county-years in the sample, and the mean




8
 We eliminate counties that meet at a corner only and counties that are separated by a body of
water and have no direct bridge or boat connection.


                                                                                                   15
noncategorical income limit (including zeros) was 42 percent of the poverty line. The SNAP

sample, which includes only 16,972 county-year observations due to missing data, has similar

summary statistics, although county-years in the SNAP sample were somewhat less likely to

have a Medicaid expansion and also had somewhat higher fractions of nonwhite populations.

       Table 1B shows both the all-county and contiguous-county samples for both the EITC

and SNAP data, and in addition shows the first year (2010) and last year (2016) separately. EITC

and SNAP participation are similar in the sample of all counties and in the contiguous counties

sample. The counties in the border sample have somewhat fewer Hispanic residents although

somewhat more non-Hispanic black residents.

       Between 2010 and 2016 the number of EITC returns increased while the SNAP

participation rate fell, consistent with the improving economy. In both EITC and SNAP data, the

border county sample is more likely to have expanded Medicaid, and as a result the average

noncategorical income limit is higher in the border county sample. Overall, the samples are fairly

similar in their summary statistics, but because there are differences, for all of our regression

analyses we estimate the model on the all-county sample and the contiguous county sample

without incorporating the within-pair controls to indicate when there are differences that may

arise from sample composition rather than specification.

       While the county border discontinuity approach has strong intuitive appeal since it

narrows the comparison to an arguably more similar counterfactual, it is important to

demonstrate that restricting to bordering county pairs improves the comparison between

expansion and non-expansion states. Various methods of examining the validity of border-pair

models have been suggested in the literature (see Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010, 2016),

Allegretto et al. (2013), and Neumark, Salas, and Wascher (2014)). In Table 2, we show that pre-




                                                                                                    16
ACA (2010-11) mean absolute differences in values of our EITC and SNAP outcomes and

covariates are smaller for contiguous pairs than they are for pairs formed by matching every

other county with each county in the data. This suggests that county pairs that border each other

are indeed more similar on observables--and therefore likely more similar on unobservables--

than randomly chosen county pairs. We therefore have more confidence in the county-border-

pair design than in a standard difference-in-difference design.

       As a descriptive exercise to illustrate the county-pair design used in our analysis, we

break the counties into two groups: those that ever expanded Medicaid and those that did not,

where "ever expanded" is defined as having a Medicaid eligibility limit above zero for non-

parents without disabilities at any point between 2010 and 2016. (Most expansions occurred in

2014 in line with the Affordable Care Act, but some states expanded earlier or later; a few had

noncategorical Medicaid eligibility before 2010.) We then run regressions of our dependent

variables of interest on the interaction of the "ever expanded" dummy with dummies for each

year, controlling for the main effects of each year as well as other controls used in the regression

analysis below. The resulting coefficients tell us about the mean difference between "ever

expanded" counties and "never expanded" counties in each year in an outcome of interest,

relative to the year 2010. For example, in the top panel of Figure 3, we show the results of this

exercise where the noncategorical Medicaid limit is the dependent variable (bars indicate 95

percent confidence intervals). As expected, the difference between expansion and non-expansion

counties starts to emerge in 2012 with early expansion and grows dramatically in 2014 when

most counties implemented their Medicaid expansion.

       In the bottom panel of Figure 3, we restrict to the border county sample and add controls

for border-pair*year fixed effects. In other words, the coefficient reflects the difference in the




                                                                                                     17
outcome variable for each "ever expansion" county relative to its adjacent "never expansion"

county. Here we again see evidence that income limits changed in "ever" counties relative to

their adjacent "never" counties in 2014, as expected.

       Figure 4 repeats these two descriptive exercises using the percent low-income uninsured

as a dependent variable. In both specifications, we see a substantial relative decline in

uninsurance starting in 2014 in "ever expanded" counties. Figure 4 shows no evidence of

differential trends between "ever expanded" and "never expanded" counties in uninsurance prior

to expansion.

       Figure 5 graphs the coefficients from similar regressions using EITC returns per 100

working-age adults as the dependent variable. The top panel indicates somewhat higher numbers

of EITC returns in "ever expanded" counties in the pre-period. Once we control for border-

pair*year dummies (shown in the bottom panel), this pre-ACA difference is largely eliminated.

Focusing on this border-pair specification, it appears that EITC returns increase around 2014 in

expansion counties relative to bordering counties, but the effects are not significant in each

separate year.

       Finally, we show the same graphical illustration for SNAP participation in Figure 6. In

the bottom panel of this figure, SNAP participation appears to increase in a relative sense around

2014 in expansion counties relative to their bordering counties, but then the two groups

converge. These estimates are noisy, however, and the specification does not account for when a

particular county experienced its expansion, nor does it account for differing levels of the

noncategorical income limit in effect in different states at different times. We next present our

results from analyses that take these differences into account.




                                                                                                    18
V. Results

A. Uninsurance

       Table 3 shows the effects of the ACA Medicaid expansions on uninsurance. Column 1

shows the analysis for the all-county sample with county fixed effects and year fixed effects,

using the standard differences-in-differences model with a continuous treatment variable shown

in equation (1), while column 2 restricts to contiguous county pairs with the same specification.

The difference between columns 1 and 2 thus reflects differences in the border counties sample

relative to the all counties sample. The results in column 1 suggest that moving from a

noncategorical income limit of 0% to 100% of the federal poverty level reduces uninsurance by

0.6 percentage points, while in column 2, the point estimate is larger in magnitude at -1.3.

Column 3 incorporates county-pair*year fixed effects as described in equation (2) above. The

county-pair approach suggests a reduction of uninsurance of about 1.6 percentage points for an

increase in the income limit from 0% to 100%. For context, the typical expansion moved from an

income limit of 0% to 138% of the poverty line, and the mean uninsurance rate in 2010 (prior to

the ACA) was 18.7 percent. Therefore, a typical expanding county reduced uninsurance by

about 2.2 p.p. relative to an adjacent non-expanding county, around 12% of the baseline

uninsurance level.

       Columns 4 through 6 of Table 3 repeat the exercise examining the percent of the

population with family incomes under 250 percent of the federal poverty level that is uninsured

as the outcome. The effects of the Medicaid expansion are concentrated in this lower-income

group, so it is not surprising that the coefficients are larger in magnitude. The preferred

specification in column 6, which includes county-pair*year fixed effects, shows that increasing

the Medicaid income limit from 0 to 100% of the poverty line reduced uninsurance 2.8




                                                                                                 19
percentage points. The estimate implies that expansion counties moving from 0 to 138% of the

poverty line would have 3.8 p.p. lower uninsurance in the low-income group than bordering

counties, again a 12 percent reduction relative to the baseline of 29.5 percent uninsurance in

2010. The findings corroborate the findings of prior research using state differences-in-

differences documenting that the ACA Medicaid expansions reduced uninsurance.

B. Earned Income Tax Credit

       Our results for estimation of equations (1) and (2) for tax returns with an EITC per 100

working age adults are shown in Table 4. The point estimates are positive and significant in the

standard difference-in-differences specifications in columns 1 (all counties) and column 2

(contiguous counties), with estimated coefficients that suggest an increase of 0.17 percentage

points. Our preferred estimate in column 3 using the county-pair identification strategy is

roughly half the magnitude and is no longer statistically different from zero. The point estimate

implies an effect size of 0.09 percentage points, suggesting that an increase in the Medicaid

income limit from 0 to 138 percent is associated with an increase of 0.12 EITC returns per 100

working-age adults. Since the mean in 2010 was roughly 14 EITC returns per 100 working-age

adults, this point estimate implies that the increase was quite small, approximately 1 percent of

the baseline level. For comparison, Kopczuk and Pop-Eleches (2007) estimate that state

electronic filing programs increased EITC returns by around 10 percent among the target income

group. Overall, our results suggest that the expansion of Medicaid eligibility under the ACA

may have led to a small increase in EITC filing, but the preferred specification does not show a

statistically significant relationship. The point estimate is about half of the size of that suggested

by the standard difference-in-differences approach, which may be biased upward by preexisting

differential trends in EITC returns between expansion and nonexpansion counties.




                                                                                                    20
C. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program

        Next, we turn to our results for SNAP (Table 5). These results rely on a smaller sample

because a number of states do not report county-level SNAP data. We find statistically

significant and positive estimates for the effect of the Medicaid noncategorical income limit on

SNAP participation per 100 population. The coefficient of 0.43 on our preferred specification

(column 3) indicates that an increase in the Medicaid noncategorical income limit from 0 to

138% of the poverty level led to a change of 0.6 additional SNAP participants per 100 people, a

4 percent increase relative to the mean rate of 15 percent SNAP participation. The effect is

statistically significant. The estimates are about one-quarter of the effect size on uninsurance.

D. State-Level Analyses

        For comparison to existing research, we show results for the state-level approach that is

more common in the literature. Panel A of Table 6 shows this analysis for the EITC. The first

two columns repeat results from Table 4 using a standard county differences-in-differences and

county-border pair design. Columns (3) and (4) repeat the analysis at the state level, with

column (4) incorporating state border pair controls. The state difference-in-difference estimate in

column (3) is statistically significant and is similar to the estimate from the county data using

state difference-in-difference variation, as expected. When state border pairs are introduced,

there is no longer a statistically significant relationship between ACA Medicaid expansions and

EITC.

        Panel B of Table 6 contains the results for SNAP. Additional states are available

because some states provide state level but not county level information, so results are shown for

two different groups of states ­ those with state level data and those that report SNAP




                                                                                                    21
information at the county level. The coefficients are fairly similar in magnitude in all

specifications and marginally significant in three of the four state level models.

       In sum, the key SNAP results­that Medicaid expansions are associated with an increase

in SNAP­are in evidence regardless of whether a county-border pair, a state border-pair, or a

state differences-in-differences approach is used. For the EITC, the state border pair approach

yields coefficients that are fairly similar to the county border pair approach, and these estimates

are substantially smaller in magnitude than the standard differences-in-differences at both the

state and the county level. This consistency across specifications may well be sensitive to the

particular outcome of interest, however, and we believe the county border-pair approach

generally offers a more reliable estimate of the effect of Medicaid expansions.

E. Robustness

       Appendix Tables 1 and 2 present results from several robustness tests using our border-

pair*year specification. For the EITC (Appendix Table 1), we add controls for the percent of the

population that is 65 and older (column 2) and the (potentially endogenous) unemployment rate

(column 3). Our main coefficient of interest is reduced slightly with the addition of these

controls. In columns 4 through 6, we present the same regressions, but with a binary

"expansion" variable instead of our continuous noncategorical Medicaid limit. We consider a

county to have expanded in a given year if it has a noncategorical Medicaid limit greater than

zero. Results are similar with this alternate specification.

       Robustness checks for SNAP are in Appendix Table 2. The models are similar to the

EITC regressions in Appendix Table 1, except that columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 also control for the

presence of an ABAWD waiver in the county which relaxed work requirements for SNAP. The




                                                                                                  22
results consistently point to a positive relationship between Medicaid expansion and SNAP

participation.



VI. Mechanisms

       Though county-level administrative data has the advantage of completeness and

accuracy, it does not allow us to investigate the mechanisms underlying increased safety net

participation. It also allows for only basic demographic controls, and does not allow

investigation of which demographic groups are particularly affected. We recently received

permission from the U.S. Census Bureau to use individual-level data with county identifiers in

the American Community Survey (ACS) to investigate heterogeneity in participation responses.

Unfortunately, we have not yet been able to access these data pending administrative delays.

Instead, we use the public-use IPUMS-ACS data set (Ruggles et al. 2019), focusing on public-

use microdata areas (PUMAs) (areas of 100,000 people or more that do not cross state lines) as a

preliminary step towards understanding mechanisms. We identify contiguous PUMAs and

implement a preliminary set of analyses with PUMA-pair-year fixed effects, analogous to what

we did with counties. Unfortunately, EITC receipt is not asked in the ACS, so we are only able

to examine mechanisms affecting EITC eligibility using this approach. 9

       Our ACS analysis focuses on adults ages 25 to 64. We run a series of regressions for all

adults in border PUMAs, and then split the sample by marital and parental status. Parents are

defined as those with a biological, step, or adoptive child under 19 in the home. As in the county




9
  We attempted to use the measure of knowledge about the EITC in the county developed by
Chetty, Friedman, and Saez (2013) to examine whether there were differential responses to
Medicaid expansion in counties with high versus low levels of knowledge, but the results were
statistically inconclusive.


                                                                                                 23
pair analysis, we examine the effect of a change in the noncategorical Medicaid income limit.

We include indicator controls for non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, female, presence of children

under 19, single parent, education high school, education some college, education college grad,

and marital status. We also control for age and age squared.

       Results for the individual analysis using PUMA-pairs are shown in Tables 7 and 8. Each

coefficient represents the key estimate on the non-categorical income limit from a different

regression. As expected, Table 7 shows meaningful increases in health insurance for all

demographic groups in expansion PUMAs relative to those in adjacent non-expansion PUMAs.

Insurance effects are larger for the sub-sample under 130 percent of the poverty line. These

increases in insurance are driven by increases in public health insurance in expansion PUMAs,

partially offset by reductions in private insurance (results not shown).

       The preliminary ACS results in Table 7 also show impacts on SNAP participation,

consistent with the results from the analysis of county administrative data. The SNAP effect is

evident across demographic groups, and is somewhat larger under 130 percent of the poverty line

(the SNAP income eligibility threshold) for most groups, indicating that changes in income

eligibility alone are not driving the results. We also see that Medicaid expansion is associated

with an increase in those who participate in both Medicaid and SNAP, and a decline in those

who participate in SNAP without Medicaid. The numbers imply that about a quarter of those

induced to obtain public insurance as the result of ACA expansions are also induced to

participate in SNAP when they otherwise would not have done so.

       To investigate whether a change in eligibility (perhaps arising from a Medicaid-induced

change in labor supply) could be causing the increased rate of SNAP participation, we examine

hours worked, earnings, income under 130 percent of the poverty line and measures of labor




                                                                                                   24
force participation in Table 8. These results suggest no overall change in SNAP eligibility due to

a labor supply response to Medicaid expansion. This finding is consistent with work that has

been done on this question using standard state difference-in-differences methods (Gooptu et al.

2016, Kaestner et al. 2017, Frisvold and Jung 2018, Leung and Mas 2018). However, for single

parents, there does appear to be a small reduction in the probability of living below the SNAP

eligibility limit of 130 percent FPL, whereas the opposite is true for married parents. The

apparent increase in SNAP eligibility for married parents does not seem to be accompanied by

changes in basic measures of labor supply such as hours worked or earnings, suggesting it could

be a statistical fluke. In any case, it is not large enough to fully explain the change in SNAP

participation associated with Medicaid expansion. We also find a reduction in the probability of

having business income and a corresponding increase (though not a statistically significant one)

in the probability of wage income for single non-parents. Overall, we conclude that take-up

factors such as knowledge and lower transaction costs are the most likely explanations for the

link between Medicaid and SNAP utilization.

       The ACS does not allow us to look at EITC utilization directly. Instead, we impute EITC

eligibility based on earnings, income, age, and family structure. There is suggestive evidence that

EITC eligibility increases overall, albeit to a very small degree, as shown in Table 7. Again,

Table 8 does not suggest overall labor supply responses underlying this change, but does show

some entry into the labor market among single parents. These changes, though quite small in

magnitude, are consistent with a model of labor supply responses to increased Medicaid income

limits among single parents generating spillover effects onto EITC eligibility.

       Table 7 also looks at participation in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families

(TANF) cash welfare program, an outcome for which we are unable to obtain county-level




                                                                                                  25
administrative data. These preliminary results suggest a higher rate of TANF participation

among single parents in expansion PUMAs. In conjunction with the other ACS evidence, one

possible explanation is that Medicaid-induced labor market entry allows single parents to meet

TANF work requirements..

       In sum, the preliminary investigation of mechanisms suggests at most a small labor

supply response to Medicaid expansions, with observed effects being largely limited to small

increases in labor supply among single parents. Information or transaction costs are likely the

primary explanation for increased levels of participation in the SNAP program. In future work

we will use restricted access ACS data with county identifiers to better understand the

mechanisms underlying our main results.



VII. Conclusion

       Our results suggest that the Medicaid expansion does affect safety net participation in

counties that expanded relative to nearby counties that did not expand. We find suggestive

evidence of small increases in EITC receipt, although these effects are not statistically significant

in the preferred specification. As expanding Medicaid eligibility could theoretically have positive

or negative impacts on levels of EITC participation, these increases represent a net effect, with

the factors leading to greater EITC receipt outweighing the factors leading to lower EITC

receipt. 10 Our preliminary results using the ACS suggest a slight boost to single parent labor

supply on the extensive margin, which could boost EITC participation.




10
 Note that if Medicaid expansions had general equilibrium impacts on a local area's labor
market conditions, those effects would be absorbed by the county-pair*year effects.


                                                                                                    26
       We find increases in SNAP participation in counties that expanded relative to

neighboring counties that did not, with about a quarter of those gaining public insurance due to

the Medicaid expansion also induced to participate in SNAP. Our preliminary analysis using the

American Community Survey suggests that information/transaction costs may be the main

explanation for the observed association between Medicaid and SNAP. It is likely that the

process of enrolling in Medicaid facilitates SNAP enrollment in some way.

       Regardless of the mechanism, the finding that Medicaid expansions promote SNAP and

perhaps EITC participation suggests the federal costs associated with the ACA may be greater

than the direct costs of the program itself. Similarly, states considering Medicaid expansions

might want to consider additional inflows of federal SNAP and EITC dollars as a benefit of

making Medicaid income eligibility limits more generous.




                                                                                                   27
VIII. References

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2013. "Credible Research
Designs for Minimum Wage Studies." IZA Discussion Paper No. 7638.

Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman. 2014. "The Impact of
Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment." American Economic Review 104(5):322-328.

Burney, Shaheer, Rebecca Boehm, and Rigoberto Lopez. 2018. "The Impact of the 2014
Medicaid Expansion on SNAP Participation and Benefits," manuscript prepared for presentation
at the 2018 Agricultural and Applied Economics Association Annual Meeting.

Brooks, Tricia, Joe Touschner, Samantha Artiga, Jessica Stephens, and Alexandra Gates.
2015. "Modern Era Medicaid: Findings from a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment,
Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP as of January 2015." Kaiser
Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8681.

Brooks, Tricia, Sean Miskell, Samantha Artiga, Elizabeth Cornachione, and Alexandra Gates.
2016. "Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility, Enrollment, Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies as of
January 2016: Findings from a 50-State Survey." Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the
Uninsured Policy Brief #8824.

Chatterji, Pinka, Xiangshi Liu, and Baris K. Yörük. 2019. The Effects of the 2010 Affordable
Care Act Dependent Care Provision on Family Structure and Public Program Participation
Among Young Adults." Review of the Economics of the Household 17:1133­1161.

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. "Using Differences in Knowledge
Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings," American Economic
Review 103(7): 2683-2721.

Cohen Ross, Donna, Marian Jarlenski, Samantha Artiga, and Caryn Marks. 2009. "A Foundation
for Health Reform: Findings of a 50 State Survey of Eligibility Rules, Enrollment and Renewal
Procedures, and Cost-Sharing Practices in Medicaid and CHIP for Children and Parents During
2009." Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8028.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
2017. "Early Impacts of the Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid
Expansion and Non-Expansion States." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36(1): 178­
210.

Cunnyngham, Karen E. 2012. "Reaching Those in Need: State Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program Participation Rates in 2010." Alexandria, VA: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, February. https://fns-
prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/ops/Reaching2010.pdf




                                                                                               28
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Minimum Wage Effects Across
State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." Review of Economics and Statistics
92(4): 945-964.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester and Michael Reich. 2016. "Minimum Wage Shocks,
Employment Flows, and Labor Market Frictions." Journal of Labor Economics 34(3): 663-704.

Finkelstein, Amy, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2018. "Take-Up and Targeting: Experimental
Evidence from SNAP." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24652.

Frisvold, David E., and Younsoo Jung. 2018. "The impact of expanding Medicaid on health
insurance coverage and labor market outcomes." International Journal of Health Economics and
Management 18 (2): 99-121.

Goodman, Lucas. 2017. "The Effect of the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansion on
Migration." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36(1): 211-238.

Gooptu, Angshuman, Asako S. Moriya, Kosali I. Simon, and Benjamin D. Sommers. 2016.
"Medicaid Expansion Did Not Result In Significant Employment Changes Or Job Reductions In
2014." Health Affairs 35 (1): 111-118.

Heberlein, Martha, Tricia Brooks, Jocelyn Guyer, Samantha Artiga, and Jessica Stephens. 2011.
"Holding Steady, Looking Ahead: Annual Findings of a 50-State Survey of Eligibility Rules,
Enrollment and Renewal Procedures, and Cost-Sharing Practices in Medicaid and CHIP, 2010-
2011." Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8130.

Heberlein, Martha, Tricia Brooks, Jocelyn Guyer, Samantha Artiga, and Jessica Stephens. 2012.
"Performing Under Pressure: Annual Findings of a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment,
Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2011-2012." Kaiser Commission on
Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8272.

Heberlein, Martha, Tricia Brooks, Joan Alker, Samantha Artiga and Jessica Stephens. 2013.
"Getting into Gear for 2014: Findings from a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment,
Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2012­2013." Kaiser Commission
on Medicaid and the Uninsured Policy Brief #8401.

Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2016. "US Food and Nutrition Programs."
In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, volume 1, Robert
Moffitt, ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 219-301.

Internal Revenue Service. 2013. "Revenue Procedure 2013-35." https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
drop/rp-13-35.pdf.

_____. 2014. "Publication 501: Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information."
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/p501--2014.pdf




                                                                                            29
_____ . 2018. "2017 EITC Income Limits, Maximum Credit Amounts and Tax Law Updates."
https://www.irs.gov/credits-deductions/individuals/earned-income-tax-credit/eitc-income-limits-
maximum-credit-amounts.

_____. 2019. "EITC Awareness Day." https://www.eitc.irs.gov/partner-toolkit/eitc-awareness-
day/eitc-awareness-day-2

Jones, Maggie R. 2014. "Changes in EITC Eligibility and Participation, 2005­2009." CARRA
Working Paper #2014-04. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau, July.
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2014/adrm/carra-wp-2014-
04.pdf.

Kaestner, Robert, Bowen Garrett, Jiajia Chen, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Caitlyn Fleming. 2017.
"Effects of ACA Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply." Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 36(3): 608-642.

Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. 2013. "A Look at Section 1115 Medicaid
Demonstration Waivers Under the ACA: A Focus on Childless Adults." Issue Brief.
https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/8499-a-look-at-section-1115-
medicaid-demonstration-waivers.pdf

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. 2007. "Electronic Filing, Tax Preparers, and
Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit." Journal of Public Economics 91: 1351-1367.

Leung, Pauline, and Alexandre Mas. 2018. "Employment Effects of the Affordable Care Act
Medicaid Expansions." Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 57 (2): 206-234.

National Conference of State Legislatures. 2018. "Tax Credits for Working Families: Earned
Income Tax Credit (EITC)." http://www.ncsl.org/research/labor-and-employment/earned-
income-tax-credits-for-working-families.aspx

Neumark, David, J. M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014. "Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?" Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 67(Supplement):608-648.

Nichols, Austin and Jesse Rothstein. 2016. "The Earned Income Tax Credit." In Economics of
Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, volume 1, Robert Moffitt, ed., Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 137-218.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and
Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0

Schmidt, Lucie, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson. 2019. "The Impact of the ACA
Medicaid Expansion on Disability Program Applications." NBER Working Paper No. 26192.




                                                                                               30
Schwartz, Aaron and Benjamin D. Sommers. 2014. "Moving for Medicaid? Recent Eligibility
Expansions Did Not Induce Migration From Other States." Health Affairs 33(1):88-94.




                                                                                          31
Figure 1a




            32
Figure 1b




            33
     Figure 2: Contiguous Border County Pairs in the US with a Medicaid Expansion
                                Differential, April 2014




Source: Medicaid expansion status determined from data on state actions collected by the Kaiser
Family Foundation.




                                                                                            34
Figure 3

                                                                                   Difference in Non-Categorical Income Limit
                                                                                in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
                                        Medicaid Non-Categorical Income Limit
     Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                                All Counties Controlling for Year Fixed Effects, County FE, and Controls
                                              -.5 0       .5   1 1.5




                                                                                      everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16
  on Medicaid Non-Categorical IncomeonLimit




                                                                                   Contig Counties Controlling for County Pair-Year FE and Controls
           -.5 0       .5   1 1.5




                                                                                      everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16




Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that include county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black and fraction Hispanic. The top panel includes year fixed effects and
the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects. EverexpYY refers to the coefficient
on a dummy for whether county ever expanded interacted with a year indicator for year YY.




                                                                                                                                                              35
Figure 4

                                                                              Difference in Low-Income Uninsurance
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group
  on Low Income Percent Uninsured on Low Income Percent Uninsured




                                                                          All Counties Controlling for Year Fixed Effects, County FE, and Controls
                                           -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2




                                                                                everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                             Contig Counties Controlling for County Pair-Year FE and Controls
        -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2




                                                                                everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16




Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that includes county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black and fraction Hispanic. In each graph the top panel includes year fixed
effects and the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects. EverexpYY refers to the
coefficient on a dummy for whether county ever expanded interacted with a year indicator for
year YY.




                                                                                                                                                        36
Figure 5

                                                                                Difference in EITC Returns per 100
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                          All Counties Controlling for Year Fixed Effects, County FE, and Controls
                                          on EITC Returns per 100
                                           -.5     0      .5    1




                                                                                everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                                 Contig Controlling for County Pair-Year FE and Controls
       on EITC Returns per 100
        -.5     0      .5    1




                                                                                everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16




Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that includes county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black and fraction Hispanic. In each graph the top panel includes year fixed
effects and the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects. EverexpYY refers to the
coefficient on a dummy for whether county ever expanded interacted with a year indicator for
year YY.




                                                                                                                                                        37
Figure 6

                                                                                   Difference in SNAP per 100
                                                                          in Expansion vs Non-Expansion Group By Year
  Effect of Being in Expansion Group Effect of Being in Expansion Group




                                                                            All Counties Controlling for Year FE, County FE, and Controls
                                            -2 -1 0 1 2 3
                                                on SNAP Rate




                                                                             everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16



                                                                              Contig Controlling for County Pair-Year FE and Controls
         -2 -1 0 1 2 3
            on SNAP per 100




                                                                             everexp11   everexp12   everexp13   everexp14   everexp15   everexp16




Note: Coefficients from regressions on 2010-2016 data that includes county fixed effects and
controls for fraction black and fraction Hispanic. In each graph the top panel includes year fixed
effects and the bottom panel includes county pair by year fixed effects. EverexpYY refers to the
coefficient on a dummy for whether county ever expanded interacted with a year indicator for
year YY.




                                                                                                                                                     38
     Table 1A: Summary Statistics, All Counties EITC and SNAP Samples 2010-2016

 Variable                                        Mean         Standard    Min     Max
                                                              Deviation

Panel A: EITC Sample, weighted by
working-age population (N=21,623)
 EITC returns per 100 working age adults         14.229        4.591      0.0     51.6
 Percent Uninsured                               14.686        6.166      2.1     41.4
 Percent Low-Income Uninsured                    23.350        8.219      4.5     51.2
 ACA Medicaid expansion (Y/N)                     0.368        0.482      0.0      1.0
 Medicaid non-categorical income limit
 (relative to the poverty line)                   0.477         0.655     0.0      2.2
 Percent non-Hispanic black                      13.455        12.902     0.0     86.0
 Percent Hispanic                                17.228        16.752     0.0     96.3

 Panel B: SNAP Sample, weighted by total
 population (N=16,965)
 SNAP participation rate                         14.374        6.514      0.0     154.6
 Percent Uninsured                               15.557        6.180      2.9      41.4
 Percent Low-Income Uninsured                    24.503        8.059      6.2      51.2
 ACA Medicaid expansion (Y/N)                     0.306        0.461      0.0       1.0
 Medicaid non-categorical income limit
 (relative to the poverty line)                   0.404         0.634     0.0      2.2
 Percent non-Hispanic black                      14.363        13.410     0.0     86.0
 Percent Hispanic                                18.416        17.870     0.2     96.3
Notes: Observations are county-years. See text for sources.




                                                                                    39
                     Table 1B: Weighted Means by Sub-Sample and Year
Sample and Year                         All Counties   Border     All Counties    Border
                                                      Counties                   Counties
                                            EITC        EITC         SNAP         SNAP
                                          Sample       Sample        Sample      Sample
 Panel A: 2010 data
EITC returns per 100 working age adult
or SNAP participation rate                   12.959      12.551        14.170      14.565
Fraction Uninsured                           17.685      15.974        18.673      17.268
Fraction Low-Income Uninsured                28.257      26.232        29.528      27.741
ACA Medicaid expansion (Y/N)                  0.125       0.157         0.032       0.032
Medicaid non-parent income limit (relat
to the poverty line)                          0.128        0.62         0.038       0.043
Percent non-Hispanic black                   13.278      13.734        14.167      15.649
Percent Hispanic                             16.454      12.750        17.640      13.794
Observations                                  3089        2390          2466        1781
Unique counties                               3089        1138          2466         859
 Panel B: 2016 data
EITC returns per 100 working age adult
or SNAP participation rate                   14.235      13.919        13.254      13.929
Fraction Uninsured                            9.965       8.903        10.675       9.699
Fraction Low-Income Uninsured                15.960      14.613        16.947      15.592
ACA Medicaid expansion (Y/N)                  0.618       0.694         0.577       0.673
Medicaid non-parent income limit (relat
to the poverty line)                          0.902       1.005         0.804       0.944
Percent non-Hispanic black                   13.163      14.076        14.535      16.008
Percent Hispanic                             18.000      14.249        19.169      15.592
Observations                                  3089        2390          2399        1713
Unique counties                               3089        1138          2399         833




                                                                                   40
Table 2: Mean Absolute Difference Between Counties in All Pairs and Contiguous Border
                            Pairs Pre-ACA, EITC Sample

Mean Absolute Difference            All Pairs      Contiguous Border        Difference
Between Counties                                         Pairs

EITC returns per 100               5.343***             3.124***            -2.219***
Working Age Adults                  (0.101)              (0.099)              (0.091)

Non-categorical                    0.100***             0.091***              -0.009
Income Limit                        (0.010)              (0.013)              (0.009)

Unemployment rate                  3.465***             1.881***            -1.585***
                                    (0.046)              (0.048)              (0.058)

Percent in poverty                 6.852***             4.287***            -2.566***
                                    (0.114)              (0.129)              (0.125)

Percent non-Hispanic black        12.770***             4.986***            -7.787***
                                   (0.367)               (0.252)              (0.287)

Percent Hispanic                   9.627***             4.163***            -5.465***
                                    (0.313)              (0.220)              (0.256)

The first column shows the mean absolute difference between pairs formed by matching each
county in the 2010 contiguous county border sample with all possible other counties. The second
column shows the mean absolute difference in the values of the variables between counties in a
contiguous pair in the 2010 data. The symbol *** indicates that the mean absolute difference
within county pairs is different from 0 at p<0.01 in columns (1) and (2). The third column
represents the difference between columns (1) and (2), and *** indicates the difference between
columns (1) and (2) is statistically different from 0 at p<0.01.




                                                                                            41
                            Table 3: Effects of ACA Medicaid Income Limits
                           on Percent Uninsured and Low Income Uninsured

                           (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)
                      All Counties     Contig        Contig      All Counties     Contig         Contig
                        Sample        Counties      Counties       Sample        Counties       Counties
                                      Sample        Sample                       Sample         Sample

                                                                   Percent    Percent    Percent
                        Percent       Percent        Percent     Low-Income Low-Income Low-Income
                       Uninsured     Uninsured      Uninsured     Uninsured  Uninsured  Uninsured

Non-categorical        -0.566**      -1.270***      -1.620***     -1.475***      -2.382***     -2.778***
Income Limit            (0.277)        (0.446)        (0.326)       (0.454)        (0.608)       (0.591)
% Non-Hispanic          0.889*         0.631*       0.341***         0.476          0.109        -0.390
black                   (0.451)        (0.365)        (0.127)       (0.666)        (0.439)       (0.282)
% Hispanic              -0.441         -0.154         -0.058        -0.319         -0.225         0.317
                        (0.378)        (0.748)        (0.269)       (0.522)        (0.861)       (0.507)

Observations            21,623         16,730        16,730         21,623        16,730         16,730
R-squared                0.959          0.952         0.993          0.955         0.952          0.989
County FE                YES            YES           YES            YES           YES            YES
Year FE                  YES            YES            NO            YES           YES             NO
County Pair*Year FE       NO             NO           YES             NO            NO            YES

      Dependent variable is the percent of individuals overall or percent of individuals with family
      incomes under 250% of poverty uninsured in a county from the Small Area Health Insurance
      Estimates 2010-2016. EITC analysis sample is used and excludes Republic County, Kansas.
      Robust standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                 42
                      Table 4: Effects of ACA Medicaid Income Limits
                       on EITC Returns per 100 Working Age Adults

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)
                                     All Counties       Contig         Contig
                                       Sample          Counties       Counties
                                                       Sample         Sample

              Non-categorical           0.168**       0.171***          0.088
              Income Limit              (0.081)        (0.051)         (0.053)
              % Non-Hispanic             0.088        0.216***        0.266***
              black                     (0.107)        (0.080)         (0.062)
              % Hispanic               0.163***        0.163*          0.154*
                                        (0.053)        (0.084)         (0.084)

              Observations              21,623          16,730         16,730
              R-squared                  0.990           0.993          0.998
              County FE                  YES             YES            YES
              Year FE                    YES             YES             NO
              County Pair*Year FE         NO              NO            YES

Dependent variable is the number of EITC returns*100 in a county divided by number of working-
age adults (ages 20-64) in the county. Republic County, Kansas does not appear in the Statistics
of Income county data. Estimates are weighted by working-age population. Robust standard errors
clustered on state in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                             43
                       Table 5: Effects of ACA Medicaid Income Limits
                            on SNAP Participants per 100 People

                                             (1)           (2)            (3)
                                        All Counties      Contig         Contig
                                          Sample         Counties       Counties
                                                         Sample         Sample

               Non-categorical             0.378           0.510*        0.433**
               Income Limit               (0.255)         (0.282)        (0.189)
               % Non-Hispanic              0.006          0.471**       0.776***
               black                      (0.216)         (0.204)        (0.230)
               % Hispanic                0.665***        1.030***         0.453
                                          (0.181)         (0.220)        (0.372)

               Observations                16,965         12,197         12,197
               R-squared                    0.948          0.962          0.990
               County FE                    YES            YES            YES
               Year FE                      YES            YES             NO
               County Pair*Year FE           NO             NO            YES

Dependent variable is the number of SNAP participants*100 in a county divided by county
population. A number of states do not report county level SNAP data and are excluded from the
sample; see text for details. In columns (4) and (5) sample is split based on the 2010 percentage of
low-income individuals that were uninsured. Estimates are weighted by population. Robust
standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                 44
                              Table 6: State-Level and County-Level Analyses of EITC and SNAP

                                       (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)                 (5)            (6)
                                      All           Contig            All         Contig         SNAP County  SNAP
                                    Counties       Counties          States        States          Reporter   County
                                    Sample         Sample           Sample        Sample             All     Reporter
                                                                                                    States    Contig
                                                                                                   Sample      States
                                                                                                              Sample
                        Panel A. Effect of Non-parent Income Limit on EITC Returns per 100 Working-Age Adults

         Non-categorical            0.168**          0.088          0.194**        0.043
         Income Limit               (0.081)         (0.053)         (0.095)       (0.056)

         Observations                21,623         16,730            343          1,498

                           Panel B. Effect of Income Limit for Non-parents on SNAP Participants per 100 People

         Non-categorical             0.378         0.433**          0.518*        0.380*             0.573*          0.311
         Income Limit               (0.255)        (0.189)          (0.268)       (0.201)            (0.301)        (0.289)

         Observations                16,965         12,197            342          1,496               231           1,022

         County or State FE           YES            YES             YES           YES                YES            YES
         Year FE                      YES            NO              YES           NO                 YES            NO
         Pair*Year FE                 NO             YES             NO            YES                NO             YES

Each cell represents the coefficient on the non-categorical Medicaid income limit from a separate regression. Dependent variable is the
number of EITC returns*100 divided by working-age adults or SNAP participants*100 divided by population. EITC state regressions
include contiguous 48 states plus D.C.; some state-years are missing. SNAP "county reporter" state regressions further exclude 14 states
that do not report county-level SNAP data. Race/ethnicity controls included. Estimates are weighted by working-age population or
population. Robust standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                                                                                                     45
                                       Table 7: Individual-Level Analysis using PUMA-pair design
                Effect of Non-Categorical Income Limit on Health Insurance, SNAP, Imputed EITC Eligibility, and TANF
                                                         (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                         All         Single Non-    Married Non-       Single     Married  Parents
                                                                        parents        Parents        Parents
                                 Number of Obs       20,745,958       6,306,487      7,070,177      1,452,034        5,917,260
 Any Health Ins                                      0.0199***        0.0329***      0.0087***      0.0284***        0.0127***
                                                       (0.003)          (0.004)        (0.002)        (0.006)          (0.004)

 Any Health Ins                                               0.0644***            0.0705***           0.0778***           0.0383***            0.0616***
 Sample <130% Pov                                               (0.007)              (0.007)             (0.009)             (0.010)              (0.014)

 Any SNAP in HH                                               0.0085***            0.0124***           0.0055***            0.0093**            0.0058**
                                                                (0.002)              (0.003)             (0.001)             (0.005)             (0.002)

 Any SNAP in HH                                               0.0165***            0.0161**            0.0242***             0.0078              0.0198*
 Sample < 130% Pov                                              (0.005)             (0.007)              (0.007)             (0.006)             (0.012)

 Public Health Ins and SNAP                                   0.0161***            0.0224***           0.0081***           0.0277***            0.0131***
                                                                (0.002)              (0.003)             (0.001)             (0.006)              (0.002)

 Public Health Ins and No SNAP                                0.0135***            0.0221***           0.0045***           0.0175***            0.0114***
                                                                (0.002)              (0.003)             (0.001)             (0.005)              (0.002)

 SNAP and No Public Health Ins                                -0.0076***          -0.0100***           -0.0025***          -0.0184***          -0.0073***
                                                                (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.001)             (0.006)             (0.003)

 Imputed EITC Eligibility                                      0.0019**             0.0007              0.0020**             0.0014               0.0034
                                                                (0.001)             (0.001)              (0.001)             (0.003)              (0.002)

 Any TANF Income                                               0.0013**             0.0013               0.0005             0.0069**              0.0005
                                                                (0.001)             (0.001)              (0.000)             (0.003)              (0.000)
Sample is individual citizens ages 25 to 64 in contiguous PUMA pairs from 2011-2017 American Community Survey. Each cell is a coefficient on the state non-
categorical income limit for the year prior to survey year from a separate regression. Analyses include PUMA fixed effects, PUMA-pair-year fixed effects, and
controls for non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, female, presence of children under 19, single parent, education high school, education some college, education college
grad, age, age squared, and marital status. Parental status defined by whether a parent reports a child in the household under 19 is their own biological, step, or
adoptive child. Robust standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                                                                                                                               46
                                         Table 8: Individual-Level Analysis using PUMA-pair design
                                    Effect of Non-Categorical Income Limit on Income and Labor Supply
                                                               (1)                (2)                  (3)                  (4)            (5)
                                                               All            Single Non-         Married Non-                       Married Parents
                                                                                                                           Single
                                                                                parents             Parents
                                                                                                                          Parents
                                    Number of Obs         20,745,958           6,306,487            7,070,177            1,452,034     5,917,260

 Under 130% Poverty                                          0.0014              -0.0001             0.0018              -0.0058*       0.0043**
                                                             (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)              (0.003)        (0.002)

 Any Earnings                                                0.0005              0.0011              -0.0003              0.0045*       -0.0003
 (for couple if married)                                     (0.001)             (0.002)             (0.001)              (0.003)       (0.001)

 Any Wage Income                                             0.0011              0.0028              -0.0004             0.0081***      -0.0012
 (for couple if married)                                     (0.001)             (0.002)             (0.001)               (0.003)      (0.001)

 Any Business Income                                        -0.0005            -0.0025***            0.0004               -0.0026        0.0021
 (for couple if married)                                    (0.001)              (0.001)             (0.002)              (0.002)        (0.002)

 Number Earners                                              0.0026              0.0011              0.0047               0.0045*        0.0014
 (for couple if married)                                     (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.004)              (0.003)        (0.003)

 Log (Couple Real                                           -0.0050              -0.0031             -0.0031              -0.0058       -0.0064
 Combined Earnings)                                         (0.003)              (0.004)             (0.005)              (0.008)       (0.006)

 Any Earnings                                                0.0015              0.0011              0.0020               0.0045*        0.0004
 (for individual)                                            (0.001)             (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.003)        (0.002)

 Any Hours                                                   0.0016              0.0013              0.0019               0.0048*        0.0005
 (for individual)                                            (0.001)             (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.003)        (0.002)

 At Least 35 Hours                                          -0.0003              0.0014              -0.0001              -0.0001       -0.0023
 (for individual)                                           (0.001)              (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.003)       (0.003)
Notes: See notes to Table 7. Robust standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                                                                                                                       47
                                                Appendix Table 1: EITC Robustness

                              (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
                             EITC               EITC               EITC              EITC               EITC               EITC
                            Returns            Returns            Returns           Returns            Returns            Returns
                            Per 100            Per 100            Per 100           Per 100            Per 100            Per 100

                            Minimal           Expanded            Unemp             Minimal           Expanded            Unemp
                            Controls          Controls            Control           Controls          Controls            Control
                         (from Table 4)
Non-categorical               0.088             0.071              0.068
Income Limit                 (0.053)           (0.052)            (0.052)
Expansion Dummy                                                                       0.050             0.035              0.031
                                                                                     (0.079)           (0.075)            (0.075)
% non-Hispanic             0.266***           0.285***           0.294***           0.271***          0.289***           0.299***
Black                       (0.062)            (0.052)            (0.052)            (0.064)           (0.053)            (0.052)
% Hispanic                  0.154*            0.248***           0.242***            0.165*           0.260***           0.254***
                            (0.084)            (0.074)            (0.074)            (0.086)           (0.076)            (0.077)
% Elderly                                     0.271***           0.271***                             0.275***           0.275***
                                               (0.055)            (0.056)                              (0.055)            (0.056)
Unemployment                                                      -0.044*                                                 -0.045*
Rate                                                              (0.025)                                                 (0.025)

 Observations              16,730             16,730             16,730             16,730             16,730              16,730
 R-squared                  0.998              0.998              0.998              0.998              0.998               0.998
 County FE                   YES               YES                 YES               YES                YES                 YES
 County Pair*Year FE         YES               YES                 YES               YES                YES                 YES
Estimates are weighted by working age population or total population. Robust standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                      48
                                               Appendix Table 2: SNAP Robustness

                               (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
                             SNAP              SNAP               SNAP               SNAP               SNAP              SNAP
                          Participation     Participation      Participation      Participation      Participation     Participation
                              Rate              Rate               Rate               Rate               Rate              Rate

                            Minimal           Expanded            Unemp             Minimal           Expanded            Unemp
                            Controls          Controls            Control           Controls          Controls            Control
                         (from Table 5)
Non-categorical              0.433**           0.416**           0.432***
Income Limit                 (0.189)           (0.176)            (0.152)
Expansion Dummy                                                                     0.596***          0.558***           0.573***
                                                                                     (0.207)           (0.203)            (0.181)
% non-Hispanic             0.776***           0.803***           0.723**            0.782***          0.808***            0.728**
Black                       (0.230)            (0.244)           (0.264)             (0.233)           (0.250)            (0.271)
% Hispanic                   0.453              0.383             0.352               0.459             0.396              0.367
                            (0.372)            (0.354)           (0.293)             (0.378)           (0.366)            (0.300)
% Elderly                                      -0.193             -0.204                               -0.190              -0.200
                                               (0.364)           (0.379)                               (0.366)            (0.380)
ABAWD Waiver                                    0.463             0.438                                 0.433              0.409
                                               (0.374)           (0.377)                               (0.375)            (0.380)
Unemployment                                                     0.367**                                                  0.366**
Rate                                                             (0.173)                                                  (0.175)

 Observations              12,197             12,197             12,197             12,197             12,197              12,197
 R-squared                  0.990              0.990              0.990              0.990              0.990               0.990
 County FE                   YES               YES                 YES               YES                YES                 YES
 County Pair*Year FE         YES               YES                 YES               YES                YES                 YES
Estimates are weighted by working age population or total population. Robust standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                       49
