                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                DEMOGRAPHIC OBSTACLES TO EUROPEAN GROWTH

                                     Thomas F. Cooley
                                      Espen Henriksen
                                     Charlie Nusbaum

                                     Working Paper 26503
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26503


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




We thank audience and seminar participants at the 2018 GRIPS-U of Tokyo Workshop, the 2018
Midwest Macro Meeting, Trinity College Dublin, U.C. Irvine, the Oslo Macro Group, the 2019
SED Meeting, and the 2019 ITAM-PIER Conference on Macroeconomics. We also thank Juan
Carlos Cordoba and Barbara Wolfe for comments. This paper has previously been presented with
the title "The Growth-Cost of Demographic Change in Europe". Use was made of computational
facilities purchased with funds from the National Science Foundation (CNS-1725797) and
administered by the Center for Scientific Computing (CSC). The CSC is supported by the
California NanoSystems Institute and the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC; NSF DMR 1720256) at UC Santa Barbara. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Thomas F. Cooley, Espen Henriksen, and Charlie Nusbaum. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Demographic Obstacles to European Growth
Thomas F. Cooley, Espen Henriksen, and Charlie Nusbaum
NBER Working Paper No. 26503
November 2019
JEL No. E6,O4,O52

                                         ABSTRACT

Since the early 1990's the growth rates of the four largest European economies--France,
Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom--have slowed. This persistent slowdown suggests a
low-frequency structural change is at work. A combination of longer individual life expectancies
and declining fertility have led to gradually ageing populations. Demographic change affects
economic growth directly through households savings and labor supply decisions and also growth
indirectly through the pension systems and the need to fund them. Tax increases to balance
budgets will impose additional distortions to individual factor-supply choices. We quantify the
growth effects from aging and from the financing of public pensions, and we estimate the welfare
gains from pension reforms.

Thomas F. Cooley                               Charlie Nusbaum
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Stern School of Business                       University of California, Santa Barbara
44 West 4th Street, Room 7-88                  Santa Barbara, CA
New York, NY 10012-1126                        enusbaum@ucsb.edu
and NBER
tcooley@stern.nyu.edu

Espen Henriksen
BI Norwegian Business School
Department of Financial Economics
Oslo
Norway
espen.henriksen@bi.no
1      Introduction

One of the most striking characteristics of advanced economies has been the secular rise in life
expectancy. During the last 50 years, life expectancy at birth in advanced economies has increased
by over ten years and, according to U.N projections, it is expected to continue increasing.1 This
impressive increase in longevity combined with a decrease in fertility has resulted in aging popula-
tions in most of the developed economies. Despite longer, and presumably healthier lives, life-cycle
labor-supply choices, particularly retirement behavior, have changed less.

    Ageing populations have powerful implications. At the individual level, increases in life
expectancy affect consumption, labor supply and savings decisions as households must adapt to a
longer life span and changes in factor prices. Many prior studies of the impact of demographic
change have only focused on savings choices and not considered how demographic change also
affects labor-supply choices.2 Here we show that labor supply decisions are the biggest contributing
factor to growth.

    We use a parsimonious model to better understand the behavioral responses to increases in life
expectancy and changing factor prices. A structural approach is needed to (i) make projections
for future growth, (ii) analyze policy responses to stagnating economic growth, and (iii) have a
laboratory to evaluate the welfare consequences of policy alternatives. Often proposals to reform
pension systems, for example extending the eligibility age, are evaluated simply on the basis of their
impact on cost and output. But, a structural model is essential to evaluate the welfare consequences
of those reforms because increasing labor force participation at older ages has some associated
utility costs that come from the labor leisure trade-off.

   We study the impact of changing demographics for aggregate growth in Europe's four largest
economies: France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom. Since the early 1990's these four
economies have experienced a slowdown in long-run growth that is persistent but not uniform.
Compared to the prior two decades, annualized long run growth over the last 20 years fell by
    1 Case and Deaton (2017) have documented a recent slight decrease in life expectancy among U.S. males in certain
socioeconomic groups due to "Deaths of Despair" ­ deaths due to suicide, drug overdose and obesity. This is largely a
U.S. phenomenon not in evidence in other countries.
    2 Krueger and Ludwig (2007), Backus, Cooley, and Henriksen (2014), and Ferrero (2010) investigate the effect

of demographic change on real interest rates and international capital flows, assuming that individuals supply labor
inelastically between fixed ages. See also Henriksen and Lambert (2018), Feroli (2003), Sposi (2019), and Bárány,
Coeurdacier, and Guibaud (2019) Similarly, also using models solely focusing on savings decisions, Gagnon, Johannsen,
and López-Salido (2016), Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016), and Ikeda and Saito (2014) show the impact of
demographic factors on the real interest rate in the United States and Japan. We separately show that both the
quantitative and qualitative implications of aging populations hinge crucially on how individual labor supply responds
to increases in life expectancy.
between 0.8 percentage points in the United Kingdom and 2.2 percentage points in Italy. At the
same time, these countries have experienced persistent increases in longevity and declines in fertility
rates. The combination of these two factors has resulted in populations aging to different degrees
within each country. In this paper, we quantify the impact of demographic change on aggregate
factor supply and demand, and on the growth experience of these economies, including the indirect
growth effects of the additional frictions and distortions that result from higher marginal taxes
necessary to finance the pension benefits of an ageing society.3

    Traditional growth accounting allocates growth outcomes to total factor productivity growth,
population growth, and changes in factor supplies­specifically capital accumulation and labor
supply on both the intensive and extensive margin. Changes in the life expectancy and the age-
cohort distribution of countries affect all of these channels. An increase in longevity affects
individual factor supply decisions whereas changes in the age composition of populations affects
the aggregation of individual assets and labor supply. Changes in the aggregation of labor supply
also affects measured TFP as a greater or smaller fraction of those choosing to work may be in the
most productive years of their lives as the relative cohort distribution changes. The combination
of these forces induces general equilibrium effects, with changes in factor prices further affecting
individual decisions.

    Demographic change also affects the aforementioned growth channels indirectly through pen-
sion systems. As populations age, and individuals either choose or are forced into retirement,
governments' pension liabilities increase. Coupled with a shrinking tax base as the relative number
of individuals choosing to work decreases, tax rates must adjust to balance government budgets.
Increases in tax rates introduce additional frictions and distortions to individual saving and labor
supply decisions, providing further headwinds for economic growth.

    Using a general equilibrium overlapping generations model with a rich demographic structure,
endogenous retirement, age heterogeneity in productivity, and a pay-as-you-go pension system,
we find that the contribution of demographic change to growth is substantial and can account for
as much as 70% of the secular growth slowdown in the case of France and Germany. For the
United Kingdom and Italy, demographic change can account for 50% and 25% of their respective
growth slowdowns. The primary channel through which this demographic change operates is the
employment-to-population ratio. We find that decreases in the employment-to-population ratio
largely outweighed capital deepening induced by increased savings. Moreover, our model predicts
that demographic change will cause growth to decline further over the next 20 years. This paper
   3 Cooley  and Henriksen (2018) show the impact of changing demographics on growth in the U.S. and Japan but do
not explicitly model the impact of retirement systems on individual decisions and economic growth.



                                                       2
complements the conclusions of Gordon (2016), Summers (2014, 2016), and others who study
secular stagnation.

    We also find that the need to finance pension systems did not lower long-run growth very much
over the 1975-1995 period. Over the last 20 years, however, pension systems have decreased growth,
sometimes substantially. In Italy, our model indicates that the need to finance pension outlays
decreased annual growth by an additional 0.18 percentage points. Moreover, these distortions will
decrease annual growth even further over the next 20 years, with labor supply accounting for most of
the decline in projected growth. These results add to the extensive literature on the implications of
ageing for the sustainability of social security systems, e.g. Fuster, mrohorolu, and mrohorolu
(2007) and mrohorolu, Kitao, and Yamada (2016), by emphasizing that labor-supply choices are
critical and that the big outstanding question is why increases in longevity have not resulted in
larger changes in the effective retirement age. 4

    To account for observed labor supply choices on both the extensive and intensive margin, a
key ingredient in our model economy is the disutility of labor supply at different ages. Due to the
stark decline in labor force participation at old ages, the disutility of labor must increase strongly
at old ages. The convex nature of the disutility of labor may be due to both psychological factors­
individuals may simply be tired of working after 30+ years in the labor force­ or to physiological
factors, e.g. declining health and fitness over the life-cycle. This paper is agnostic on the exact
causes of the disutility of labor over the life cycle, but we calibrate our model to observed age
specific labor force participation rates in each of the countries taking as given the pension system
in those countries. This enables us to analyze the incentive effects of alternative pension systems.
More importantly, it provides a laboratory to evaluate the welfare effects of possible reforms.

    This paper also contributes to the literature on late-life labor supply. Erosa, Fuster, and
Kambourov (2016) show that a fixed cost to participation is key for matching aggregate Frisch
elasticities. Others, such as French (2005), van der Klaauw and Wolpin (2008), and Erosa,
Fuster, and Kambourov (2012), argue that social security rules have a sizable impact on retirement
behavior. Capatina (2015), Pashchenko and Porapakkarm (2017), and French and Jones (2011)
instead study the role of health risk and show that it may be just as important as social security
rules in accounting for labor supply choices. All of these papers, however, assume either a constant
or linear cost to labor force participation, or allow individuals' time endowment to change only
as a result of changing health status. As a result, they either have difficulty matching the labor
force participation profiles of both healthy and unhealthy individuals after the age of 60+, or do
   4Amore exhaustive review of such papers includes, but is not limited to, Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), De Nardi,
mrohorolu, and Sargent (1999), Kotlikoff, Smetters, and Walliser (2007), Kitao (2014), Conesa and Garriga (2016),
McGrattan and Prescott (2017), and McGrattan and Prescott (2018).

                                                         3
not attempt to match labor supply profiles that late in life. This, however, is a key part of the life
cycle for understanding the effects of aging populations on economic growth and potential policy
reforms to mitigate any adverse welfare effects.

    Our paper is also related to Auclert, Malmberg, Martenet, and Rognlie (2019) and Börsch-
Supan, Leite, and Rausch (2019), who study how changing age-cohort distributions may affect
future growth, taking decisions as given. Kopecky (2018), Hopenhayn, Neira, and Singhania
(2018), and others study how changing demographics may account for firm dynamics and the
decline in entrepreneurial activity and, through that, productivity growth.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the long term growth and
demographic trends in France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom. Section 3 describes our
model along with two methods of financing our pension systems. Section 5 presents our historical
decompositions, growth projections, and our pension reform experiments. Section 6 concludes.



2     Growth and Demographic Change

2.1    Historical Growth

The world's largest economies have experienced a growth slowdown over the last five decades.
Figure 1 shows GDP-per-capita trends for the four largest European economies and the United
States. In the two decades immediately following World War II, Germany, France, and Italy
experienced significant catch up, in large part due to the build-up after wartime destruction. Our
goal is to estimate the role that demographic changes may have played since the 1970s.



                                       [Figure 1 about here]



    We can decompose historical growth into its constituent components using growth accounting
to determine the contributions of factor inputs and productivity using a standard Cobb-Douglas
production function:
                                      Y = A · K  ( L · h)1-                                (1)




                                                  4
where A is TFP, K is the aggregate capital stock, L is the number of workers, and h is the average
hours worked by those in the labor force.5 This implies an expression for growth, which includes
                                                                     L
both an intensive and extensive labor-supply margin given by h and pop , respectively.

                                 Y =  A + K / L +  L / pop +  pop + (1 - )h                          (2)

In Equation 2, i is the growth rate of component i . Population growth can trivially account for GDP
growth and so we exclude it from the rest of our discussion, instead focusing on GDP-per-capita
growth. The per-capita growth accounting expression then becomes

                                   Y / pop =  A + K / L +  L / pop + (1 - )h                         (3)

The annualized results of this exercise are shown in Table 1.



                                                 [Table 1 about here]



    Growth accounting highlights both the persistence and heterogeneity across countries in the
growth slowdown shown in Figure 1. Table 1 further shows that understanding the determinants
of labor-supply is crucial for understanding the growth experience of these economies. In order to
account for these facts, a low-frequency structural change that has first order implications for labor
supply and differs across countries is necessary. One such factor is demographic change.



2.2    Demographic Trends

Life expectancy at birth among the advanced economies has increased steadily as shown in Figure 2.
Life expectancy among these countries increased from an average of 72.5 to 77.3 and 77.3 to 81.8
between 1975-1995 and 1995-2015, respectively. UN projections continue this trend with a
predicted rise from 82.7 to 85.5 between 2020 and 2040.



                                                [Figure 2 about here]

   5 Our   assumed capital share is consistent with that of our calibration discussed in Section 4




                                                             5
    These dramatic changes in longevity combined with lower fertility has caused populations to
age, some significantly. Figure 3 illustrates the historical shift in the age-cohort distribution for the
United Kingdom, France, Germany and Italy, respectively, and how they differ. Two characteristics
stand out. In all economies, population aging has persisted for several decades and is projected to
continue. Second, the historical and projected rightward shifts in the age-cohort distribution differs
across these four countries. The low frequency nature of these trends and their differences between
countries implies that demographic factors may contribute to both the decline in long-run growth
in each country and the different growth histories across countries.



                                             [Figure 3 about here]



    An often overlooked feature of the European experience is that, even as life expectancy has
increased substantially, the average retirement age has not.6 On average, individuals have predom-
inantly allocated additional years of life to retirement.



                                             [Figure 4 about here]




2.3     Growth and demographics

Increases in life expectancy and changes in the age-cohort distribution may affect economic growth
through all the five channels identified by the growth accounting exercise in Equation 2.

    Figure 5 shows that labor supply on the intensive margin shows a clear hump-shaped pattern over
the life cycle across these European countries. If this hump shape remains unchanged, as the cohort
distribution changes, hours will also change. In addition, labor supply choices on the intensive
margin may change as life expectancy increases and factor prices change due to demographic
factors.



                                             [Figure 5 about here]

   6 While this has been historically true for the United States as well, Figure 4 shows that the increase in the gap
between effective retirement age and life expectancy has been considerably smaller and has remained roughly constant
since the mid to late 1990's.

                                                         6
    Almost the same mechanisms hold for labor supply on the extensive margin. Figure 5 also
shows a clear hump-shaped pattern of labor force participation over the life cycle across these
European countries. The number of individuals in the labor force will therefor be directly affected
by shifts in the cohort distributions. In addition, labor supply choices on the extensive margin may
also change as life expectancy increases and factor prices change due to demographic factors.

   As the average age increases, more individuals will be in their wealthiest years. In order to
smooth consumption over a longer expected lifetime, individual savings rates may increase. Both
demographic factors shaping individual choices and the aggregation of these choices contribute to
capital deepening, ie. increase in the capital-to-labor ratio.

    Aging populations affect measured TFP. As populations age, the fraction of the workforce in
the most productive years of their lives also changes. Since productivity is measured conditional
on number of hours worked, this affects measured TFP.

   In addition, the more individuals who have chosen to retire relative to the number of individuals
who have chosen to work, the higher are the taxes necessary to finance pensions and other programs
supporting retirees. These taxes will distort labor-supply choices both on the extensive and intensive
margin.

   All of these factors, both direct and indirect, affect equilibrium prices through the aggregate
capital stock and labor supply, which further affects individual incentives and output.



3    Model

Our model economy is as parsimonious as possible while addressing all the five growth channels
identified by the growth accounting exercise. In particular, individuals make labor-supply choices
on both extensive and intensive margin and savings choices over the life cycle. In order for the
model to match observed retirement behavior, we assume that disutility of working is increasing
with age. In order to distinguish between labor-supply choices on the intensive and the extensive
margin, the model is calibrated to idiosyncratic shocks to labor productivity over the life cycle.

    The benchmark economy abstracts from pensions. In this economy, individuals fund their own
retirement consumption by savings. Subsequently, we introduce a pension system where old age
benefits are financed by workers with either lump sum or distorting taxes. We decompose the
growth effects of demographic change into a direct effect and an indirect effect, operating through
the increasing wedges necessary to finance increasing pension outlays. These environments allow

                                                  7
us to discuss the extent to which pension systems impose additional obstacles to growth and
identifies the margins most affected by them.



3.1    Households

At each age, i , households maximize their expected discounted utility by choosing consumption
and labor supply conditional on their life expectancy

                                                    I
                                     max Et               s j u ( c j ,t + j , h j ,t + j )        (4)
                                    {c j,h j }
                                                   j =i


where  is the household's discount factor, si is the probability that a household lives from age i to
i + 1, and ci and hi are consumption and hours worked at age i , respectively. Household preferences
are assumed to be additively separable both within and across periods and take the iso-elastic form
given by
                                         c1-       (1 - h - i · Ip )1-
                               u(c, h) =       +                                                  (5)
                                         1-               1-
Here,  denotes the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, l = 1 - h - i · Ip is effective leisure,
and  defines the curvature over effective leisure. Ip is an indicator function that takes a value of 1
if h > 0 and 0 otherwise. Households' cost to participation, i , is allowed to differ by age and is
given by the following functional form.

                                                 i = 1 + 2 · i 3                                   (6)

This cost function may capture a number of life-cycle features, such as deteriorating health, changes
in tolerance to fatigue and stress, and other life-cycle incentives, such as retirement systems. The
labor supply literature has largely emphasized the first and last of these three considerations. French
(2005) and Capatina (2015), for example, evaluate the role of deteriorating health in late life labor
supply. They assume that the cost to participation differs between sick and healthy individuals, but
each is fixed over the life cycle. Instead, they allow the probability of negative health to increase
with age. Related are Rust and Phelan (1997), Blau and Gilleskie (2006, 2008), and French and
Jones (2011) who estimate the retirement incentives induced by medicare and employer provided
health insurance. While their findings are mixed, they all find that health insurance can at least
partially account for observed retirement behavior. Our specification is appealing as it captures all
of these features while preserving the parsimony of our model. Most importantly, however, it can
be easily matched to old age labor force participation rates.


                                                            8
    The households maximize expected discounted utility subject to their budget constraint, which
is given by
                      ci,t + ai+1,t +1 = (1 + rt )ai,t + wt · hi,t · i · i,t + bt             (7)

c is consumption, a is asset holdings, r is net rate of return on capital, w is hourly wage rate,
h is number of hours worked,  is age-dependent productivity,  is the households idiosyncratic
productivity, and b is accidental bequests. To close the model, we assume that accidental bequests,
bt , from households that exit the model as a result of mortality risk are evenly distributed among
all surviving households.

   We further assume that households begin their economic lives with no assets and enforce a
no-ponzi condition, producing an initial condition and boundary condition given by

                                        ai0,t = 0        and         aimax,t  0                                  (8)

where imax is the maximum allowed age. We maintain (8) throughout the paper.

    Households differ both between and within cohorts in several ways. First, household produc-
tivity differs between cohorts due to an age specific productivity profile, i , and within cohorts as
a result of idiosyncratic labor productivity shocks. We assume that the idiosyncratic component of
individual productivity follows an AR(1) process in logs for each individual given by

                                                ln i+1 =  ln i +       i +1                                      (9)

where i  N 0,  2 is Gaussian white noise. These two sources of heterogeneity create differences
in average hours worked between cohorts and hours dispersion within cohorts, respectively. In
particular, these productivity differences incentivize households who are in the most productive
years of their lives or who have received a series of high productivity draws to work more hours.

    Households also face an endogenous and irreversible retirement decision each period. Consis-
tent with Erosa et al. (2016) and Rogerson and Wallenius (2013) who show the importance of a
fixed cost to work in accounting for labor supply elasticities and retirement, the interaction between
our cost to participation function, i , and life cycle productivity profile, i , generate heterogeneity
in labor force participation rates between cohorts.7 As discussed in Section 4, our calibrated cost to
participation function is increasing in age while our life-cycle productivity profile is hump shaped.
Labor force participation rates, therefore decrease over the life cycle since it becomes more costly
to remain in the labor force and households are less productive on average at old ages.
   7 More precisely, Rogerson and Wallenius (2013) emphasize the need for non-convexities in either individual budget

constraints or choice sets to generate reasonable intertemporal elasticities of labor.

                                                            9
   The interaction between Equation 9 and Equation 6, further provides a mechanism within our
model to generate endogenous workforce composition. As i increases with age, households who
have received a series of poor idiosyncratic productivity shocks become less likely to remain in the
workforce. As a result, only the most productive households continue working at old ages. This
both creates within cohort differences in labor force participation and makes our model consistent
with papers showing that life-cycle earnings is flatter than life-cycle productivity, e.g. Rupert and
Zanella (2015).



3.2    Technology

We assume that a representative firm with constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production
technology demands capital and labor, and produces a numeraire good for consumption in perfectly
competitive markets. Thus, the firm's problem is given by

                                                1-
                                max
                              Kd, t , Ld, t
                                              Kd,t Ld,t - (rt +  )Kd,t - wt Ld,t                  (10)

where 0 <  < 1 is capital share, Kd,t is aggregate capital demand, Ld,t is aggregate labor demand
measured in efficiency units, rt is the net real interest rate, and wt is the real wage rate. Moreover,
the aggregate capital stock evolves according to the usual law of motion,

                                               Kt +1 = (1 - )Kt + It                              (11)

where  is the depreciation rate and It is net investment.



3.3    General Equilibrium

An equilibrium in this environment is defined as follows:


   1. Households choose savings, consumption, and labor supply on the extensive and intensive
      margins taking prices and conditional survival probabilities, si , as given such that




                                                         10
         · Household's solve the following recursive problem each period:

                 v LF (i, a, ) = max u(c, h) +  · si · E | max { v LF (i + 1, a ,  ), v R (i + 1, a )}
                                    c,a , h



                 v R (i, a) = max {u(c, 0) +  · si · v R (i + 1, a )}
                             a ,c


         · Decisions are aggregated to get the aggregate supply of capital and labor measured in
           efficiency units:
                                                                         
                                              Ks,t =              xi ·        a · d µ(a,  | i, t )
                                                              i          a×


                                                                         
                                              Ls,t =              xi ·        h · i ·  · d µ(a,  | i, t )
                                                              i      a×


            where xi is the fraction of the population constituted by cohort i and µ(a,  | i, t ) is the
            stationary joint distribution of a and  in time t for cohort i .

   2. Firms maximize profits taking prices as given:

                                                                1-
                                                max
                                              Kd, t , Ld, t
                                                              Kd,t Ld,t - rt Kd,t - wt Ld,t



   3. Markets clear:

                                              {rt, wt } | Ks,t = Kd,t & Ls,t = Ld,t



3.4    Demographics

Our definition of general equilibrium shows that the conditional survival probability at each age, si ,
and the age-cohort distribution, xi , in each period are sufficient statistics to capture demographics
within our model. Several factors influence the evolution of a country's age-cohort distribution.
First, changes in mortality rates reduce the number of deaths per year. Second, declines in a
country's fertility rate reduces the degree to which aging cohorts are replaced by new, younger
individuals. Both of these effects serve to shift the age-cohort distribution right. Lastly, a country's
cohort distribution is affected by net migration flows, thereby shifting the cohort distribution either
left or right depending on the mix of migrants.

                                                                     11
    Let xt  R I denote the vector of length I where each element contains the fraction of the
population of age i at time t . Each cohort is endowed with an age specific fertility rate, fi,t , and
a conditional survival probability, si,t , in each period. Moreover, denote mt  R I as the vector of
net migration of each age group in period t . Then the evolution of the cohort distribution within a
given country is given by
                                             xt +1 = t xt + mt                                    (12)

where,
                                          f1,t f2,t f3,t . . . fi,t 
                                                          ...
                                                                    
                                          s1,t 0       0       0
                                     t =   0   s       0  ...  0
                                                                    
                                                 2,t                                            (13)
                                          ..     .
                                                 .   . .. ...   .
                                                                .
                                                                    
                                          .      .              .   
                                         0
                                                0 . . . s I -1,t
                                                               0    
Note that the cohort distributions used in our quantitative exercise do not necessarily equal the
stationary distribution implied by t . Instead, we assume that individuals believe that the current
demographic structure and therefore prices will persist in perpetuity. Results should be interpreted
as calculating steady states implied by each point along the demographic transition path.

   Our model consists of I overlapping generations. We assume that households are ex-ante
identical, enter their independent economic lives at age 20, and that no individual can live past
age 100. Prior to age 20, households do not work, accumulate assets, or consume. Moreover, all
households are born with ai0 = 0 net assets.

   At each age, i , households face mortality risk. Denoting si as the probability of surviving to
age i + 1 conditional on reaching age i , the unconditional probability of reaching age j is given by
       j -1
sj =          si . These survival probabilities capture changes to life-expectancy within our model and
       i =1
distort the discount rate at each age. Upon death, any assets saved from age i to i + 1 are transferred
equally across the remaining population in the form of lump sum accidental bequests, bt .



3.5      Pension Systems

To quantify the implications of public defined-benefit pensions and their financing, we introduce a
parsimonious pension system with guaranteed old age benefits. Here, we assume that households
believe that current pension systems will persist indefinitely and that taxes are adjusted to balance
government budgets period-by-period. For computational simplicity, we take the level of real
pension benefits to be constant and equal for each eligible household across cohorts above some
eligibility age, IR . In particular, define L,t and tt to be the labor tax rate and lump sum taxes levied

                                                    12
on households, respectively, at time t . The household budget constraint then becomes

 ci,t + ai+1,t +1 = (1 - )ai,t + rt · ai,t + (1 - L,t ) · wt · hi,t · i · i,t + bt - tt · 1(i < IR ) + pt · 1(i  IR ) (14)

where pt is the level of real pension benefits and with rt re-defined to be the marginal product of
capital rather than the net real interest rate. Moreover, we assume that lump sum taxes are levied
only on those who are not eligible for old age benefits so that net transfers received in old age are
not distorted by the financing of pension benefits. To close the model, define the budget constraint
of the government to be
                                          xi · pt = L,t · wt · Lt + Tt                           (15)
                                          i  IR

where Tt denotes total lump sum tax revenues and where we have assumed that there is no additional
government spending outside of pension outlays.

    Pension systems have important implications for individual decisions, particularly household
labor supply. First, incentives to accumulate assets and work later in life as life expectancy increases
is mitigated relative to a world without pension systems as individuals may rely on social security
in addition to individual savings to smooth consumption. Second, as a larger fraction of the
population enters retirement, these pension systems create significant disincentives to work. As
populations age, a greater number of households become eligible for benefits causing total pension
outlays to increase. If increases in life expectancy do not translate into large increases in labor
force participation at old ages, the tax base will decrease and force tax rates to rise. The changes in
these tax rates provide greater disincentives to work as populations age and result in even smaller
increases in retirement ages as life expectancy rises.



3.6    Importance of Labor-Supply Decisions

To illustrate the importance of labor supply decisions in our framework, we solve a special case
of our model with inelastic labor supply. In contrast to our benchmark model, the vast majority
of the literature investigating the consequences of aging populations assumes that labor is supplied
inelastically until a given retirement age. Key results, such as secular decline in interest rates, rest
on this particular assumption.

    The focus of literature studying demographic change has largely been on its effects on the supply
and demand for capital. The general assumption has been that labor is supplied inelastically until
some exogeneous retirement age. The implicit assumption is that retirement age does not change
as life expectancy rises. That is to say that gains to longevity, both in the past and in the future, will

                                                           13
translate one-for-one into more years spent in retirement with no adjustment to individual work
behavior. Understanding how labor supply decisions change as expected longevity and factor prices
change are not only of crucial importance for making projections for future real interest rates, but
also for making growth projections and estimating the welfare effects of potential reforms.

    To illustrate the sensitivity of previous results to the assumptions made about labor supply, we
solve a simplified version of our model that reflects those used in the literature. We assume that
households make only a consumption-savings choice, are identical within cohort, and supply labor
inelastically until an exogenously given retirement age. At retirement they exit the labor force and
collect social security. In effect, this model is identical to our model after fixing {i, i } = {0, 1}  i
and  = 0. The rest of our model environment is left unchanged. At the benchmark, life expectancy
and the exogenous retirement age are first set to 70 and 65, respectively. We then increase life
expectancy to 80 years, solve the model for retirement ages between 65 and 75, and compare the
model-implied equilibria with the benchmark.8 The range of retirement ages represent the entire
range between two extremes: i) Retirement age does not adjust at all in response to gains to life
expectancy and remains at 65 years. All gains to longevity translate one-to-one to more years in
retirement. And ii), retirement age adjusts one-for-one with life expectancy, while expected time
in retirement remains the same.



                                                [Figure 6 about here]



    Figure 6 shows the growth in output, change in equilibrium interest rate, and change in the
equilibrium labor tax rate necessary to finance pension outlays relative to the first extreme. Clearly,
the conclusions drawn are both quantitatively and qualitatively sensitive to assumptions regarding
labor supply. In fact, output growth, the change in real interest rates, and the change in budget
balancing tax rates may all be positive or negative depending on what assumptions are made.
All results would change sign if time in retirement, instead of length of working lives, was held
constant. In particular, interest rates would increase if retirement age increases by just six years
when life expectancy increases by ten years. This exercise highlights that a key margin necessary
to understand the effects of demographic change is individual labor supply.
   8 Cohort   distributions are given by the steady state distributions implied by each life expectancy at birth.




                                                             14
4     Calibration

We calibrate our benchmark model and pension systems separately for Italy, Germany, France,
and the United Kingdom by fixing several preference and production parameters, estimating the
age-cohort distributions, survival probabilites, and productivity parameters outside the model, and
using simulated method of moments for the remaining parameters. Our calibration target year is
1995 due to the availability of data. The key margins of our model are the labor supply elasticities
on both the intensive and extensive margin, particularly at old ages, and tax rate elasticities.



4.1     Preference Parameters

We first set  = 1 in order to obtain balanced growth preferences as in King, Plosser, and Rebelo
(1988) and fix the curvature on leisure to be  = 4. The remaining preference parameters are the
discount factor, , household's weight on leisure, , and the cost to participation parameters, 1 , 2 ,
and 3 . We set  to match the measured capital-output ratio for each country, which is calculated
from the Penn World Tables 9.0 release through the FRED database.  is targeted to a weighted
average of hours worked per year by working households aged 20-64 from the OECD statistical
database. The weights are given by the relative size of the workforce at each age. Because of the
importance of labor-supply decisions on the extensive margin in driving our results, our goal is
to tightly link our cost to participation parameters, { 1, 2, 3 }, to retirement decisions at the end
of life. To do so, we calibrate these parameters to match labor force participation rates of those
aged 60-64 and 65-69, and the effective retirement age calculated as in Keese (2003).9 Data for
each is obtained from Eurostat and the OECD statistical database, respectively. Finally, we restrict
participating households to work no less than 20% of their available time.



4.2     Technology and Productivity

Our production technology is Cobb-Douglas form with a capital share of  = 0.33. While standard
measures of capital share show significant heterogeneity across economies, Gollin (2002) shows
that capital shares are in fact quite stable in the cross section after controlling for self-employed
income. Our chosen value reflects his mean estimate. We set the depreciation rate, , to match the
1995 real interest rate in each country, where we calculate the real interest rate as the return on 10
    9 The effective retirement age we use is a weighted labor market exit age starting at age 40, where the weights are

the change in labor force participation from age i to i + 1.


                                                         15
year long-term government bonds less inflation. Each is taken from the OECD and World Bank,
respectively, through FRED. As in Hansen (1993), we estimate the life-cycle productivity profile
and idiosyncratic productivity process from the PSID.10 Figure 7 shows our estimate for i , and
we find the persistence and variance of the idiosyncratic productivity process to be  = 0.97 and
 2 = 0.02, respectively.



                                                 [Figure 7 about here]




4.3       Pension System

There are important differences in the public pension systems of the four European Economies we
study. These are discussed extensively in Erosa et al. (2012) and in SHARE, the Survey of European
Health and Retirement systems. For our purposes the important features of pension systems that
largely drive changes in tax rates and retirement incentives are the eligibility age, IR , and the level
of real old age benefits, p. The former is taken from the Blondal and Scarpetta (1997) and Gruber
and Wise (1999). In order to calibrate pt , we match the level of pension expenditures in the form of
non-means tested old age benefits by country as a percentage of GDP and assume that these old age
benefits are evenly distributed among the eligible population. This data is obtained from Eurostat.
We allow only one form of taxes to balance the government budget constraint at any given time.
Consequently, we calibrate two models with pension systems: a lump sum model and a labor tax
model. In our quantitative experiments, we fix pt and allow the relevant tax rate to adjust to close
the model. Finally, note that we fix pt = tt = L,t = 0 in our benchmark model without pension
systems.



4.4       Demographics

What remains is to calibrate the survival probabilities and relative size of each age-cohort in each
country. The cohort distributions are taken from the United Nations (2017), which gives the cohort
distribution in 5 year age bins. We linearly interpolate between the center of each age bin and
re-normalize the interpolated distribution to obtain 1 year cohort bins. The interpolated cohort
distributions are shown in Figure 3.
  10 A   similar data set is not readily available to us for the four countries herein considered.



                                                              16
    The one-year survival probabilities are calculated as in Henriksen (2015) using life expectancy
data obtained from the United Nations. These estimates are shown in Figure 8 and incorporate the
fact that mortality rates are a function of both age and life expectancy at birth.

     The set of moments matched for each country are summarized in Table 3. Appendix B gives the
corresponding model moments, calibrated parameters, and fixed parameters for each country. Of
particular note are our calibrated cost to participation functions. For each model and each Country,
{ 1, 2, 3 } are broadly consistent with French (2005) and Capatina (2015). Both estimate that the
life-cycle probability of poor health is increasing and approximately convex in age with the latter
further showing that individual time endowment decreases in expectation over the life-cycle.



                                        [Table 3 about here]




5     Quantitative Results

In our quantitative exercise, we fix the calibrated parameters of the model and adjust the conditional
survival probabilities and cohort distributions to match those in 1975, in 1995, and in 2015. We then
perform growth decompositions from 1975-1995 and 1995-2015 by applying the growth accounting
methodology in Equation 2 to the model steady states. Finally, we make growth projections by
repeating the above exercise for 2020 and 2040. We conclude this section with a discussion of the
effects of pension reforms and innovations to factors captured by our cost to participation function.



5.1    Direct Effect of Demographics

We first decompose the per-capita growth effects of demographic change using the benchmark
model. Table 4 displays a summary these effects in the benchmark model. It highlights the
changing contribution of aging populations to growth relative to the growth slowdown discussed
in Section 2.



                                        [Table 4 about here]



                                                 17
While aging populations substantially boosted growth during the 1975-1995 period, their con-
tributions to growth declined throughout the following two decades in all countries considered.
Our model indicates that the changing historical contribution of demographic change to growth is
responsible for a decline in annual per-capita growth of 0.33-0.68 percentage points between these
two periods. Relative to our growth accounting exercise in Section 2, our benchmark results suggest
that aging populations account for roughly 70% of the secular growth slowdown in Germany and
France, 46% in the United Kingdom, and 27% in Italy.



                                         [Table 6 about here]



    To explore the channels through which aging populations effect growth, we focus our discussion
on the past 20 years. Table 6 shows that demographic change was a drag on per-capita growth for
France, Germany, and Italy while it contributed positively in the United Kingdom. The primary
channels through which this effect operates are through changes in labor supply on the extensive and
intensive margins and, to smaller degree, through capital accumulation. Indeed, the combination
of increases in life expectancy and rightward shifts in the age-cohort distribution leads to capital
deepening. These increases in the aggregate capital stock result in significant declines in equilibrium
interest rates ranging from 81 basis points in the case of Italy to 43 basis points in United Kingdom.
r  changes between 1975 and 2015: UK: 43 basis points, IT: 81 basis points, GE: 75 basis points,
and FR: 75 basis points.

    Labor supply is affected along both the intensive and extensive margins. As workforces age,
the average cost of participation incurred by households also rises. The overall effect is that hours
worked decreases.

    Changes in the employment-population ratio have the largest effect on growth. Over the past
20 years, aging has caused substantial declines in the labor force participation rate. As in the
case of labor hours, rightward shifts in the cohort distribution have resulted in a larger fraction
of the economically active population being in the right tail of the age-cohort distribution. Older
households face strong incentives to retire due to both a higher cost to participating in the labor force
and declines in life-cycle productivity at old ages. Conversely, gains to life expectancy incentivize
households to increase labor supply at old ages. This endogenous response works to mitigate
declines in labor supply as age cohort distributions shift. For example, between 1995 and 2015, the
effective retirement age in each country increased by: UK: 0.93, IT: 1.58, GE: 1.23, and FR: 1.21.
In comparison, life expectancy at birth over this same time period increased by an average of 4.5

                                                   18
years across these economies. As discussed above, shifts in the age cohort distribution outweighed
increases in effective retirement ages with the net effect of declining labor force participation.

     Demographic change also affected measured total factor productivity. Due to our hump shaped
life-cycle productivity profile, young populations that age begin to have a larger share of their
workforce in the most productive periods of their lives. Thus, aging populations affect measured
TFP mechanically through shifts in the age-cohort distribution.

    Measured TFP is also affected by an endogenous mechanism briefly discussed in Section 3.
Due to the persistence of idiosyncratic productivity shocks and rising cost to participation, there
are strong self selection effects with respect to labor force participation. In particular, those who
have received a series of high productivity draws early in life are more likely to remain in the labor
force at older ages.

    Strong general equilibrium effects further effect all of these margins. As relative prices change,
so too do the incentives to accumulate capital and supply labor. Changes to the latter are of particular
importance given our results. For example, changes in the wage rate directly affect the level of
individual productivity required to remain in the workforce at old ages. Labor force participation
rates and the composition of workers are in turn affected. In this case, the negative labor supply
effects described above are partially offset by rises in the wage rate induced by capital deepening.

    Over the next two decades, our model predicts that the contributions of demographic change to
per-capita growth will decline further. Indeed, Table 7 shows that decreases in the employment-
population ratio are projected to become more prominent while capital deepening will decelerate.
The benchmark model indicates that Germany and Italy will face the most significant declines to
future growth.



                                        [Table 7 about here]




5.2    The Effect of Pension Systems

Next, we compare the growth accounting exercise discussed in the previous section to a model
with pensions that are funded with lump-sum taxes. Because lump-sum taxes are non-distortionary
in nature, this comparison allows us to estimate how old-age transfers alone impact growth. We
subsequently describe our results when such transfers are funded by a labor income tax, allowing
us to estimate the growth effects of increasing distortions that result from pension systems.

                                                  19
   Quantitatively, the provision of old-age transfers themselves create few declines in growth.
While small, these effects are most strong in Italy. Old-age benefits provide elderly households
with additional resources from which to consume. Thus, retired households may rely on social
security in addition to individual savings to smooth consumption throughout retirement. This
mitigates incentives to increase savings and labor supply resulting from gains in life expectancy.

    The distortions arising due to these pension outlays, on the other hand, have important impli-
cations for growth. As populations age, fiscal authorities face increasing liabilities in the form of
social security payments. Table 8 show just how drastically pension outlays increase in response
to aging in our model. Given the declines in labor supply identified in Section 5.1, tax rates must
increase to balance budgets. The rise in labor tax rates in turn provide strong disincentives to work,
further decreasing labor supply and compounding the problem faced by fiscal authorities.11



                                            [Table 8 about here]



    The quantitative effect of these distortions are shown in Table 5, Table 6, and Table 7. These
distortions were quantitatively unimportant during the 1975-1995 period. Because a large number
of previously inactive households began entering the labor force during this period (see Figure 3),
increases in labor supply provided sufficient tax revenue to remove the need to increase tax rates.
Thus, pension systems did not greatly impact growth during 1975-1995.

    Over the past two decades, changing demographics imply that there were fewer new workers
and more workers in retirement. As a result, tax rates rise sharply to cope with changing pen-
sion obligations. These additional distortions amplify the rise in retirement rates relative to the
benchmark and lump sum models. Between 1995 and 2015, effective retirement ages increased by
substantially less than in the benchmark model: UK: 0.48, IT: 0.79, GE: 0.71, and FR: 0.64. This
endogenous response of old-age labor supply is roughly half of that in the benchmark model. The
end result is that annualized growth in the employment/population ratio decreased by an additional
10 basis points in France, Germany, and Italy as a direct result of changing tax rates. The effect in
the United Kingdom is smaller, at around 4 basis points.

    Rising tax rates also affect capital deepening. Not only does the duration of households' working
lives decrease relative to a world without such distortions, but so too does after tax labor income
conditional on working. Both features directly effect the resources from which households save.
  11 Conesa, Kehoe, Nygaard, and Raveendranathan (2019) suggest that trends in college attainment may mitigate the
need to increase tax rates.

                                                       20
The end result is a decline in capital accumulation. Moreover, pension systems dampen the decline
in interest rates previously discussed through this channel. In this case, declines in the equilibrium
interest rate instead range from 21 basis points to 50 basis points.

   While the effects are smaller, these changing distortions also affect measured TFP growth. As
labor taxes rise, the individual productivity level needed to remain in the workforce during old age
does as well. Thus, the workforce that remains following a rise in labor taxes is more productive.
This amplifies the self-selection mechanism in the model.

    All of these effects contributed to a growth decline resulting from pension systems. In total,
changing tax rates decreased annual growth by between -0.04 percentage points in the case of the
United Kingdom and -0.18 percentage points in Italy throughout the 1995-2015 period. Our model
further predicts that the growth effects of these distortions will become much stronger over the next
20 years.



5.3    Policy Reforms

Given the sizable labor supply effects of aging populations, we now consider why individuals
exit the labor force when they do and how these considerations affect the economy as a whole.
Understanding these choices allows us to identify policy reforms that may both mitigate the negative
growth effects of future demographic change and improve welfare. We stress the latter and rely
on welfare effects measured by the median consumption equivalence of a newborn agent as a
measuring stick. Our definition of consumption equivalence is given by

                                      I                                         I
                              Ei0           t st u( j ct, j , ht, j ) = Ei0           t st u(ct, j , ht, j )
                                                                                                               (16)
                                    t =i0                                     t =i0


where  j is the consumption equivalence for household j , { ct, j , ht, j } are their pre-reform optimal
choices, and { ct, j , ht, j } are their post reform optimal decisions. Straightforward algebra allows for
                        

a simple expression of the consumption equivalence for individual j defined by

                                                     j = e[Vj, post -Vj, pr e ]/                               (17)

               I
where  =             t st , Vj, post is the post-reform value function for newborn j , and Vj, pre is the
             t =i0
pre-reform value function for newborn j .

    We first assess the role of pension systems in driving decreases in the employment-population
ratio. Decreasing the level of old age benefits forces households to rely more heavily on individual

                                                                 21
savings during retirement. Households may therefore increase labor supply to finance savings
increases. Raising the eligibility age incentivizes a longer working life directly. Because households
must wait longer to receive any social security payments, households may increase their labor market
exit age to avoid a period of low consumption between retirement and social security eligibility.
Furthermore, both reforms decrease the fiscal authority's total pension obligations, reducing the
degree to which tax rates rise to balance budgets. We consider these reforms by separately reducing
per-retiree pension outlays by 5%-20%, and increasing the pension eligibility age increases by 5
years by the year 2040.12

    Table 9 shows a summary of the effects of reducing the level of pension benefits received when
in retirement. Evidently, such a reform mitigates the projected adverse growth effects of aging
populations. Table 15 shows that the need to rely more heavily on personal savings to finance
old age consumption causes savings rates to become more sensitive to changes in life expectancy.
Second, the indirect effect pension systems on individual decisions through tax rates becomes
weaker. The reduction in benefits reduces the need to raise tax rates, which in turn provides
fewer disincentives to work. Relative to the pre-reform economy, the effective retirement age of
households can increase substantially depending on the extent of the reform. Table 15 further
shows that the labor supply channel is again much more important than individual savings.

    More importantly, these reforms are welfare improving. The welfare effects of reductions
in pension benefits may be significant as distortions to individual incentives begin disappearing
depending on the extent of the reform. In France, Germany, and Italy, the median per-period
consumption equivalent for newborns quickly rises over 1% as the extent of the reform increases.
For significant benefits reductions, median per-period consumption equivalents range from 2.38%-
4.16%. The United Kingdom sees more modest welfare gains with consumption equivalence,
reaching a peak of 1.59%.



                                               [Table 9 about here]



    Except for conservative reductions in pension benefits, Table 10 identifies that increasing the
pension eligibility age yields similar increases in annual growth. Increasing the eligibility age
operates through similar channels as reductions in pension benefits. Table 16 displays the effects
of eligibility reform in detail. First, as the eligibility age increases, social security does not become
available to households until a later age. This implies that agents must rely more heavily on labor
  12 We   discuss these reforms for the labor tax model only as the lump sum model features no distortions

                                                          22
income and private savings for these additional years before they become eligible for pension
benefits. Second, as less of the population is eligible for any given level of benefits, government
outlays and thus tax rates again increase by less as populations age. These two effects serve
again to increase capital accumulation as life expectancy increases and mitigate the reduction in
the employment to population ratio as populations age. In the case of increasing eligibility ages,
increases in both growth and the effective retirement age are larger than that for most reductions in
pension benefits. Despite this fact, the welfare gains from reductions in pension benefits are larger
than increases in the pension eligibility ages, a direct result of sharp increases in the dis-utility of
labor experienced by households at old ages.



                                        [Table 10 about here]



    This highlights the fact that the growth and welfare effects of pension reforms are limited by
other factors that incentivize retirement. Two important components emphasized previously are
health and fitness. These forces are captured by the cost to participation function in our model.
Improvements in health, for example, directly affect our cost to participation function and therefore
labor supply choices. We estimate the role of these issues by assuming that future gains to life
expectancy are accompanied by equivalent gains to health, i.e. rightward shifts in our cost to
participation function. Implementing innovations to health therefore require shifting the cost to
participation function by 3 years.



                                        [Table 11 about here]



    Table 11 suggests that innovations to health and fitness captured by our quantitative experiment
provide substantial welfare improvements. The per-period consumption equivalence for the United
Kingdom are larger than the highest welfare gains in any of pension reforms. The same is true in
France, Germany, and Italy for all but the largest cuts in pension benefits. In all four countries,
the gains to projected growth and increases in the effective retirement age outpace that of any
pension reform considered. Table 17 shows that the additional gains to growth are largely a
result of increased labor force participation rates and longer average hours worked. These results
further highlight the importance of labor supply decisions and life-cycle (dis-)incentives to work
for estimating the effects of demographic change.

                                                  23
6    Conclusion

In this paper, we have asked to what extent demographic trends affect economic growth in the four
largest European Economies: France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom. We use a general
equilibrium model with a rich demographic structure and funded pension systems to capture the
impact of ageing on changes in factor supplies. We find that the demographic transition can account
for a significant fraction of the historical growth slowdown in these economies, and that evolving
demographics will continue to drag down growth over the next 20 years.

   Our model framework shows that the large gains to life expectancy are economically more
important than declining fertility. Increases to longevity change individuals' savings and labor
supply decisions over the life cycle. Changes in longevity are also quantitatively more important
than fertility for both the number and the proportion of the population in advanced ages where they
have accumulated the most assets, where labor market decisions change, and where retirement is
spent.

    Much of the previous literature has focused on how demographics may change the equilibrium in
the market for capital, assuming that labor is supplied inelastically and that gains to longevity do not
change the length of working lives. In contrast we highlight that the most important consequences
for growth may come from how gradually higher individual life expectancy changes labor-supply
decisions on both on the intensive and extensive margin.

    With our baseline calibration, increases in life expectancy translate mostly into longer individual
time in retirement. Increases in life expectancy will also, mechanically, imply that the average age
will increase. An indirect consequence of individuals choosing to spend more time in retirement
and an increase in the number of individuals in the age groups that choose to reduce their labor
supply or retire, is that equilibrium tax rates must rise sharply to balance budgets. These higher
taxes further distort the participation decision of households.

    To account for labor supply decisions on the intensive and extensive margin, we employ a
reduced-form function that is convex in age to capture the cost of labor market participation. This
is calibrated to match historical moments. This functional form allows us to make projections for
future factor supplies and economic growth; gives us a laboratory to evaluate economic reforms to
increase growth; and allows us to change the measure of such reforms from a pecuniary measure
to a welfare measure.

   This paper underscores that a hugely important outstanding question is to acquire an even deeper
understanding of individuals' late-life labor supply and retirement decisions as life expectancy

                                                  24
changes. If retirement decisions are mainly due to incentives from government programs, there
may be both huge output and welfare gains from reforming those systems. If instead households
face strong intrinsic preferences against working at old ages, seemingly obvious policy reforms,
like increasing the threshold retirement age, may turn out to be welfare decreasing.




                                              25
References
Auclert, A., H. Malmberg, F. Martenet, and M. Rognlie (2019). Demographics, wealth and interest
  rates in the 21st Century. Mimeo, Stanford. Presented at SITE Summer Workshops 2018.

Auerbach, A. J. and L. J. Kotlikoff (1987). Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge University Press.

Backus, D., T. F. Cooley, and E. Henriksen (2014). Demography and low-frequency capital flows.
  Journal of International Economics 92(1), 94­102.

Bárány, Z., N. Coeurdacier, and S. Guibaud (2019). Capital flows in an aging world. Mimeo,
  SciencePo.

Blau, D. M. and D. B. Gilleskie (2006). Health insurance and retirement of married couples.
  Journal of Applied Econometrics 21(7), 935­953.

Blau, D. M. and D. B. Gilleskie (2008). The role of retiree health insurance in the employment
  behavior of older men. International Economic Review 49(2), 475­514.

Blondal, S. and S. Scarpetta (1997). Early retirement in OECD countries: The role of social
  security systems. OECD Economic Studies 29, 7­54.

Börsch-Supan, A., D. N. Leite, and J. Rausch (2019). Demographic changes, migration and
  economic growth in the Euro area. Prepared for the ECB Forum on Central Banking 2019,
  Sintra, Portugal, June 17­19, 2019.

Capatina, E. (2015). Life-cycle effects of health risk. Journal of Monetary Economics 74, 67 ­ 88.

Carvalho, C., A. Ferrero, and F. Nechio (2016). Demographics and real interest rates: Inspecting
  the mechanism. European Economic Review 88, 208­226.

Case, A. and A. Deaton (2017). Mortality and morbidity in the 21st Century. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity 48(1), 397­476.

Conesa, J. C. and C. Garriga (2016). Intergenerational policy and the measurement of tax incidence.
  European Economic Review 83(C), 1­18.

Conesa, J. C., T. J. Kehoe, V. M. Nygaard, and G. Raveendranathan (2019). Implications of
  increasing college attainment for aging in general equilibrium. Working Paper 26000, NBER.

Cooley, T. F. and E. Henriksen (2018). The demographic deficit. Journal of Monetary Economics 93,
  45­62.


                                                26
De Nardi, M., S. mrohorolu, and T. Sargent (1999). Projected U.S. demographics and social
  security. Review of Economic Dynamics 2(3), 575­615.

Erosa, A., L. Fuster, and G. Kambourov (2012). Labor supply and government programs: A
  cross-country analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 59(1), 84 ­ 107.

Erosa, A., L. Fuster, and G. Kambourov (2016). Towards a micro-founded theory of aggregate
  labour supply. Review of Economic Studies 83(3), 1001­1039.

Feroli, M. (2003). Capital flows among the G7 nations: A demographic perspective. FEDS Working
  Paper 2003-54, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Ferrero, A. (2010). A structural decomposition of the U.S. trade balance: Productivity, demo-
  graphics and fiscal policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (4), 478­490.

French, E. (2005). The effects of health, wealth, and wages on labour supply and retirement
  behaviour. Review of Economic Studies 72(2), 395­427.

French, E. and J. B. Jones (2011). The effects of health insurance and self-insurance on retirement
  behavior. Econometrica 79(3), 693­732.

Fuster, L., A. mrohorolu, and S. mrohorolu (2007). Elimination of social security in a dynastic
  framework. Review of Economic Studies 74(1), 113­145.

Gagnon, E., B. K. Johannsen, and D. López-Salido (2016). Understanding the new normal: The
  role of demographics. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080, Board of Governors
  of the Federal Reserve System.

Gollin, D. (2002). Getting income shares right. Journal of Political Economy 110(2), 458­474.

Gordon, R. J. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth. Princeton University Press.

Gruber, J. and D. Wise (1999). Social Security and Retirement around the World. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.

Hansen, G. (1993). The cyclcical and secular behaviour of the labor input: Comparing efficiency
  units and hours worked. Journal of Applied Econometrics 8(1), 71­80.

Henriksen, E. (2015). Representative survival probabilities for heterogeneous-agent economies.
  Mimeo, UC Davis.

Henriksen, E. and F. Lambert (2018). "Imbalances" for the long run. Working paper, NYU Stern
  School.

                                                27
Hopenhayn, H., J. Neira, and R. Singhania (2018). From population growth to firm demographics:
  Implications for concentration, entrepreneurship and the labor share. Working Paper 25382,
  NBER.

Ikeda, D. and M. Saito (2014). The effects of demographic changes on the real interest rate in
  Japan. Japan and the World Economy 32, 37­48.

mrohorolu, S., S. Kitao, and T. Yamada (2016). Achieving fiscal balance in Japan. International
 Economic Review 57 (1), 117­154.

Keese, M. (2003). A method for calculating the average effective age of retirement. Methodology
  paper, OECD.

King, R. G., C. I. Plosser, and S. T. Rebelo (1988). Production, growth, and business cycles.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 21(2), 195­232.

Kitao, S. (2014). Sustainable social security: Four options. Review of Economic Dynamics 17 (4),
  756­779.

Kopecky, J. (2018). An aging dynamo: Demographic change and the decline of entrepreneurial
  activity in the United States. Mimeo, Trinity College Dublin.

Kotlikoff, L., K. Smetters, and J. Walliser (2007). Mitigating america's demographic dilemma by
  pre-funding social security. Journal of Monetary Economics 54(2), 247­266.

Krueger, D. and A. Ludwig (2007). On the consequences of demographic change for rates of returns
  to capital, and the distribution of wealth and welfare. Journal of Monetary Economics 54(1),
  49­87.

McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2017). On financing retirement with an aging population.
 Quantitative Economics 8(1), 75­115.

McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2018). An aggregate model for policy analysis with demo-
 graphic change. Journal of the Economics of Ageing 11, 52­61.

Pashchenko, S. and P. Porapakkarm (2017). Work incentives of Medicaid beneficiaries and the role
  of asset testing. International Economic Review 58(4), 1117­1154.

Rogerson, R. and J. Wallenius (2013). Nonconvexities, retirement, and the elasticity of labor supply.
  American Economic Review 103(4), 1445­1462.

Rupert, P. and G. Zanella (2015). Revisiting wage, earnings, and hours profiles. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 72(C), 114­130.

                                                 28
Rust, J. and C. Phelan (1997). How social security and medicare affect retirement behavior in a
  world of incomplete markets. Econometrica 65(4), 781­831.

Sposi, M. (2019). Demographics and the evolution of global imbalances. Globalization Institute
  Working Paper 332, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Summers, L. H. (2014). U.S. economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the zero
  lower bound. Business Economics 49(2), 65­73.

Summers, L. H. (2016). The age of secular stagnation. Foreign Affairs ( ), 2­9.

United Nations (2017). World population prospects: The 2017 revision, key findings and advance
  tables. Working Paper ESA/P/WP/248, Department of Economics and Social Affairs, Population
  Division.

van der Klaauw, W. and K. I. Wolpin (2008). Social security and the retirement and savings
  behavior of low-income households. Journal of Econometrics 145(1), 21­42.




                                               29
A   Figures




     Figure 1: Real GDP per Capita in G7 Economies Excluding Canada and Japan




                                        30
Figure 2: Life Expectancy in G7 Economies Excluding Canada and Japan




                                31
(a) United Kingdom                                    (b) Germany




    (c) France                                          (d) Italy

                 Figure 3: Age-Cohort Distributions




                                32
Figure 4: Years in Retirement in G7 Economies Excluding Canada and Japan




   (a) Average Hours Worked                     (b) Labor Force Participation

                 Figure 5: Life-Cycle Labor Supply in 2015



                                    33
             (a) Interest rate                                (b) Output




                                      (c) Tax rates

Figure 6: Sensitivity of the retirement-age assumption on key variables and predictions




                                          34
Figure 7: Life-Cycle Productivity Profile




Figure 8: Conditional Survival Probability



                   35
B   Tables

           Table 1: Historical Growth Accounting Annualized Growth Rates

                             Y / pop      A      · K / L     L / pop   (1 - ) · h

         1975-1995
           France            1.88%     1.56%     0.96%      -0.12%      -0.53%
           Germany           2.30%     2.06%     0.90%      -0.09%      -0.57%
           Italy             2.43%     1.41%     0.96%       0.16%      -0.09%
           United Kingdom    2.26%     1.91%     0.65%       0.01%      -0.32%
           United States     2.21%     1.07%     0.35%       0.77%       0.02%
         1995-2014
           France            1.02%      0.65%    0.47%       0.21%      -0.30%
           Germany           1.34%      0.70%    0.37%       0.65%      -0.38%
           Italy             0.21%     -0.16%    0.44%       0.17%      -0.24%
           United Kingdom    1.54%      0.98%    0.23%       0.44%      -0.10%
           United States     1.42%      1.18%    0.52%      -0.18%      -0.11%


                             Table 2: Calibration Results


               LFPR60 - 64    LFPR65 - 69       Retire . Ag e   K /Y   Avg . Hour s W or ked
U.K.
   Data           0.37            0.110             62.0        3.02           0.34
   Benchmark      0.43            0.046             61.8        3.07           0.32
   Lump Sum       0.50            0.110             62.3        3.15           0.32
   Labor Tax      0.50            0.110             62.3        3.02           0.32
France
   Data           0.11            0.030             59.6        3.23           0.33
   Benchmark      0.28            0.033             60.0        3.27           0.29
   Lump Sum       0.34            0.036             60.3        3.21           0.30
   Labor Tax      0.29            0.030             59.8        3.27           0.29
Germany
   Data           0.19            0.045             60.3        3.55           0.33
   Benchmark      0.38            0.065             61.1        3.65           0.28
   Lump Sum       0.38            0.053             60.7        3.57           0.30
   Labor Tax      0.36            0.047             60.6        3.43           0.29
Italy
   Data           0.19            0.063             59.1        4.02           0.34
   Benchmark      0.28            0.050             59.7        4.16           0.29
   Lump Sum       0.27            0.022             59.7        4.37           0.32
   Labor Tax      0.27            0.033             59.6        4.16           0.30




                                          36
                  Table 3: Summary of 1995 Moments by Country

 Moment                                           France      Germany       Italy     U.K.
 Labor-force participation rate for ages 60-64     11%          19%         19%      37.2%
 Labor-force participation rate for ages 65-69     3.0%        4.5%         6.3%      11%
 Avg. hours worked for ages 20-64                  0.33         0.33        0.34      0.34
 Effective retirement age                          59.6         60.3        59.1       62
 Real interest rate                               5.75%        5.14%       6.96%     5.54%
 Capital-to-output ratio                           3.23         3.55        4.02      3.02
 Pension outlays as a fraction of GDP              9.9%        7.4%        10.2%      7.8%


         Table 4: Benchmark Model Historical Annualized Growth Summary


                     1975-1995          1995-2014          Change       Percent of Slowdown
United Kingdom         0.39%              0.06%             -0.33               46%
Germany                0.60%             -0.08%             -0.68               71%
France                 0.47%             -0.16%             -0.63               73%
Italy                  0.57%             -0.02%             -0.59               27%


                 Table 5: 1975-1995 Annualized Model Growth Rates


                              Y / pop     A       · K / L     L / pop   (1 - ) · h
         United Kingdom
            Benchmark          0.39      0.03       0.04      0.28         0.05
            Lump Sum           0.42      0.02       0.05      0.28         0.07
            Labor Tax          0.40      0.02       0.05      0.29         0.05
         France
            Benchmark          0.47      0.06       0.09      0.33        -0.01
            Lump Sum           0.45      0.05       0.07      0.33         0.01
            Labor Tax          0.46      0.06       0.08      0.33        -0.01
         Germany
            Benchmark          0.60      0.02       0.07      0.52        -0.02
            Lump Sum           0.57      0.03       0.06      0.50        -0.01
            Labor Tax          0.56      0.04       0.06      0.48        -0.01
         Italy
            Benchmark          0.57       0.01      0.10      0.45         0.01
            Lump Sum           0.57      -0.01      0.08      0.46         0.05
            Labor Tax          0.51       0.01      0.06      0.43         0.02




                                            37
     Table 6: 1995-2015 Annualized Model Growth Rates


                 Y / pop    A       · K / L    L / pop   (1 - ) · h
United Kingdom
   Benchmark       0.06    0.03     0.08       0.03        -0.09
   Lump Sum        0.06    0.03     0.07       0.03        -0.07
   Labor Tax       0.01    0.05     0.04      -0.01        -0.08
France
   Benchmark      -0.16    0.04     0.09      -0.18        -0.11
   Lump Sum       -0.15    0.04     0.07      -0.19        -0.07
   Labor Tax      -0.24    0.06     0.05      -0.26        -0.10
Germany
   Benchmark      -0.08    0.05     0.10      -0.11        -0.12
   Lump Sum       -0.11    0.04     0.07      -0.13        -0.09
   Labor Tax      -0.19    0.06     0.05      -0.18        -0.12
Italy
   Benchmark      -0.02    0.12     0.15      -0.15        -0.15
   Lump Sum       -0.11    0.12     0.11      -0.20        -0.14
   Labor Tax      -0.18    0.14     0.09      -0.25        -0.17




     Table 7: 2020-2040 Annualized Model Growth Rates



                 Y / pop    A       · K / L    L / pop   (1 - ) · h
United Kingdom
   Benchmark     -0.24     -0.01     0.05      -0.28        -0.01
   Lump Sum      -0.26     -0.03     0.02      -0.28         0.04
   Labor Tax     -0.35     -0.01    -0.01      -0.34         0.01
France
   Benchmark     -0.25     -0.01     0.04      -0.32        0.03
   Lump Sum      -0.22     -0.03     0.04      -0.31        0.07
   Labor Tax     -0.37     -0.02    -0.01      -0.38        0.04
Germany
   Benchmark     -0.52      0.02     0.08      -0.61        -0.01
   Lump Sum      -0.48     -0.01     0.06      -0.59         0.06
   Labor Tax     -0.71      0.01    -0.01      -0.72         0.01
Italy
   Benchmark     -0.67     -0.05     0.08      -0.76        0.05
   Lump Sum      -0.64     -0.09     0.06      -0.79        0.16
   Labor Tax     -1.13     -0.05    -0.07      -1.08        0.08




                              38
                     Table 8: Outlays as a Fraction of GDP


                             U.K.     France   Germany        Italy
            1975
              Lump Sum       7.10%    9.48%       7.58%      8.43%
              Labor Tax      7.04%    9.44%       7.63%      8.37%
            1995
              Lump Sum       7.85%    9.99%       7.39%      10.18%
              Labor Tax      7.81%    9.95%       7.45%      10.24%
            2015
              Lump Sum       8.81%   12.79%       10.26%     13.51%
              Labor Tax      8.86%   12.95%       10.52%     13.76%
            2020
              Lump Sum       9.41%   13.88%       11.05%     14.86%
              Labor Tax      9.48%   14.24%       11.38%     15.31%
            2040
              Lump Sum      12.51% 16.99%         16.15%     22.35%
              Labor Tax     12.84% 17.93%         17.35%     24.99%



Table 9: Labor Tax Model: Projected Growth Rates for an x % Decrease in Benefits


                 Y / pop (pp)         Retirement Ag e            CE (%)
                                          (yrs.)
  UK
     5%              0.03                  0.17                       0.40
     10%             0.07                  0.43                       0.80
     15%             0.11                  0.64                       1.17
     20%             0.15                  0.88                       1.55
  France
     5%              0.09                  0.46                       0.63
     10%             0.14                  0.72                       1.21
     15%             0.18                  1.03                       1.78
     20%             0.27                  1.49                       2.33
  Germany
     5%              0.04                  0.24                       0.63
     10%             0.13                  0.59                       1.32
     15%             0.17                  0.80                       1.91
     20%             0.22                  1.01                       2.48
  Italy
     5%              0.12                  0.42                       1.11
     10%             0.25                  0.84                       2.13
     15%             0.37                  1.29                       3.11
     20%             0.43                  1.55                       3.93



                                      39
 Table 10: 2020-2040 Annualized Growth Rates for a 5-Year Increase Retirement Age


                       Y / pop (pp)        Retirement Ag e           CE (%)
                                               (yrs.)

Lump Sum
  France                   0.07                  0.73                  1.21
  Germany                  0.11                  0.60                  1.55
  Italy                    0.11                  0.59                  2.56
  United Kingdom           0.10                  0.72                  1.08
Labor Tax
  France                   0.22                  1.29                  1.46
  Germany                  0.26                  1.31                  2.11
  Italy                    0.36                  1.43                  2.99
  United Kingdom           0.17                  1.08                  1.39




        Table 11: 2020-2040 Annualized Growth Rates for a 3 Year Shift in 


                       Y / pop (pp)        Retirement Ag e           CE (%)
                                               (yrs.)

Labor Tax
  France                   0.31                  1.47                  2.00
  Germany                  0.26                  1.53                  2.18
  Italy                    0.46                  1.71                  2.39
  United Kingdom           0.29                  1.45                  1.73




                                       40
                                 Table 12: Calibrated Parameters


                                                        1         2          3       p

          U.K.
             Benchmark       0.944    0.055   0.206   0.0505   0.00181      1.414   ­
             Lump Sum        0.958    0.055   0.274   0.0503   0.00192      1.331 0.592
             Labor Tax       0.955    0.055   0.339   0.0028   0.00225      1.285 0.583
          France
             Benchmark       0.942    0.046   0.355   0.0440   0.00203      1.355   ­
             Lump Sum        0.953    0.046   0.392   0.0370   0.00197      1.306 0.557
             Labor Tax       0.957    0.046   0.392   0.0390   0.00266      1.207 0.540
          Germany
             Benchmark       0.950    0.043   0.353   0.0495   0.00224      1.310   ­
             Lump Sum        0.958    0.043   0.332   0.0470   0.00196      1.323 0.602
             Labor Tax       0.957    0.043   0.347   0.0420   0.00294      1.196 0.578
          Italy
             Benchmark       0.937    0.013   0.350   0.0495   0.00215      1.316     ­
             Lump Sum        0.952    0.013   0.266   0.0412   0.00232      1.304   0.723
             Labor Tax       0.951    0.013   0.415   0.0014   0.00243      1.243   0.673




                                     Table 13: Fixed Parameters


Parameter                               Source                  France       Germany           Italy        U.K.
Cohort Size                      United Nations (2017)          Figure 3      Figure 3       Figure 3     Figure 3
Survival Probability               Henriksen (2015)             Figure 8      Figure 8       Figure 8     Figure 8
Life-Cycle Productivity             Hansen (1993)               Figure 7      Figure 7       Figure 7     Figure 7
Capital Share                        Gollin (2002)                0.33          0.33           0.33         0.33
Utility Curvature                  King et al. (1988)           1.0, 4.0      1.0, 4.0       1.0, 4.0     1.0, 4.0
Idiosyncratic Productivity    Cooley and Henriksen (2018)      0.97, 0.02    0.97, 0.02     0.97, 0.02   0.97, 0.02
Pension Eligibility Age       Blondal and Scarpetta (1997)         60            65             62           65




                                                41
Table 14: Lump Sum Model: 2020-2040 Annual Growth Rates for an x % Decrease in Benefits



                           Y / pop    A       · K / L     L / pop   (1 - ) · h
               UK
                5%         -0.23     -0.02        0.03   -0.27         0.03
                10%        -0.21     -0.02        0.04   -0.25         0.02
                15%        -0.19     -0.02        0.07   -0.24         0.01
                20%        -0.17     -0.01        0.07   -0.22        -0.01
               France
                 5%        -0.23     -0.02        0.03   -0.30         0.06
                 10%       -0.21     -0.02        0.05   -0.29         0.05
                 15%       -0.19     -0.01        0.06   -0.28         0.03
                 20%       -0.17     -0.01        0.07   -0.25         0.02
               Germany
                 5%        -0.46     -0.01        0.07   -0.58         0.05
                 10%       -0.45     -0.01        0.08   -0.56         0.03
                 15%       -0.41      0.01        0.10   -0.55         0.02
                 20%       -0.39      0.01        0.11   -0.53         0.01
               Italy
                  5%       -0.65     -0.08        0.07   -0.78         0.14
                  10%      -0.64     -0.08        0.09   -0.77         0.12
                  15%      -0.62     -0.06        0.09   -0.77         0.11
                  20%      -0.59     -0.05        0.10   -0.75         0.10




                                             42
Table 15: Labor Tax Model: Annualized Projected Growth Rates for an x % Decrease in Benefits


                             Y / pop    A       · K / L     L / pop   (1 - ) · h
                 UK
                    5%       -0.32     -0.01        0.01   -0.32            0.01
                    10%      -0.28     -0.01        0.02   -0.29           -0.01
                    15%      -0.24     -0.01        0.04   -0.26           -0.01
                    20%      -0.20     -0.01        0.05   -0.23           -0.01
                 France
                    5%       -0.28     -0.01        0.02   -0.32            0.03
                    10%      -0.23     -0.01        0.04   -0.29            0.03
                    15%      -0.19     -0.01        0.05   -0.25            0.02
                    20%      -0.10     -0.01        0.08   -0.20            0.01
                 Germany
                    5%       -0.67      0.01        0.01   -0.69            0.01
                    10%      -0.58      0.01        0.04   -0.64           -0.01
                    15%      -0.54      0.03        0.04   -0.61           -0.01
                    20%      -0.49      0.02        0.07   -0.58           -0.01
                 Italy
                    5%       -1.01     -0.05       -0.03   -1.00            0.07
                    10%      -0.88     -0.04        0.01   -0.93            0.07
                    15%      -0.76     -0.04        0.05   -0.85            0.06
                    20%      -0.70     -0.04        0.07   -0.80            0.06




     Table 16: 2020-2040 Annualized Growth Rates for a 5 Year Increase Retirement Age



                                  Y / pop      A      · K / L    L / pop    (1 - ) · h
            Lump Sum
              France              -0.15     -0.02      0.06      -0.22         0.03
              Germany             -0.37      0.01      0.11      -0.50         0.01
              Italy               -0.54     -0.06      0.12      -0.69         0.08
              United Kingdom      -0.16     -0.02      0.07      -0.20        -0.01
            Labor Tax
              France              -0.15     -0.02      0.05      -0.22         0.04
              Germany             -0.45      0.01      0.07      -0.53         0.01
              Italy               -0.77     -0.06      0.03      -0.82         0.08
              United Kingdom      -0.18     -0.02      0.05      -0.21        -0.01




                                               43
Table 17: 2020-2040 Annualized Model Growth Rates for a 3 Year Shift in 



                       Y / pop    A       · K / L    L / pop   (1 - ) · h

   Labor Tax
     France             0.05     -0.01     0.08     -0.14         0.11
     Germany           -0.35      0.03     0.04     -0.51         0.08
     Italy             -0.67     -0.02    -0.01     -0.78         0.13
     United Kingdom    -0.06      0.01     0.02     -0.17         0.08




                                   44
