                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        SUBJECTIVE PARENTAL BELIEFS. THEIR MEASUREMENT AND ROLE

                                       Orazio Attanasio
                                        Flávio Cunha
                                        Pamela Jervis

                                      Working Paper 26516
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26516


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No
695300 - HKADeC - ERC-2015-AdG/ERC-2015-AdG). Cunha acknowledges funding from NIH
grant 1R01HD073221-01A1. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Orazio Attanasio, Flávio Cunha, and Pamela Jervis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Subjective Parental Beliefs. Their Measurement and Role
Orazio Attanasio, Flávio Cunha, and Pamela Jervis
NBER Working Paper No. 26516
November 2019
JEL No. I21,I24,O1

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the importance of maternal subjective beliefs about the technology of skill formation in
determining parental investments on child development. We describe our framework in three
steps. First, we discuss the construction of the survey instrument we used to elicit maternal
subjective beliefs. Second, we show how to convert the answers to the survey instrument into
estimates of maternal subjective beliefs. Finally, we correlate maternal subjective beliefs with
maternal investments of child development. We apply our framework to a unique dataset
collected as part of an 18-month-long parenting stimulation program in Colombia, whose target
population were low-income households with children aged 12 to 24 months at baseline and
lasted 18 months. In this program, home visitors paid weekly visits to randomly chosen
households to improve mother-child interactions and other maternal behaviors that foster the
development of children's cognitive and non-cognitive skills. We show that the vast majority of
mothers believe that the technology of skill formation follows a Cobb-Douglas parameterization,
but there is significant heterogeneity in coefficients of investments across mothers. In particular,
mothers hold low subjective expectations, which means that mothers underestimate the returns to
their investments. We also find that maternal subjective beliefs predict investments, but that the
program did not affect maternal subjective beliefs.

Orazio Attanasio                                 Pamela Jervis
Department of Economics                          Department of Industrial Engineering
Yale University                                  University of Chile
37 Hillhouse Avenue                              Beauchef 851
New Haven, CT 06511                              Santiago, Chile
and Institute for Fiscal Studies, FAIR,          and Institute for Fiscal Studies
BREAD and CEPR                                   pjervis@dii.uchile.cl
and also NBER
orazio.attanasio@yale.edu

Flávio Cunha Department
of Economics Rice
University
P.O. Box 1892
Houston, TX 77251-1892
and NBER
flaviocunha@rice.edu
1       Introduction

A large body of research, in developed and developing countries, show that differences
in cognitive and non-cognitive skills across socio-economic groups appear early on in
the lives of children and remain stable once these children start school. This evidence
includes studies from developed countries, such as Cunha et al. (2006) in the United
States, and developing countries such as Rubio-Codina et al. (2015) in Colombia. Lags
accumulated in the first three years are important and have long term consequences
(see, for example, Currie and Thomas (1999), Behrman et al. (2009) and Heckman
et al. (2010)).
    There is also mounting evidence that development in the first 3 years of life is
malleable and, therefore, salient for interventions. Many interventions, based on stim-
ulation and aiming at changing parenting practices, seem to be effective. The cele-
brated Reach Up program has been proven to be effective in the short and long run
(see for instance Grantham-McGregor et al. (1991) for some of the short run impacts
and Gertler et al. (2014) for the long run ones). In the United States, the literature
reports considerable impacts of home visitation programs when they were implemented
in controlled, small-scale settings (Baker and Piotrkowski (1996), Caldera et al. (2007),
Olds et al. (1998), Eckenrode et al. (2010), Drotar et al. (2009)).1 Similar evidence,
from different contexts, is accumulating.
   To better understand the impacts of these interventions and possibly to design
new ones, it is therefore key to understand what makes them work and, in particular,
what drives parental behavior. Attanasio et al. (2014), for instance, show that a large-
scale adaptation of the Jamaica program in Colombia increased cognitive and receptive
language skills by 26% and 22% of a standard deviation, respectively. Attanasio et al.
(2018) then argue that the intervention's short run impacts are to a great extent
explained by increased parental investments. In particular, they report that both
time spent interacting with children and the number of didactic materials at home
increased by 30% and 23% of a standard deviation. Furthermore, they show that a
careful mediation analysis that takes into account the endogeneity of investment, can
explain with these increases most of the impacts. The salient question, then, is, why
do parents targeted by these interventions increase and improve parental investment?

    1
      More recently, Michalopoulos et al. (2019) find more modest impacts of programs when imple-
mented at a larger scale. In their study, they estimate that home visitation programs improve the
quality of the home environment by 9% of a standard deviation but that these programs do not have
an impact on child development as measured by expressive language and socio-emotional skills.

                                               1
  There are at least three channels through which home visitation programs and,
more generally, stimulation interventions may influence parental investments. First,
home visitors model parental behavior and thus present forms of interaction that are
more conducive for positive development. According to this channel, home visitation
programs improve child development by encouraging parents to adopt technologies
of skill formation that are more efficient in promoting child development. Second,
some programs offer didactic materials that might increase the psychic benefits that
parents experience when interacting with their children. Third, home visitors pro-
vide information to parents about the importance of early parental investments for
child development. According to this channel, some parents may choose low levels of
parental investments because they expect returns to this investment to be low, which is
consistent with anthropological and sociological studies in the US (Lareau (2003) and
Putnam (2015)). In this case, while all parents might care equally about the develop-
ment and well-being of their children, low-income parents might not be aware of the
importance that some specific activities, such as talking and interacting in specific ways
with a small child, might have for their development. And yet, the findings in child
development indicate that early stimulation is essential for subsequent development
and that exposure to language and meaningful interactions drive subsequent devel-
opments. Under this hypothesis, low-income parents, pursuing what Lareau (2003)
defines "natural growth," could be making suboptimal parental investment choices.
    The standard practice in economics to investigate what drives parental investment
is to estimate (dynamic) models where parents are assumed to solve an optimization
problem where their welfare depends both on their consumption and on children out-
comes and where they "know" the functional form of the technology of skill formation
of child development or human capital (Del Boca et al. (2013)). Within such mod-
els, parental investment is driven by the nature of the technology of skill formation
of human capital, by financial resources and the cost of investment in children and
by how much parents care for their children. Because these models assume parents
"know" the technology of skill formation, these models are ill-suited to understand the
importance of parental beliefs about the technology of skill formation in determining
parental investments in children. We can easily extend the theory to allow for misin-
formation about the technology of skill formation. Empirically, however, it is tough to
provide credible estimates about the importance of misinformation because only under
exceptional circumstances can one separately identify preferences from beliefs Manski
(2004).


                                            2
   One possibility to study parental behavior without assuming that parents "know"
the nature of the process of child development or the technology of skill formation of
human capital is to elicit directly parental beliefs about the process of child develop-
ment and, in particular, about the usefulness of parental stimulation and investment
and how these inputs interact with child development before investing. In this paper,
we elicit maternal subjective beliefs in a sample of poor mothers in Colombia. We
show how to convert the answers to a specific set of questions into estimates of ex-
pected rates of returns on specific investment and then relate these estimates to actual
parental investment behavior. With our approach, mothers share beliefs about the
set of possible technologies (i.e., they agree that a family of technology of skill forma-
tion adequately describe the process of child development), but we allow each mother
to have individual beliefs about the parameters of the technology of skill formation.
Therefore, in our framework, we allow mothers to have the right or the wrong expecta-
tion about the productivity of specific inputs. We can recover, for each mother in our
sample, the expectation about the returns to parental investments, and we can iden-
tify the technology of skill formation that describes their expectations about the child
development process (given inputs). Additionally, we can investigate if there is hetero-
geneity in expectations about the returns to early investments, what variables explain
the heterogeneity in expected returns, if this heterogeneity in expectations about re-
turns predict heterogeneity in parental investments, and if the parenting stimulation
program influenced the heterogeneity in expectations about returns to investment.
   Our work is closely related to Cunha et al. (2013) who elicit maternal beliefs about
the technology of skill formation from disadvantaged mothers in Philadelphia, USA.
As in that paper, we create scenarios of different inputs and ask mothers to report
expectations about child development for each scenario of the inputs. However, we
argue that our methods are more appropriate for researchers interested in eliciting
such beliefs from populations with limited literacy and cognitive skills as our beliefs
questions are far more straightforward than those used by Cunha et al. (2013). Our
new beliefs elicitation survey instrument, in turn, requires us to develop new methods
to analyze our data and to map maternal answers to expectations about returns to
parental investment.
   Our paper make four important contributions. First, we propose a new tool to
elicit information on beliefs by the respondent. Much work went into the design and
implementation of the measurement tool and its validation. We wanted a measure-
ment tool that could be implemented and used easily in a large scale survey and, at


                                            3
the same time, allows to derive measures of subjective beliefs about the process of child
development that could be compared to actual data from the same population. From a
measurement point of view, our approach consists in assuming that parents think that
child development depends over a given period on the developmental status of a child
and parental investment. We therefore ask mothers to relate different scenarios of chil-
dren initial development and parental investment to certain developmental outcomes.
In particular, we consider high and low levels of child development at the beginning
of the period and high and low levels of parental investment. With these data we can
derive very simply measures of investment returns under two different levels of child
development at the beginning of the period. We then put more structure in the data
and device an approach that allows to estimate, for each mother in the sample, the
parameters of a subjective technology of skill formation.
  Second, in our data, we can estimate the technology of skill formation objectively.
Therefore, we can quantify whether maternal subjective beliefs are biased (or not) by
comparing objective estimates with subjective beliefs. We find that maternal subjective
beliefs are downward biased and that most mothers have expectations of returns to
investments that are too low. Our findings, thus, mirror those of Boneva and Rauh
(2018) who elicited maternal returns about early and late investments and find that
mothers in the UK have low expectations about the returns to early investments in
children.
  Third, we relate our maternal subjective to actual parental investments in our data.
We find that maternal subjective beliefs about the returns to parental investment cor-
relate significantly with actual investment behavior. As mentioned above, we estimate
returns to investments for two scenarios of child development at the beginning of the
period. We find evidence that heterogeneity in both expectations predicts heterogene-
ity in parental investments, but that the correlation is stronger for the return under
high level of child development at the beginning of the period.
   Our final contribution is to assess whether the parenting stimulation program ran-
domly targeted to half the sample affected maternal subjective beliefs or not. Our
result is negative. The distribution of maternal subjective beliefs, elicited two years
after the end of the intervention whose impacts were measured in Attanasio et al.
(2014), is the same for control and treatment groups. This result is consistent with
the fact that Andrew et al. (2018) find no differences in parental investments (or in
child development) between control and treatment group one year after the end of the
program. Our study suggests that the lack of permanent effects in parental investments


                                           4
is because the program did not permanently change maternal subjective beliefs.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 proposes a theoretical
framework that highlights the contribution of our paper. Section 3 describes the context
of our study. Section 4 presents the methodology to elicit maternal subjective beliefs.
Section 5 develops econometric techniques to analyze our data. Section 6 presents
our empirical results. Section 7 is the conclusion. Section A presents appendices that
provide further details about our study.

2    The Process of Child Development:
     Subjective Beliefs and Objective Evidence

In this paper, we study a novel dataset that includes information on parental beliefs
about the process of child development. The data we use was collected to evaluate a
parenting stimulation program within a cluster Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT).
We collected information on parental beliefs through a survey instrument, which we
discuss extensively in Section 4. The module was informed by a model of parental
behavior that incorporates a technology of skill formation whose output is child de-
velopment measured by multiple skills. Such a model provides a useful conceptual
framework that we use to interpret the collected data. We describe it in this section.
    While the focus of this paper is not the estimation of parental preferences, it is use-
ful to consider explicitly the problem faced by parents. We assume parents maximise
an objective function and that parental preferences depend on household consumption
(Ci ), child development at the end of the period (Hi,1 ), and, possibly, parental invest-
ment (Xi ). The direct dependence of preferences on parental investment is not standard
but captures the potential psychic benefits of investing in children. We assume that
parents' objective function is Cobb-Douglas in the three arguments:

                      U (Ci , Hi,1 , Xi ) = ln Ci + i ln Hi,1 + i ln Xi

    The maximisation problem faced by parents is subject to a budget constraint. Let
Pi and Yi denote, respectively, the relative price of parental investment and household
income. As we assume this is a one-period model without saving or borrowing, we
write the budget constraint as:


                                      C i + Pi X i = Y i                               (1)
    In addition to the budget constraint, parents face the constraint imposed by the
process of child development. Let Hi,0 denote the child development at the beginning of

                                              5
the period. Let i and i denote zero-mean variables that are, respectively, known and
unknown by the parent at the time that parental investments are chosen. Both shocks
are unobserved by the researcher. We assume that the technology of skill formation is
a translog function:


               ln Hi,1 = 0 + 1 ln Hi,0 + 2 ln Xi + 3 [ln Hi,0 ln Xi ] +         i   + i          (2)
   The technology of skill formation in equation (2) reduces to a Cobb-Douglas when
3 = 0. Cunha et al. (2013) assume that the technology of skill formation is a con-
stant elasticity of substitution (CES), which can also yield, under certain assumptions,
a Cobb-Douglas function. Attanasio et al. (2018) also use a CES technology of skill
formation but consider different types of parental investments (time and material in-
vestment). They cannot reject the Cobb-Douglas specification and find that in the
case of cognition, only material investment plays an important role. In our model, we
consider only one dimension of child development (a combination language and cogni-
tion skills) and one dimension of parental investment (also a combination of materials
and activities/time). These simplifications are driven by the nature of the beliefs data
collected but, given the results obtained by Attanasio et al. (2018) on the same data,
are not particularly stringent.
   Equation (2) represents the actual process of child development. In standard mod-
els, parents are assumed to know such a process when making decisions about the
allocation between consumption and investment goods. We relax this assumption.
Instead, while we do assume that parents' beliefs about the technology of skill forma-
tion can be well approximated by the right functional form, we do not assume that
they know the correct values for the parameters of such a technology. That is, we do
not assume that the vector  = (0 , 1 , 2 , 3 ) is in the information set of the parents.
Therefore, parents do not necessarily observe or know the "true" technology of skill
formation (the objective technology of skill formation ), but have beliefs about it.
   Let i = {Yi , Pi , µi,0 , µi,1 , µi,2 , µi,3 , i , i , i } . The set i is a subset of the parent's
information set. We assume that parent i believes that the technology that produces
child development in period t = 1 as a function of child development in period t = 0
and parental investment is:

            E [ln Hi,1 | i , Hi,0 , Xi ] =µi,0 + µi,1 ln Hi,0 + µi,2 ln Xi +
                                         + µi,3 [ln Hi,0 ln Xi ] + E [ i | i , Hi,0 , Xi ]       (3)

   Equations (2) and (3) play different roles in the model of child development and

                                                 6
parental investment. The objective technology of skill formation in equation (2) de-
scribes the actual process of child development, given child development at the begin-
ning of the period, Hi,0 , and parental investment, Xi . Equation (3) and its parameters
represent subjective beliefs about the process and are used by parents to determine
parental investment choices.
   The objective technology of skill formation, equation (2), can be estimated from
actual data on child development at t = 0 and parental investment. The challenge
one faces in obtaining consistent estimates of the parameters of the technology of skill
formation is the fact that some of its arguments, and in particular parental investment,
are chosen by parents and are therefore likely to be correlated to the residual terms in
equation (2).
   We assume parents maximise expected utility that depends on their consumption,
child development and posssibly on investment:

                     max E [ln Ci + i ln Hi,1 + i ln Xi | i , Hi,0 , Xi ]
                       Xi

subject to (1), (2) and (3).
   From this problem it is possible to derive the following investment policy function
which determines parental choices:

                                      Xi = g (i , Hi,0 )                                   (4)

   The investment equation (4) is a function of preference parameters (i and i ),
beliefs parameters (µi,2 and µi,3 ), child development at the beginning of period (Hi,0 ),
income (Yi ) and prices (Pi ). As our data comes from the evaluation of a stimulation
intervention, among the determinants of investment we also have a dummy variable
that indicates random assignment to control (di = 0) or treatment(di = 1). Equation
(4) makes clear that investment behavior is driven by a combination of parental pref-
erences and subjective parental beliefs about the parameters of the technology of skill
formation.
   Most studies in the literature on child development do not have data on preferences
or beliefs. Previous studies explored information on Xi , Hi,0 , Yi , Pi , or di to estimate an
equation such as (4) while assuming that parents knew the parameters of the objective
technology of skill formation. As we discuss below and as argued in Attanasio et al.
(2018), it is possible to estimate the parameters of the objective production function
in equation (2) without using data on parental beliefs, even when the latter differ
from the former, that is when parents might have distorted views of the process of

                                              7
child development. However, without any other information, it is not possible to
identify separately the µi 's, which represent subjective beliefs about the process of
child development, from the preference parameters i and i .
      To get consistent estimates of the parameters that characterise the process of skill
formation in equation (2) we use an IV approach. It is therefore essential that the policy
function (4) for investment contains valid instruments. However, the approach we use
does not necessarily require the correct specification and estimation of the investment
function or the assumption that parents know the "true" technology of skill formation
or even data on beliefs.
    We describe the methodology we use in Section 5.3. The main intuition is simple
and built on what was proposed by Williams et al. (2019). We first use a measurement
system to obtain from available measures estimates of the latent factors (on child
development and parental investment) that enter in equation (2). Then, we use the
randomness of the allocation as an IV to obtain the parameter estimates from these
factors. The randomness of the allocation, combined with the result found in Attanasio
et al. (2018), who argue that the parenting stimulation program did not affect the
technology of skill formation, but induced parents to change their parental investment
behavior, provides us with a valid instrument to obtain consistent estimates of the
objective technology of skill formation (2).


3      The Data: Origin and Content

In this section, we present the data we use in our study. First, we discuss its origin.
Second, we describe the measures of child development and parental investment con-
tained in the data. The measures are key to the design of the beliefs questions we
discuss next.

3.1     The Evaluation of a Parenting Stimulation Program

As mentioned above, we use data that were collected to evaluate the impact of a
parenting stimulation program aimed at fostering the development of young children
living in poor families in Colombia. The basic structure of the program was guided by
the Jamaica study of early years parenting stimulation by Sally Grantham-McGregor
Grantham-McGregor et al. (1991). The RCT in Colombia was designed to evaluate
the effect of two different interventions and their combination, using a 2 × 2 design.
The first treatment was a parenting stimulation program delivered through weekly


                                             8
home visits to stimulate the child and involve the caregiver and child in a number of
structured visits, while the second was a nutritional supplementation.
   The parenting stimulation program used the infrastructure of an existing welfare
program and community women to deliver the stimulation component, in an attempt
to test a scalable version of the program. The Jamaica curriculum (Reach-Up ) was
adapted to the Colombian context. The original curriculum aimed to promote child
development in an integrated manner (language, cognitive, motor and socio-emotional
skills) and to encourage caregivers to teach their children based on events surrounding
daily routine activities. The curriculum was based on picture books, pictures to stimu-
late conversation, puzzles, cubes/blocks and patters, toys from recycled materials and
language games and songs.
   The evaluation sample included 1,429 children aged 12-24 months at baseline living
in 96 semi-urban towns. The randomisation, over the 4 groups (Stimulation, Supple-
mentation (micronutrients), Stimulation + Supplementation and Control) was done
across towns, to avoid contamination of the control group.
   The parenting stimulation program had significant impacts on a variety of out-
comes. which are discussed in Attanasio et al. (2014). This study used two surveys on
the children in the evaluation sample and their primary caregiver: the baseline survey
collected before the program started in 2009-2010 (children aged 12-24 months) and a
first follow-up survey collected 18 months after the baseline, at the end of the program,
in the last few months of 2011. In the baseline and first follow-up surveys, data were
collected to measure children's cognitive, language, and socio-emotional skills as well as
height, weight, haemoglobin, and morbidity. Parental investments were measured with
data on food intakes, childcare arrangements, didactic materials, parent-child interac-
tions, and time use. Finally, data on primary caregivers and other household members
was collected using a general household survey. These included data on socioeconomic
status, education, labour supply, time use, reproductive history, health conditions,
depression, knowledge on parenting, parenting practices and the home environment,
among others.
  Attanasio et al. (2018) show that these early impacts on child development were,
to a large extent, explained by an increase in parental investment. One possibility
to explain such an increase, caused by a program that did not provide parents with
any resources, is that the program changed parental beliefs about the process of child
development. To investigate such a hypothesis, data on parental beliefs and on how
they relate to parental investment can be very useful. More generally, we can relate


                                            9
data on parental beliefs to parental investment, both as a way to validate our novel
measures and to investigate the role that beliefs play in investment choices.
      About two years after the end of the program, the children and their families
that participated into the study were contacted again, to collect information on the
medium-run impacts of the program, which are described in Andrew et al. (2018).2
The follow-up two, that happened in the fall of 2013, included, among other things,
a survey instrument to elicit parental beliefs about the process of child development,
designed along the lines we describe in Section 4.5. The survey instruments were
administered to the primary caregivers, who were mostly mothers. In what follows, we
refer to parental subjective beliefs as maternal subjective beliefs.

3.2     Measures of Child Development and Parental Investments

In this subsection, we summarize the measures of child development and parental
investments that were collected in the baseline and first follow-up surveys of the eval-
uation study. Details on these data are important for this paper as we used them
to design the beliefs elicitation survey instrument we describe in Section 4.5 and to
estimate the parameters of the objective process of child development, which we then
compare to the beliefs data.
   To assess child development, we used Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Devel-
opment, Edition III (Bayley (2006)) and the short versions of the MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventory (Jackson-Maldonado et al. (2012)). We use
these instruments from the baseline and the first follow-up surveys to estimate, respec-
tively, (the log of) child development at the beginning of the period (ln Hi,0 ), and end
of the period (ln Hi,1 ).
      The BSI-III is considered the gold-standard assessment of child development for
children below age 42 months. It measures cognition, expressive language, receptive
language, fine motor, and gross motor skills. For our analysis we use the subscales that
relate to expressive and receptive language and cognition.
      The MLI has three versions which depend on the child's age. MLI-I is appropriate
for children aged between 8 to 18 months-old. For each of 104 words prompted by
the interviewer, the parent reports if the child "understands and says the word," "un-
derstands, but does not say the word," or "neither understands, nor says the word."
The MLI-II is appropriate for children aged between 19 to 30 months-old. For each

   2
    Andrew et al. (2018) report a fade-out of the program's impacts on mesures of child development
and on parental investment.

                                                10
of 100 words prompted by the interviewer, the parents report if the child "says the
word" or "does not say the word" that is asked by the interviewer. Both of these were
collected at baseline. The MLI-III is appropriate for children aged between 31 and 48
months-old. For each of 100 words prompted by the interviewer, the parents report if
the child "says the word" or "does not say the word" that is asked by the interviewer.
The MLI-III was collected in follow-up one survey.
      There are several important differences between the MLI and the BSID-III. First,
the former is based on parental report while the latter is scored based on direct obser-
vation of the subject child. Second, the MLI was usually administered at the primary
caregiver house by the interviewer that collected the household survey, while the BSID-
III was administrated in community centers by a trained evaluator.
      To assess parental investments, we used the UNICEF Family Care Indicator instru-
ment (FCI, Frongillo et al. (2003)), which corresponds to Xi in our model and we use
the data collected in follow-up one. This instrument contains questions about the types
and number of play materials used by the child as well as the types and frequency of
play activities. The data reflect the interactions between the primary caregiver (mostly
the mother) and the child. We have a third source of data, directly reported by parents,
that measure the amount of time parents interact with the children on a given day.


4      Elicitation of Maternal Subjective Beliefs

In this section, we describe the methodology we use to develop the survey instrument
to elicit information on maternal beliefs about the technology of skill formation. In
particular, we discuss how we used existing data on child development and parental
investment to design the beliefs questions. We start with an intuitive explanation of
our approach. We then provide the details of the techniques we use in the various steps
to design the beliefs questions.

4.1     An intuitive summary

A first and important part of our approach consists in using the available data to relate
the latent variables of our conceptual framework, child development and the parental
investment, to observable variables. In formulating the beliefs questions, we assume
that mothers use the same mapping from the relevant latent variables (child develop-
ment and investment) to observable variables. Therefore, in our measurement tools,
we want to include variables that, from the point of view of the mothers, are salient in-


                                           11
dicators of child development and parental investment. The relationship between child
development and observable measures is important as we will explore it to estimate
the process of child development, that is, the equation that describes the causal rela-
tionship between inputs and child developmental outcomes. As we want to compare
the estimates of the process of children cognitive development with parental beliefs, it
is crucial that the developmental metric used in the actual data is comparable to that
used with the beliefs data.
   In the conceptual framework we discussed in Section 2, child development is rep-
resented by a latent variable Hi,a , which evolves as the child ages. Such a variable,
for child i aged a, Hi,a , depends on the level of child development at the previous age
a - 1 and, among other environmental factors, on parental investment, Xi . Equation
(2) represents such a process. In section 4.3.2, we explain the measurement system
which relates the latent variables in our conceptual framework (and our representation
of maternal beliefs) to observable variables and discuss how we estimate it.
   In eliciting subjective maternal beliefs about the process of child development, we
posit that mothers believe that child development at the end of the period depends
on child development at the beginning of the period, parental investments, and other
variables. However, we do not assume that mothers know the "true" process of child
development. To elicit beliefs about the developmental process, we present mothers
with several "scenarios" - that is, pairs of parental investment and child development
at the beginning of the period. For each scenario, we ask mothers to report expected
child developmental outcomes. Both the scenarios and the outcomes are formulated
in terms of observable and, as we argue below, salient variables. In section 4.3.1, we
explain the IRT model which aggregates the individual items of child development and
parental investment measures into continuous scores. We note that the measurement
systems we estimate plays two roles. On the one hand, we use them to design the
beliefs questions in that they allow us to use well understood language and parental
investments which is related to child development. On the other, we use to estimate
from available data latent factors, which in turn are used to estimate the process of
child development. To make the process estimates comparable to the estimates derived
from the beliefs question we need to make sure we use the same metric in estimating
the relevant latent factors.
   Armed with estimates of the measurement systems that relate latent factors (child
development and investment) to observable variables, we can convert both the scenar-
ios and the outcomes into estimates of the relevant latent factor that appear in our


                                          12
framework. This approach allows us to map out the following function:


              E [ln Hi,1 |i , H0 , X ] = f i (H0 , X ) = E [f i (H0 , X ) + i |i , H0 , X ]         (5)

where i indicates the mother. As i indexes the function f , we let each mother have a
different belief about the process of child development that links Hi,0 and Xi to Hi,1 .
Equation (5) can be interpreted as a more general specification of an equation such as
(3). The expression after the second equal sign in equation (5) stresses the fact that
child development does not depend only on child development at the beginning of the
period and parental investment, but also on a variety of other factors. As mothers
are likely to be aware of the importance of these additional factors, we frame the
beliefs questions referring to a hypothetical child, explicitly not their child. Our aim
is to obtain information on their subjective beliefs about the role played by parental
investment (X ) and children's initial conditions (H0 ) in the developmental process.                  i

represents heterogeneity in the process of child development with zero mean conditional
on our exogenously chosen pairs, but it is not zero mean conditional on the actual
realization of the pairs for mother i.3
    Given the structure in equation (5) and the measurement system, the different pairs
presented to the mothers describe different scenarios of values of ln H0 and ln X ; the
possible answers represent measures of maternal expectations of child development at
the end of the period, that is, they are error-ridden measures of E [ln Hi,1 |i , H0 , X ],
that correspond to each scenario.
    Presenting mothers with different combinations of scenarios, for both child devel-
opment at the beginning of the period and parental investment, allows us to get a
better mapping of the function representing mothers' perception of the process of skill
formation, by covering a larger subset of the domain of the relevant function. More-
over, asking several questions regarding different outcomes for each scenario allows us
to reduce the influence of measurement error from the beliefs elicitation. However,
the larger the number of pairs, the more costly it is for the mothers to answer our
beliefs elicitation survey instrument. We design four different scenarios for H0 and
X , corresponding to "low" and "high" values of H0 and X . Mothers are then asked
about the age at which the hypothetical child is able to achieve certain tasks under
each alternative scenario. The four scenarios are a compromise between the benefits

   3
     This observation provides an intuition of why we use an IV approach to estimate the technology
of skill formation objectively, but do not have to do so for the estimation of the subjective technology
of skill formation.

                                                   13
and the costs associated with the elicitation of maternal beliefs.
   In the rest of this section, we discuss how the scenarios are formulated, how
they relate to ln H0 and ln X and how the answers given for each scenario relate to
E [ln Hi,1 |i , H0 , X ]. Before that, however, we discuss how we ensure that we use the
same and comparable metric to measure the various factors estimated from data and
beliefs questions, and we sketch how the abstract constructs of ln H1 , ln H0 and ln X are
translated into variables and situations that can be easily understood by the mothers
we interview.

4.2     Location and Scale of Child Development

As our conceptual framework deals with unobserved latent factors representing child
development (and parental investment) for which we have a number of measures or
markers, we need to establish a cardinal metric that is going to be used for such
factors. Choosing a consistent and comparable metric is particularly important as we
aim to compare objective data and relationships on the process of child development
to those perceived by mothers. In this section, we discuss the child development metric
we use.
    When measuring development in children younger that 42 months, the Bayley Scales
of Infant Development (BSID) are often considered some of the best available measures.
Each BSID-III subscale is measured in terms of a raw score based on the number of
items for which the examined child receives credit (i.e., 1 point). The number of items
that children answer correctly increases, on average, with their age. We exploit this
correlation to construct both the location and the scale of the child's latent stock of
child development at both periods of our model, ln Hi,0 and ln Hi,1 . In the education
literature, these location and scale are known as "age-equivalent score."
             raw
   Let BSIDi,j    denote the observed raw score for child i in scale j . Let ln ai denote
the logarithm of the child's age at the time that child development is measured. For
each scale, we calculate the mean of the raw score for all the children in our data of
                                 raw
a certain age ai , meanagei (BSIDi,j ). We then regress log age (ln a) on an intercept
and these average raw scores. We denote the intercept and slope of this regression,
                                            j       j
which converts average scores into "age" as 0 and 1   and use them to define the
developmental age-equivalent of each child corresponding to scale j .

                                           j   j       raw
                            ln devagei,j = 0 + 1 × BSIDi,j                            (6)

      Notice that equation (6) converts the BSID-III score of every child into an esti-

                                           14
mated log of age-equivalent score. The log of age-equivalent BSID-III score has a
meaningful location and scale. We also note that the log of age-equivalent score is
                                                  raw
invariant to monotonic transformations to the BSIDi,j score. In our analysis, the log
of age-equivalent expressive language BSID-III score is used as an anchor for the other
measures of child development. As a result, our factors of child development ln Hi,0
and ln Hi,1 have both the location and the scale of the BSID-III log of age-equivalent
expressive language score and, thus, have cardinality. This is a desirable property
because the estimation of the technology of skill formation requires cardinal variables.
   In contrast, the provision of cardinal metric for investments is easy because one of
the measurement variables for investments is the amount of time of interaction between
parents and children (as reported by the parent), which is cardinal.
      This approach contrasts with that of Cunha et al. (2010), who obtain cardinality by
anchoring raw scores onto adult outcomes. The advantage of our approach is that we
can use the same cardinality to anchor not only child development scores, but also the
maternal answers to questions designed to elicit subjective beliefs about the process
of child development without additional assumptions. Indeed, as we show below, we
elicit maternal subjective beliefs by asking mothers to report the age they believe
a hypothetical child will reach certain developmental milestones for each one of the
scenarios of child development at the beginning of period and parental investments.
      In what follows, the measures of child development we use are all located and scaled
according to the log of age-equivalent scores of expressive language scale in the BSID-
III. We now present the measurement system that provides a basic framework for our
data analysis and for our construction of the beliefs elicitation survey instrument.

4.3     Mapping child development into observable variables

As children reach different degrees of development, they achieve the ability to perform
certain tasks, such as understanding certain words and the ability of expressing them.
The ability of performing certain task are, therefore, markers of child development.
This insight is important both for estimating latent factors that can be used in the
estimation of the production function in equation (2) from actual data and for the
formulation of the beliefs questions, as we assume that mothers also use the same
markers as indicators of child development. Although the specific system that we use
to design the scenarios for the belief questions is slightly different from the richer one
we use to estimate the latent factors used in estimating the true production function,
the idea is substantially very similar: we assume that child development, in reality or


                                             15
as perceived by mothers is related to a set of observable variables.
   In order to relate observed variables to the abstract constructs that enter equations
such as (2), we use relatively standard latent variable models, which in some cases we
extend to accommodate the nature of the data available and use all the information
we have efficiently. In particular, we assume that, corresponding to each of the three
latent factors ln Hi,1 , ln Hi,0 and ln Xi , we have a number of observable indicators whose
values are affected by one of the three latent variables and some measurement error.
Crucially, we assume that mothers use a similar model, relating the process of child
development to some well-defined variables reflecting skills, such as the ability of a
child to understand or express words. Analogously, we use a number of observable
variables (purchase of toys and books, activities with the child and time spent in these
activities) as markers of parental investment and assume that mothers relate parental
investment to the same variables observable variables.
   In this subsection, we describe the two systems that we estimate. The first, an IRT
model, aggregates the individual discrete items of the MLIs, FCI and time use instru-
ments into individual continuous scores which are scaled appropriately to guarantee
consistency across the two system. The second is a standard factor model that use the
aggregated MLI scores and the subscales of the Bayleys' tests, and the FCI instrument
and time to estimate the relevant latent factors.

4.3.1   Item Response Theory Analysis of MLI and FCI

To design scenarios for the beliefs questions we focus on a set of items from the MLI.
The MLI score, a measure of expressive language skills, is obtained through a simple
summation of the performance in individual words. In the MLI-I, the answers can be
assigned a score of 0, 1, or 2. Given that there are 104 words in MLI-I, a child's score
can take any value between 0 and 208. In the MLI-II and MLI-III, the answers can
be assigned a score of 0 or 1, and because there are 100 words, the score can range
between 0 and 100.
   We use the MLI as a foundation for our elicitation instrument. For this reason,
it would be impossible to summarize scenarios of child development at the beginning
of the period if we had to describe how a hypothetical child performs in each one of
the MLI words. Additionally, it would be even more difficult to ask mothers to rate
a hypothetical child's performance, for each one of the four scenarios, if she had to
provide answers to each one of 100 MLI-III words.
   For this reason, we need to reduce the number of words that we use to describe


                                            16
the scenarios, and the number of words we ask mothers to state whether the child will
be able to say or not for each scenario. One way to reduce the dimensionality is to
estimate an Item Response Theory model for MLI-I, MLI-II, and MLI-III.
   The IRT analysis we perform serves two purposes. First, with the IRT model, we
are able to identify sets of words that are informative and have different degrees of
difficulty. We use this information to design our beliefs elicitation survey instrument.
We return to this in Section 4.4. Second, from the estimates of the IRT model, we
can obtain an MLI score for child i of age t which we denote by mM  LI
                                                                 i,t . This score
is an alternative and more efficient scoring algorithm than the simple sum of correct
answers that is normally used. Such a score gives greater weights to words that are
more informative and lower weights to words that do not have strong relationship with
expressive language skills. The score mM
                                       i,t
                                           LI
                                              is now a continuous measure, derived from
the MLI data, that can be used to estimate the measurement system we describe below.
        
   Let wi,j,k denote the latent performance of the child i with respect to word k in the
MLI-j list. We assume that this latent variable is determined by a single index:

                         
                        wi,t,k = t,k,0 + t,k, zi,t + t,k mM
                                                          i,t
                                                              LI
                                                                 +   i,t,k               (7)
                                                                                      
where zi,t is a vector of observable variables, which are allowed to shift the index wi,t,k .
   As we discuss below, to estimate the objective process of skill formation, we use data
from both the MLI and the BSID-III. To guarantee comparability with our measures of
maternal beliefs, we add the BSID-III to the IRT model. To estimate the parameters
of the IRT model, however, we fix the intercept and the loading coefficient of the
BSID-III, as we use the BSID-III only to provide the scale and location of the latent
variable we estimate with the IRT models. When predicting the MLI scores, we discard
the BSID-III data. Therefore the scoring algorithm we construct inherits the location
and scale (in age equivalence) we fixed for the BSID expressive language subscale, as
discussed in section 4.2. This property makes the latent factors that can be derived
from the scenarios and from the answers to the beliefs question directly comparable
to the estimates of the latent factor used in the estimation of the objective process of
skill formation.
   We use slightly different types of single index models for three different types of
MLIs:

   · Dichotomous variables (for MLI-II and MLI-III) wi,j,k  {0, 1}: P rob{wi,j,k =
                
      1} = P r{wi,j,k  0};


                                              17
   · Polytomous variables (for MLI-I) wi,j,k  {1, 2, ..., L}: P rob{wi,j,k = l} = P r{cl-1 
     wi,j,k  cl }, where c0 = -;
                                                                             4
   · Continuous variables (for BSID-III): wi,j,k = wi,j,k ;

   We apply the same procedures for the analysis of the FCI instrument and time use
that we use as measures of parental investments. In particular, we classify FCI items as
measures of didactic materials and measures of activities and time that involve parents
and children. Appendix A.1 presents detailed description of the estimation procedure
of the IRT models presented in this Section.
   The estimation of the IRT model provides a framework to obtain a continuous
score of MLI that we can use in the estimation of the objective technology of skill
formation. However, the IRT analysis would not be necessary if the only goal of the
study was to objectively estimate the technology of skill formation because one could
use the MLI raw scores for this purpose. The estimation of the IRT model is useful
for several reasons if the aim is to estimate subjective beliefs about the technology
of skill formation. First, the model helps identify salient items for the elicitation
instrument. Second, given the scenarios and maternal answers, the model provides a
way to parsimoniously estimate the scores of the latent variables for the scenarios (log
of human capital at the beginning of the period and parental investment) and the score
of the latent variable for log of human capital at the end of the period. In what follows,
we first show how to operationalize scenarios and then how to use the IRT parameters
to construct the remainder part of the beliefs elicitation survey instrument.

4.3.2      A richer measurement system

Consider the latent factor i,j  {ln Hi,0 , ln Xi , ln Hi,1 }. The index i represents the child
and the index j represents time-0 natural log of child development (ln Hi,0 ), natural log
of parental investment (ln Xi ), or time-1 natural log of child development (ln Hi,1 ). We
express the relationship between measure k , mk
                                              i,j , and latent factors, i,j , as follows:



                                         mk
                                          i,t = gj,k (i,t , zi,t ,
                                                                     k
                                                                     i,t )                        (8)

where k i,j represents measurement error and zi,t are observable variables that can po-
tentially enter the relationship between child development and its markers represented
by equation (8). The superscript k represents the different measures we have for each

   4
       In the BSID-III case, the variable wi,j,k denotes the score in subscale k , k = 1, 2, 3.

                                                      18
one of the latent factors, including the scores derived from the MLI, the various sub-
scales of the BSID-III, and the subscales of the FCI as well as the data on the amount
of time of interaction between parents and children.
   Having estimated a model like (8) with a very wide range of observed measurement
variables, it is then possible to use the estimated parameters to obtain estimates of the
unobservable latent factors, even when we explore only a subset of the measurement
variables used to estimate the more general model. This observation will be important
for the construction of the scenarios and for the use of the maternal subjective beliefs
data.
   It is useful to mention our procedure's basic steps.

  1. We consider "dedicated" systems where a measurement loads on a single factor.
     It is worth it to remember that we consider explicitly three factors: natural
      log of child development at the beginning of the period (ln Hi,0 ), natural log of
      child development at the end of the period (ln Hi,1 ), and natural log of parental
      investment (ln Xi );

  2. Each latent factor we consider can affect the available measures on its own or in
      combination with some observable variables zi,t (such as gender);

  3. In particular, we assume that the skill registered by measurement variable k , for
     child i or age t is determined by a single index:

               mk     k      k       k         k
                i,t = t,0 + t,1 zi + t,2 i,t + i,t ;   i,t = ln Hi,0 , ln Hi,1 , ln Xi .   (9)

      where zi,t is a vector of observable variables, which are allowed to shift the index
      mk
       i,t .


  4. We assume that the joint distribution of the unobservable factors i is a mixture
                                                  k
      of log normals, while the measurement error i,t is a normal random variable,
      independent across different measures k .

We label this model as the measurement system. We estimate all of its parameters
(subject to location and scaling parameters described in Section 4.2) and recover the
distribution of the latent factors.

   The measurement system we have described is used as an input in the estimation
of both subjective and objective technologies of skill formation, but in different ways.
For the objective estimation of the technology of skill formation, we use realizations of

                                             19
child development and investments and we divide the estimation in two stages. In the
first stage, we estimate the parameters of the measurement system and predict factor
scores. In the second stage, we regress the predicted factor scores for ln Hi,1 against
the predicted factor scores for ln Hi,0 and ln Xi and apply bias-correction formulas. We
present the estimation procedure in Section 5.3.
   For the subjective technology, we use the same two stages, but instead of realiza-
tions of time-0 human capital and investments, we use the data from the hypothetical
"scenarios" of time-0 human capital and investments. Additionally, instead of realiza-
tions of time-1 human capital, we use maternal reports of expectation of time-1 child
development for each one of the "scenarios." We now start to describe the construction
of the elicitation instrument.

4.4      Hypothetical Scenarios

The next step in our framework is to define the scenarios that were presented to the
mothers. To design such scenarios, we use the data we collected on the families in the
first two waves of our survey.5 Our goal is to provide mothers with concrete verbal
descriptions of scenarios for child development at the beginning of the period (time-0
) and parental investments.

4.4.1      Hypothetical Scenarios for current Child Development

As we explained in 3.2, we measured child development with two distinct instruments:
MLI and BSID-III. In spite of the BSID-III reliability, we build on the MLI instrument
to construct the scenarios of child development at baseline. The main reason for such
a strategy is because language is very salient to mothers. They associate language
acquisition to child development and they seem to be acutely aware of language devel-
opment (see Weigel et al. (2006), Masur and Gleason (1980), Furrow et al. (1979)). In
addition, the MLI provide a stock of items among which we choose (on the basis of the
available data) the more effective and salient.
      The MLI-I has 104 words. From these we choose a small set of carefully selected
words, using estimates of the parameters j,k,0 and j,k from the IRT model in equation
(7), to construct a number of scenarios. These parameters are useful because they
describe important properties of the elements of the MLI-I instrument. The parameter
j,k,0 in the IRT model for j =MLI-I captures the difficulty of word k in the MLI-I


   5
       The beliefs questions were asked in the third wave.

                                                   20
instrument, while j,k measures the information content of the same word in the MLI-
I instrument. By selecting salient words (high j,k ) and varying degrees of difficulty
(different values of j,k,0 ), we can use a small set of MLI-I items to construct informative
groups of "easy" and "difficult" words. We then define the first scenario - verbal
                 L
description of H0  - as one in which the child can only say the easy words at the
                                                                                H
beginning of the period (child aged 9 months). We define the second scenario - H0 -
as one in which the child can understand and say both the easy and the difficult words
at the beginning of the period.

4.4.2     Hypothetical Scenarios for Parental Investments

Similarly to the construction of scenarios for child development at the beginning of
period, we use the estimated parameters of the IRT model for the FCI instrument
and time to define scenarios for parental investments. We identify salient items of
such a factor and choose these measures to define low and high scenarios for parental
investment.
      We describe the scenario that defines X L as the one in which the mother spends
little time with the child and spends little money on didactic materials or toys. In
particular under this scenarios the toys available to the child are defined by simple
toys that extremely common, such as a ball or a doll. In contrast, we define the
scenario for X H as the one in which the mother spends more time and money on the
child's development. In this scenario, the toys made available to the child include
puzzle, construction toys and material for drawing, painting and/or drawings.
   The scenarios for parental investment were presented to the mothers in laminated
illustrated cards so that the oral description could be reinforced with visual stimulation.
Figure A.2 in Appendix A.2 shows the vignettes used during the beliefs elicitation
survey instrument, which are assumed to represent the item chosen to define a scenario.

4.5     Beliefs Elicitation Survey Instrument

The instrument to elicit maternal beliefs provides mothers with a hypothetical scenario
s = (sh , sx ), where sh is a scenario for H0 and sx is a scenario for X . The scenario
                                       L
pairs s take value in the set S = {(H0              L
                                         , X L ), (H0            H
                                                      , X H ), (H0 , X L ), (H0
                                                                              H
                                                                                , X H )}. Then
the beliefs elicitation survey instrument asks mothers to report the expected level of
child development at the end of the period, E [ln Hi,1 | i , s]. Specifically, for each
of the four scenarios we construct, we asked the mother at what age a hypothetical
child would start saying 3 sets of words in that particular scenario. The three set

                                             21
of words were chosen to be `easy' (first set), `medium' (second set) and hard (third
set) and on the basis of the parameters of an IRT model. We used words from the
MLI-II on baseline data for children between 19-24 months. All the chosen words,
k , had high loading factors' j,k . `Easy' words had low j,k,0 's, `medium' words had
medium j,k,0 's and `hard' words had high values of j,k,0 's in the equations of the IRT
model for j =MLI-II. For ease of notation, we will label the `easy' words as having
{q = e1 , e2 , e3 }, the `medium' words as having {q = m1 , m2 , m3 } and the `hard' words
as having {q = h1 , h2 , h3 }.
   For each scenario, we use different group of words to have multiple measures of the
expected level of child development at the end of the period E [ln Hi,1 | i , s]. The use
of different groups of words with different levels of difficulty allows us to investigate
and address measurement error in maternal responses about expected levels of child
development.
   To indicate their answers, mothers used wooden tablets that had been marked with
different ages (from 9 to 48 months) at the top and that contained a number of strings
with a bead. Figure A.3 in Appendix A.2 shows the scenarios s  S used in the
beliefs elicitation survey instrument tablets for which the mothers reported the age a
hypothetical child would start saying each set of words. For each set of words and a
scenario there was a string with a bead. The mother was asked to put the bead at the
age at which the hypothetical child would be able to say a certain set of words under a
given scenario. At the end of the exercise each mother was presented with two wooden
tablets (left and right diagrams from Figure A.3) with the 12 strings and beads and
was asked whether she would want to revise any of the questions.
   Consistency (in that easier words - or high investment - should correspond to earlier
ages) was not forced. However, before asking these questions the mothers were trained
to use the wooden tablets with some practice questions. They were asked at what
age a hypothetical baby (aged 6 months) would start to crawl, walk and run using two
different scenarios in terms of nutrition (low and high). During these practice questions,
the interviewer would point out to inconsistencies, if, for instance, the mother would
indicate that the hypothetical baby would start to run before starting to crawl or she
would indicate that a malnourished child (low nutrition) would run before a well fed
one. The point of this exercise was to familiarise the mothers with an instrument that is
not standard in field work and especially with a population with low levels of education.
We chose this procedure after extensive piloting in which alternative wordings of the
questions were tried. We describe the procedure in more detail in Appendix A.2.


                                           22
   The next step in our framework is to describe a methodology that transforms ma-
ternal subjective beliefs answers to estimates of E [ln Hi,1 | i , s].


5     Expected Returns to Parental Investment and Technologies
      of Skill Formation: subjective and objective views

In this section, we show how we used the answers to the beliefs elicitation survey
questionnaire. In particular, we first show how to compute subjective expected rates
of returns to parental investment under different levels of child development at the
beginning of the period. We then move on to show how to use the subjective maternal
beliefs data to estimate, under certain assumptions, the parameters of the subjective
technology of skill formation for each respondent. Finally, we show how to estimate
the parameters of the objective technology of skill formation.

5.1   Subjective Expected Returns to Parental Investment

The mothers in our sample answer the beliefs elicitation survey questionnaire by re-
porting the age at which a hypothetical child can say three sets of words under different
scenarios of parental investments and child development at the beginning of the period.
Given that, it is very simple to compute the subjective expected returns to parental
investment under different levels of child development at the beginning of the period
implied by these answers: one could compute the returns in terms of number of months
and average across the gains in months caused by the parental investment for the three
sets of words. The interpretation is that a child with high levels of parental investment
will reach high performance in language development much faster than a child who
receives a lower level of parental investments. The fact that mothers report ages in
their answers is convenient because our measures of child development are located and
scaled in a developmental age anchor, as explained in Section 4.2.
    Slightly more complicated (and more useful) is to express the expected returns to
parental investment in terms of an error-ridden measure of the latent factor that, in
our conceptual framework, represents the subjective maternal conditional expectation
about child development at the end of the period E [ln Hi,1 |i , H0 , X ]. To be clear,
we represent this error-ridden measure as ln Hi,1,s,q where i indexes the mother, s
indexes the hypothetical scenarios, and q = e, m, h indexes the difficulty level of the
words. To convert the answers from the beliefs elicitation survey questionnaire into
the E [ln Hi,1 |i , H0 , X ]-metric, we follow a three-step approach.


                                             23
    In step one, we use the IRT model described in Section 4.3.1 to estimate the log
of the age at which the median child learns how to say the set of words of difficulty q .
Given these words in the beliefs elicitation survey questionnaire, let Mi,q be equal to
one 1 if the child can say all the three words considered in category q . The probability
that Mi,q = 1 for child i with latent child development at the end of the period ln Hi,1
is:

                                                                                   
                                 3
    Pr (Mi,q = 1| ln Hi,1 ) =          1 -  -j,wq ,0 - j,wq ,1 zi - j,wq ln Hi,1      (10)
                              wq =1


where the parameters j,wq ,0 , j,wq ,1 and j,wq were estimated in the IRT model.
  Let ln H^ q,1 denote the prediction of the factor ln Hi,1 implied by our latent factor
model when Pr (Mi,q = 1) = 0.5. Note that ln H   ^ q,1 is the median natural log of child
development at the end of the period, measured in age-equivalent location and scale,
as described in Section 4.2. Therefore it represents the developmental age at which
half of the children have learned to say the three words within the difficulty category
                                               ^ q,1 . We then exponentiate it to obtain
q . We can invert equation (10) to estimate ln H
H^ q,1 for the next step.
   In the second step, we compare the log age for such a median child with the log
of the age the mother reports for a given scenario Let ai,s,q denote the age reported
by mother i, for scenario s, and word difficulty level q . We can then define maternal
subjective beliefs about the developmental delay, i,s,q as follows:

                                                       ^ q,1
                                      i,s,q = ai,s,q - H                              (11)
                              ^ e,1 = 21, so that the median child learns the easy
   As an example, assume that H
words at age 21 months. Suppose, additionally, that mother i states that for scenario
s = (H H , X L ) the hypothetical child she refers to will learn the "easy" words at
age 25 months, so that ai,(H,L),e = 25. In this example, mother i's subjective beliefs
about developmental delay implied by the (H,L) scenario is the difference between 25
and 21, so that i,(H,L),e = 4. In other words, mother i believes that, under scenario
s = (H H , X L ), this hypothetical child is 4 months behind in terms of child development
with respect to the median child in our sample.
   Finally, in step three, we obtain an error-ridden measure ln Hi,1,s,q of the latent
factor E [ln Hi,1 |i , H0 , X ]. We want to make sure that we measure a mother's expected
development in terms of a benchmark consistent with our data collection. In particular,

                                               24
as the data for lnHi,1 were collected when the children were around 36 months old,
we adopt this benchmark for the expectation data. Let  denote the typical age of
children at the time of the assessment of child development at the end of the period.
Then,


                                 ln Hi,1,s,q = ln ( - i,s,q )                         (12)

      Given the mapping between different scenarios and developmental age given by
equation (12), it is immediate to compute the subjective expected returns to parental
investment under different levels of child development at the beginning of the period
measured in this metric.
      Notice that this procedure yields one measure of maternal expectations about child
development at the end of the period, conditional on a scenario of child develop-
ment at the beginning of the period and parental investment, for each set of words,
q  {e, m, h}. Therefore, these measures can be seen as different error-ridden measures
of our target subjective moment, E [ln Hi,1 | i , s], which we use to recover subjective
expected returns and to estimate the subjective technology of skill formation. Specifi-
cally, we model:


                           ln Hi,1,s,q = E [ln Hi,1 | i , s] + i,1,s,q                (13)

5.2     Estimation of the Subjective Technology of Skill Formation

As we mentioned in Section 4.4, the scenarios we presented the mothers were chosen
with the help of the IRT analysis of the data of child development at the beginning of
the period and parental investments. These IRT models allow us to compute a score
                                                                     sh
for the log of child development at the beginning of the period (ln H0  ) and the log of
parental investment (ln X sx ) corresponding to each scenario s  S . Furthermore, we
treat ln Hi,1,s,q as three measures of the same (unobserved) expected child development
at the end of the period conditional on a given scenario s. In our conceptual framework,
mothers know the "right" functional form for the technology of skill formation but
not necessarily the "right" parameters. Therefore maternal reports are error-ridden
measures of the term in the left-hand side of the subjective technology of skill formation,
equation (3), which we reproduce here for convenience:




                                              25
          E [ln Hi,1 |i , Hi,0 , Xi ] =µi,0 + µi,1 ln Hi,0 + µi,2 ln Xi +
                                      µi,3 [ln Hi,0 ln Xi ] + E [ i |i , Hi,0 , Xi ]        (3)

    As we mentioned above, in the elicitation of maternal beliefs, we ask mothers to
think of a hypothetical child, not their own children. Furthermore, we describe this
hypothetical child with hypothetical scenarios of child development at a certain age
and parental investment. Therefore, from the mother's point of view, the conditional
expectation is one that refers to this hypothetical child. Therefore, we treat maternal
                                              sh
reports as information about E [ln Hi,1 |i , H0  , X sx ]. If we combine equations (3) and
(13), and condition on the information set that the mother had to answer the elicitation
instrument, which simulates a specific scenario s = (sh , sx ), we obtain:


                                              sh
                 ln Hi,1,s,q =µ0,i + µ1,i ln H0  + µ2,i ln X sx +
                                         sh                         sh
                               µ3,i [ln H0  ln X sx ] + E [ i |i , H0  , X sx ] + i,1,s,q           (14)

                              sh
   We assume that E [ i |i , H0  , X sx ] = 0, which implies that the scenarios s  S are
uncorrelated with shocks i . This is true for the hypothetical child. This assumption
                                                                                  6
is fairly mild because the scenarios are constant across mothers.
    Equation (14) can be seen as a factor model where the µi 's are the factors and
where the factor loadings are known. For each mother in our sample, we have twelve
data points that we can use to estimate mother i's subjective expectations about
the parameters in the technology of skill formation. We can then estimate, for each
individual, the vector {µi,0 , µi,1 , µi,2 , µi.3 } by running an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
regression separately for each mother in our sample. Alternatively, we can improve
the precision of the individual-level estimates by using the Swamy (1970) estimator,
described in the detail in Appendix A.3. Note that our procedure does not assume
that mothers share the same expectations about the returns to investment or about the
parameters of the subjective technology of skill formation. This feature is important for
our goals because we aim to investigate if the parenting stimulation program affected
    6
     However, in the estimation of the objective technology of skill formation, the relevant conditional
expectation is E [ i |i , Hi,0 , Xi ], which we do not assume is equal to zero. In essence, the estimation
of the subjective technology of skill formation does not have endogeneity because the scenarios are
exogenous and do not vary across mothers. In the objective technology of skill formation estimation,
actual parental investments depend on variables that are known by the parents, but unobserved by
the econometrician.

                                                   26
maternal beliefs or not. By estimating mother-specific beliefs parameters, we will
be able to compare mean beliefs in the control group against those in the parenting
stimulation group.

5.3    Estimation of the Objective Technology of Skill Formation

One of the main contributions of this paper is to compare individual subjective beliefs
of the process of child development with actual evidence on a sample of children from
the same population from which our sample of mothers is drawn. Having explained how
we convert the answers mothers give to the beliefs elicitation survey questionnaire into
parameters of a subjective technology of skill formation at the individual level, we need
now to obtain the same set of parameters for a sample of actual children. A number
of issues need to be tackled to make the comparison between the "subjective" and
"objective" technology of skill formation sensible. First, as mentioned above, we make
the relatively strong assumption that maternal subjective beliefs can be represented
with a technology of skill formation which has a functional form that is similar to the
one we fit to actual data, but does not have necessarily the same parameters. Second,
we need to guarantee the metrics used for the latent factors that enter to the"objective"
and "subjective" technology of skill formation are the same and have cardinality so we
can meaningfully estimate the objective and subjective parameters of the technology of
skill formation. Third, while the "subjective" technology of skill formation is obtained
manipulating the scenarios exogenously (as we chose them) and asking mothers what
outcomes they map into, in the case of actual data, we need to take into account that
investment choices are made by parents, possibly in reaction to shocks and the process
of child development. In other words, actual investment is endogenous. In this Section,
we discuss briefly the last two issues.
   To estimate the "objective" technology of skill formation we first estimate a mea-
surement system, effectively using the same data to estimate the IRT model to define
the scenarios and get estimates of Hi,1 in the formulation of the beliefs questions,
but using a slightly different way to aggregate the information coming from discrete
variables. We describe the procedure in detail in Appendix A.4. 7 Having obtained
estimates for the relevant factors we scale them in a way which is consistent with the
approach used to estimate the "subjective" technology of skill formation. This location
and scaling makes the two sets of estimates comparable.

   7
     We first estimate an IRT model to aggregate the items of the MLI measures. We then use a
continuous factor model to aggregate this measures with continuous measures from the BSID-III.

                                             27
   As for the endogeneity of parental investment, we use a IV approach which requires
the use of a valid instrument. We use the parenting stimulation program, which we
know affected parental investment over the period considered. It could be argued
that the parenting stimulation program might have affected the technology of skill
formation directly and therefore would not be a valid instrument. However, Attanasio
et al. (2018), who use a different set of instruments, argue that the observed impact
of the parenting stimulation program is not caused by the program directly but is
mediated by an induced increase in parental investment. Such a result makes the
program, which was randomly assigned in our sample, a valid instrument.


6     Data Analysis and Empirical Results

In this section, we first provide some information about the survey instrument used to
elicit beliefs data and show how different scenarios span the domain of the production
function of human development, both in terms of initial conditions and parental in-
vestment. We then use these data to characterise how maternal subjective beliefs vary
in the population, how they are related to parental investment and how, translating
them in beliefs about a technology of skill formation, they compare to the relationship
between child development on one side and parental investment and child development
at the beginning of the period as we estimate in the data.

6.1   Baseline and Follow-up one Data Analysis and the Construction of
      Scenarios

As discussed in Section 4.5, the scenarios used as a starting point for the beliefs elici-
tation model were constructed using the estimate of IRT models for child development
at the beginning of the period and parental investment in materials and activities. In
total we consider 4 scenarios that correspond to "low" and "high" values of parental
investment and child development at the start of the period considered for the hypo-
thetical child to whom the scenarios refer to. In Figure 1 we plot the density function
of the factor representing developmental age and parental investment. The dotted lines
in the figure represents the `low' and `high' levels of the factor considered. The Figure
gives an idea of the part of the domain of the two inputs of the function in (2) that
are covered by the scenarios.




                                           28
Figure 1: Scenarios for Child Development at the beginning of the period and Parental
Investment (Materials and Activities/Time)
                                                 Score of Child Development at t=0                                                      Score of Parental Investment - Materials                                                        Score of Parental Investment - Activities
                                 4                                                                                             .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
 Density (kernel=epanechnikov)




                                                                                               Density (kernel=epanechnikov)




                                                                                                                                                                                           Density (kernel=epanechnikov)
                                 3                                                                                             .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3



                                 2                                                                                             .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2




                                 1                                                                                             .1                                                                                          .1




                                 0                                                                                             0                                                                                           0
                                      2.4      2.6              2.8                  3   3.2                                        0      2                  4                    6   8                                        -4     -2                 0                    2      4
                                                        Developmental Age                                                                   Parental Investment - Materials                                                                 Parental Investment - Activities




6.2                                         Expected Child Development: Maternal Answers

We now start analysing the data on beliefs by computing average outcomes (the age at
which a hypothetical child is able to say `easy', `medium' and `hard' words) correspond-
ing to different scenarios s  S in terms of parental investment and child development
at the beginning of the period. This evidence provides insights on whether the answers
provided by mothers to the beliefs elicitation survey instrument are sensible.

 Table 1: Expected Child Development at the end of the period: Maternal Answers

                                                                                     VARIABLES                                                                                         Mean                                          St. Dv.                  Min                   Max
                                              easy                                                                                                                                     18.3                                            6.3                     9                     48
                                              medium                                      Low Investment                                                                               23.4                                            7.3                    10                     48
              Low Child                       hard                                                                                                                                     29.4                                            8.8                    11                     48
                                              easy                                                                                                                                     15.7                                            5.7                     9                     48
         Development at t = 0
                              High Investment medium                                                                                                                                   20.0                                            6.7                     9                     48
                                              hard                                                                                                                                     24.9                                            8.1                     9                     48
                                              easy                                                                                                                                     14.3                                            4.6                     9                     45
                              Low Investment medium                                                                                                                                    17.9                                            5.5                     9                     47
              High Child                      hard                                                                                                                                     22.2                                            7.1                    10                     48
                                              easy                                                                                                                                     13.5                                            5.1                     9                     48
         Development at t = 0
                              High Investment medium                                                                                                                                   16.6                                            5.7                     9                     48
                                              hard                                                                                                                                     20.3                                            7.1                     9                     48
         Observations: 1200.

                                     Table 1 report the mean, standard deviation and range of the answers to the 12
questions in the beliefs elicitation survey instrument presented in two wooden tablets
(left and right diagrams from Figure A.3) with 12 strings each with one bead used

                                                                                                                                                     29
to provided the answer. The age range presented to the mothers to choose from was
between 9 and 48 months. For each scenario, s  S , we report the relevant statistics
for the easy, medium and hard words. The mean for easy words is always below that of
medium words for each scenario, which in turn is below that of hard words. Further-
more, the means for the low levels of parental investment are always above the means
for levels of high parental investment and the means for low levels of child development
at the beginning of the period above the corresponding means for high levels of child
development at the beginning of the period. As none of these consistencies were forced
by the interviewers on the respondents, this evidence constitutes an indication that,
on average, the questions worked, at least in some basic dimension, reasonably well.
While at the individual level there are a few inconsistencies, they are few and do not
affect the means.
   There is a considerable amount of variability in the answers that the mothers pro-
vide. The coefficient of variations for all the 12 questions are between 0.3 and 0.4.
   Using the answers to the basic questions, we can compute subjective maternal
beliefs about the returns to parental investment. For each set of words, {q = e, m, h},
and for each mother we can compute the returns from moving from "low" to "high"
parental investment, expressed in terms of months. That is, for each mother, we
can simply compute the difference in the ages at which the hypothetical child start
saying a certain set of words under the high and low parental investment scenario.
Moreover, we can compute these returns both for children with low and high levels of
child development at the beginning of the period. Figure 2 plots the distributions of
returns to parental investment in the sample for words of medium difficulty, {q = m},
conditional on low (dashed line) and high (continuous line) levens of the child's initial
development. The latter is clearly to the right of the former. A similar picture is
obtained computing the returns using as outcomes words of different level of difficulty
or their average.
   We note that there are a few mothers for whom the subjective return on investment
is negative, signalling probably a problem in understanding the questions. In Table 2,
we report that the return is negative for about 14% in the case of low initial condition
and in 17.5% in the case of high initial condition. However, as mentioned above, on
average, the returns to parental investment are positive. Importantly, the returns to
investment are perceived to be higher under low initial child development than high
initial child development.
   The next step in our analysis of the beliefs data consists in translating the outcomes


                                           30
Figure 2: Returns to Parental Investment by Scenarios of Child Development at t = 0

                                                            Returns to Investments by Scenarios of Child Development t=0
                                                   4




                   Density (kernel=epanechnikov)
                                                   3




                                                   2




                                                   1




                                                   0
                                                       -1            -.5                      0                   .5              1
                                                             Differences H-L Parental Investment for more difficult words

                                                                  Low Child Development t=0       High Child Development t=0




           Table 2: Returns to Parental Investment for more difficult words

 VARIABLES                                                                                    Mean Std. Dev.                   % of negative values
 Return to Low Child Development t=0                                                          0.16 0.24                        13.8
 Return to High Child Development t=0                                                         0.08 0.21                        17.5
 Observations: 1200.


we elicit (the age at which a child can say different words) into an index of development,
following the steps of the procedure we described in Section 5. Following that procedure
allows us to convert the answers to the beliefs questions into the expected developmental
age for each of the four scenarios (and for each of the 3 sets of words). As we have three
different estimates of the perceived developmental age for each s  S corresponding to
set of words,{q = e, m, h}, we consider their average.
   Figure 3 plots the four density distributions of the (log of) average developmental
ages corresponding to the four scenarios. Consistently with the evidence in Table 1, the
distribution of developmental ages moves to the right as we move from the worst sce-
nario (low child development at the beginning of the period and low investment) to the
best one (high child development at the beginning of the period and high investment).
Analogously, when moving from low to high child development at the beginning of the
period keeping investment constant or moving from low to high investment keeping
child development at the beginning of the period constant, the distribution also moves
to the right.
    We use the expression defined in equation (12) to estimate subjective beliefs about
the return to investment across different scenarios s. In particular, we show how child

                                                                                        31
                            Figure 3: Maternal Beliefs of Child Development

                                                                      Maternal Subjective Beliefs of Child Development at t=1
                                                  5




                  Density (kernel=epanechnikov)
                                                  4



                                                  3



                                                  2



                                                  1



                                                  0
                                                       2                    2.5                       3                    3.5                4
                                                                                           Developmental Age

                                                           Low Child Development t=0, Low Parental Investment   Low,High    High,Low   High,High




development at the beginning of the period influences maternal subjective expectations
about the returns to investment. For high levels of initial development the return is:

                                                        H
                                                  ri,q H0 = ln Hi,1,(H H ,X H ),q - ln Hi,1,(H H ,X L ),q ,                                        (15)

while for low initial development is:

                                                            L
                                                      ri,q H0 = ln Hi,1,(H L ,X H ),q - ln Hi,1,(H L ,X L ),q .                                    (16)

   Having translated for each mother and for each scenario the expected outcome in
terms of developmental age, we can, again, compute the returns to investment (under
low and high child development at the beginning of the period) using equations (15)
and (16). We plot the density distribution for these returns in Figure 4. The graphs for
the two returns are, not surprisingly, similar to those for the returns obtained directly
from the beliefs data, and expressed in terms of months, which we plotted in Figure
2. Once again, we notice that the return with low child development at the beginning
of the period are, on average, higher than the returns with low child development at
the beginning of the period. Furthermore, a small fraction of mothers appear to have
negative expected returns. In the rest of the paper, we use this definition of returns,
expressed in terms of developmental age.




                                                                                                 32
Figure 4: Subjective Expected Returns to Investments by Scenarios of Child Develop-
ment t = 0

                                                             Returns to Investments by Scenarios of Child Development t=0
                                                    8




                    Density (kernel=epanechnikov)
                                                    6




                                                    4




                                                    2




                                                    0
                                                        -1            -.5                      0                   .5           1
                                                                                    Developmental Age

                                                                   Low Child Development t=0       High Child Development t=0




6.3     How Maternal Subjective Beliefs Vary

As shown in Table 1, maternal subjective beliefs about the process of child development
are substantially heterogeneous in our sample. We now study whether they co-vary with
mothers' observable characteristics. Table 3 relates the subjective expected returns to
parental investment for low and high levels of child development at the beginning of the
period to socioeconomic characteristics of the mothers who expressed those subjective
beliefs. In our data, in addition to standard variables, such as age and education
of the mothers, we have a wealth of other variables. In the table, we report the
results obtained regressing subjective expected returns to parental investment (under
low and high child development at the beginning of the period) on age, two education
dummies (indicators for primary or secondary education, with the no-education being
the excluded group), the CES-D index of depression, the score in the Raven progressive
matrices test taken by the mothers and an indicator of whether the child in the original
evaluation sample of the intervention is male. In the second and fourth columns, we
also add a dummy that identifies mothers living in villages targeted by the intervention.
      Of the variables considered, the only one that appears to be significantly related
to the expected returns on parental investment is the score in the Raven tests, indi-
cating that women with higher Raven tests have higher expected returns to maternal
investment, both for low and high initial child development.

Are Maternal Subjective Beliefs about Returns of Parental Investment af-

                                                                                         33
                                                                                                                  34




Table 3: Returns to Child Development on Investment and SE characteristics

VARIABLES                                      Return to Low Child                 Return to High Child
                                               Development at t = 0                Development at t = 0
Mother's age                                   0.002      0.002                     0.001      0.001
                                               (0.001)    (0.001)                  (0.001)    (0.001)

Mother's education                             0.156             0.156               -0.006              -0.006
(primary)                                      (0.088)           (0.088)            (0.052)             (0.052)

Mother's education                             0.151             0.151               0.015               0.015
(secondary and more)                           (0.088)           (0.088)            (0.052)             (0.051)

Mother's depression                             0.001             0.001              -0.000              -0.000
(CES-D)                                        (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)

Mother's IQ                                    0.015             0.014             0.018                0.018
(standardized Raven's Score)                   (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.004)              (0.004)

Dummy for Male                                  -0.018            -0.018             -0.006              -0.006
(child)                                        (0.012)           (0.012)            (0.008)             (0.008)

Dummy for Treatment                                               0.008                                  0.001
                                                                 (0.013)                                (0.009)
Adjusted R2                                     0.014             0.014              0.026               0.026
F                                               2.582             2.224              4.367               3.751
Observations                                    1200              1200               1200                1200
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at municipality level,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
fected by the Parenting Stimulation Program? Attanasio et al. (2014) have
shown that the parenting stimulation program evaluated by the data we are using had
an impact on several measures of child development, including cognition and language.
Attanasio et al. (2018) analysing the data from the same parenting stimulation program
show that the program triggered a large increase in parental investment and argue that
such an increase explains a large part if not all the increase in children cognition caused
by the parenting stimulation program.
      A possible hypothesis, therefore could be that the increase in parental investment
was driven by a shift in maternal beliefs about the nature of the developmental process.
The results in Table 3 show that this is not the case, at least a few years after the
parenting stimulation program was finished. On average, expected returns do not
seem to be affected by the parenting stimulation program at all. To look beyond
means, using the beliefs data, we plot the distribution of subjective expected returns
to parental investment for low and high levels of child development at the beginning of
the period for the randomly assignment to control or parenting stimulation program.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of subjective expected returns in the two sample is
virtually identical.
    While this result might be disappointing, Andrew et al. (2018) report that, in
the follow-up two, in which the maternal subjective beliefs data were collected, the
effect of the parenting stimulation program on parental investment had faded out.8
It is therefore possible that both the effects of the parenting stimulation program on
maternal subjective beliefs and parental investment have faded out, 2-years after the
end of the parenting stimulation program. We now turn the analysis of correlations
between parental investment and maternal subjective beliefs about its return.

6.4     Does Parental Investment Vary with Maternal Subjective Beliefs?

Having estimated parental beliefs on returns to investment we relate them to invest-
ment. We start by considering a reduced form equation where investment is regressed
on its determinants, including its perceived returns. We consider separately returns
conditional on "low" child development at the beginning of the period and "high"
child development at the beginning of the period.
      As mentioned above, we have three measures of these returns, one corresponding to
each set of words {q = e, m, h}. We run three separate regressions: first, we consider

   8
     Andrew et al. (2018) report that also the impact of the parenting stimulation program on child
development, as measured 2-years after the end of the parenting stimulation program, had faded out.

                                                35
Figure 5: Subjective Expected Returns to Investment and Parenting Stimulation Pro-
gram

                                                                                              Returns to Investment
                                                             Low Child Development t=0                                                                      High Child Development t=0
                                                                                                                                              8

                                               4
               Density (kernel=epanechnikov)




                                                                                                              Density (kernel=epanechnikov)
                                                                                                                                              6
                                               3




                                                                                                                                              4
                                               2




                                               1        kmirnov p = .48                                                                       2        kmirnov p = .29




                                               0                                                                                              0
                                                   -1         -.5             0          .5          1                                            -1         -.5             0          .5     1
                                                                    Developmental Age                                                                              Developmental Age

                                                                    Control       Stimulation                                                                      Control       Stimulation




the average of the three measures of returns; second, we use rgw ewturn estimnated
only hard words as the outcome and finally, to take into account that each of the
three avaiable measures could be affected by measurement error, we use one measure
of expected returns and instrument it with the other two. Table 4 shows that maternal
beliefs about high initial child development correlate with maternal investments. The
coefficients on the first and third column are much larger than those in the first and
thrid, indicating that the measures of returns might be affected by measurement error.
The returns on investment under low initial child development do not seem to matter
for investment. In column 2, this variable takes a negative and significant coefficient,
which is difficult to rationalise.

6.5   Subjective Technology of Skill Formation

As we discussed in Section 2, one can frame parental investment as depending on
individual preferences, resources and the subjective technology of skill formation. In
Section 5.2, we have discussed how, starting from an assumption about the subjective
technology of skill formation, we can estimate its parameters for each respondents, the
vector {µi,0 , µi,1 , µi,2 , µi.3 } in equation (3) or equation (14). In this section, we perform
such an exercise.
   The mother's subjective technology of skill formation is defined by equation (3) or,


                                                                                                         36
                               Table 4: Investment and Returns on Investment

                    Dependent Variable: Maternal Investment
 VARIABLES                                   OLS      OLSa                                                     IV            IVa
 Return to Low Child Development at t = 0 -0.285 -0.289                                                      -0.214         -0.246
                                           (0.164) (0.154)                                                  (0.162)        (0.149)

 Return to High Child Development at t = 0                                  0.806            0.332         0.846            0.384
                                                                            (0.231)         (0.217)        (0.229)          (0.210)
 Controls                                                                                     yes                             yes
 Adjusted R2                                                                  0.007          0.117             .             0.115
 F                                                                            6.670         19.604           6.865          19.432
 Observations                                                                 1200           1200            1200            1200
 a
     Regression controls by mother's age, education, depression and IQ (standardised Raven's score) as well as gender of the child.

 Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at municipality level,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




equivalently, by equation (14), which we reproduce for convenience:

                                          sh
             ln Hi,1,s,q =µ0,i + µ1,i ln H0  + µ2,i ln X sx +
                                        sh                         sh
                              µ3,i [ln H0  ln X sx ] + E [ i |i , H0  , X sx ] + i,1,s,q                               (14)

      Our procedure, described in Section 5.2 yields estimates of the coefficients of these
equations for each mother. We report the results obtained with the Swamy (1970)
estimator, although similar results can be obtained with a factor model.9 These re-
sults can then be compared to estimates of the objective technology of skill formation
obtained from data on actual child development.
    Our approach delivers a set of coefficient for the perceived production function
for each mother in our sample on which we have beliefs data. As with the data on
subjective returns to parental investment, the estimated technologies of skill formation
exhibit a considerable amount of heterogeneity.
  The individual coefficients of the subjective technology of skill formation are sum-
marised in Table 5. In particular, in the first two columns of the Table we report the
average coefficients of two specifications for the technology of skill formation: one which
assumes a Cobb Douglas form, forcing the µi,3 coefficients to zero and one that assumes
a translog specification as in equation (3). Below the average of each coefficient, we
report the standard deviation for that coefficient in the sample. These standard devi-
ation, therefore, represent the sample heterogeneity in perceived production function,
      9
      In equation (14), the µi 's can be considered factors to be estimated whose loading factors are
the variables that define the scenarios and which, in our data, are observed.

                                                                   37
rather than the precision of our estimates. In the third column we report the frac-
tion of coefficients in the sample which, in column 2, are estimated to be statistically
significant (that is with a t-value greater than 2).

           Table 5: Estimation of Subjective Technology of Skill Formation

               Dependent Variable: Expected Child Development at t = 1
                                          Cobb Douglas       Translog
                                              (1)              (2)          Fraction |t| > 2
               Intercept                      2.8025           2.5297           93.25%
                                             (0.0302)         (0.0425)

     Child Development at t = 0               0.2582           0.3523           63.33%
                                             (0.0093)         (0.0136)

         Parental Investment                  0.0472           0.3206           22.17%
                                             (0.0030)         (0.0274)

 P. Investment x Child Dev. at t = 0                           -0.0946          18.25%
                                                              (0.0091)


   The estimates for the coefficient of child development at the beginning of the pe-
riod is considerably less volatile and more concentrate than the estimate for maternal
investment. We find that very few of the interaction terms are significantly different
from zero. This indicates that the Cobb Douglas case represents a good approximation
(relative to the translog) for many mothers. We note that we do impose constant re-
turn to scale and that the average effect of investment is quite low, at 0.047. Moreover,
for only 22% of mothers this coefficient is statistically significant. The coefficient of
child development at the beginning of the period, instead, is statistically significant for
63% of mothers and is, on average, much larger, at 0.258.
   To have an idea of how these coefficients compare with the estimates one would
obtain fitting a similar technology of skill formation to actual data about child de-
velopment, we fit such a specification to the first follow up survey, where the ages of
the children correspond roughly to the ages used in describing the scenarios in the
beliefs questions. To estimate such a specification, we need to take into account that,
in actual data on child development and parental investment, the latter is endogenous,
as it is decided by parents, possibly in reaction to individual shocks in the process of
development.

                                            38
   Attanasio et al. (2018) estimate a technology of skill formation and an investment
function to interpret the effect of the parental stimulation program on child develop-
ment. They argue that investment is indeed endogenous and, taking that into account,
changes substantially the size of the coefficient. While Attanasio et al. (2018) do not
use the program as their primary exclusion restriction to identify the effect of parental
investment on child development, they find that the parenting stimulation program
does not enter the technology of skill formation directly. Therefore, here we use the
randomness of the program as an exclusion restriction to obtain a consistent estimate
of the effect of parental investment on child development.

             Table 6: Estimation of Objective Technology of Skill Formation

                                                 First Stage                       Second Stage
                                               Log of Parental          Log of Child Development at t = 0
                                                 Investment                     at First Follow Up
                 Intercept                          -0.7033                              2.5834
                                                   (0.2626)                             (0.0912)

 Log of Child Development at t = 0                  0.5568                               0.2870
                                                   (0.0901)                             (0.0564)

        Log of Parental Investment                                                       0.1892
                                                                                        (0.0915)

          Dummy for Treatment                       0.1432
                                                   (0.0483)


    We report our results in Table 6. The first stage, which can be read as a model of
parental investment, indicates that parents invest more in more developed children. It
also indicates that the the treatment, as reported in Attanasio et al. (2018) increases
substantially parental investment. As for the second stage result, reported in the
second column, we notice that the coefficient of investment on children's cognitive
development is 0.189, substantially higher than the average coefficient (0.047) of the
subjective technology of skill formation. 10
   The beliefs variables we use to estimate the subjective technology of skill formation
are scaled so to make them comparable with the estimates obtained on actual data:
   10
      In addition to the results we report, we also estimated a version of the `objective' technology of
skill formation assuming a translog function. The coefficient on the interaction term is not statistically
different from zero and small in magnitude.

                                                   39
the average coefficients in Table 5 are therefore directly comparable with the estimates
in Table 6. The main difference between the point estimates in the latter table and
the averages in the former, is on the coefficient on parental investment. While such
a difference is not statistically significant at the 5% level, the evidence is suggestive
of the fact that many parents tend to underestimate the productivity of investment
in the developmental process. This result is consistent with anthropological evidence,
such as that discussed in Lareau (2003), that claims that poor parents might not be
investing much in their young children because they do not see the usefulness of such
interventions.
    Having estimated the parameters of the subjective technology of skill formation for
each mother in the sample, we now analyse whether these coefficients relate to other
variables. In a way this exercise is similar to that whose results are reported in Table
3, except that rather than considering the two simple returns that can be computed
directly from the beliefs data, we use the parameters of the subjective technology of
skill formation and, therefore, introduce more structure on the data which allows us to
exploit efficiently all the information we have about individual beliefs.
   In Table 7 we regress the estimated parameters of the subjective technology of skill
formation (the µ's) on the same set of observables used in Table 3. In particular,
we regress each of the µ's on age, two indicators of education, a depression index,
the results of the Raven tests, and an indicator of the gender of the target child. In
addition, for each parameter we present a regression which includes the treatment
dummy.




                                           40
                    Table 7: Subjective Estimates and SE characteristics
            VARIABLES                              µ0         µ0        µ1            µ1        µ2          µ2
            Mother's age                         -0.007     -0.008    0.009         0.010      0.009      0.009
                                                (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.005)

            Mother's education                   -0.160     -0.172     0.195         0.208     0.101      0.102
            (primary)                           (0.403)    (0.413)    (0.415)       (0.425)   (0.377)    (0.378)

            Mother's education                   -0.165     -0.175     0.219         0.229     0.156      0.157
            (secondary and more)                (0.391)    (0.401)    (0.402)       (0.413)   (0.376)    (0.377)

            Mother's depression                  0.006      0.006      -0.006        -0.007    0.001      0.001
            (CES-D)                             (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)       (0.006)   (0.007)    (0.007)

            Mother's IQ                          0.015      0.016      -0.002        -0.003   0.117      0.117
            (standardized Raven's Score)        (0.035)    (0.035)    (0.036)       (0.035)    (0.037)   (0.037)

            Dummy for Male                       0.069      0.072      -0.050        -0.052    -0.099     -0.099
            (child)                             (0.068)    (0.068)    (0.067)       (0.067)   (0.067)    (0.068)

            Standardized ln H0                   -0.034     -0.033     0.031         0.030     0.034      0.034
                                                (0.033)    (0.033)    (0.034)       (0.034)   (0.037)    (0.037)

            Ratio ln H0 /ln H1                  0.002       0.002      -0.002        -0.002    -0.000     -0.000
                                                (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)

            Standardized Household Wealth        0.022      0.021      -0.017        -0.017    0.022      0.022
                                                (0.033)    (0.033)    (0.033)       (0.033)   (0.036)    (0.036)

            Standardized ln X                   0.060      0.056       -0.053        -0.049    -0.019     -0.019
                                                (0.032)    (0.033)    (0.032)       (0.033)   (0.035)    (0.035)

            Dummy for Treatment                             0.090                    -0.092               -0.008
                                                           (0.067)                  (0.066)              (0.075)
                       2
            Adjusted R                           0.001      0.002     -0.000         0.001     0.013      0.012
            F                                    1.599      1.783      1.245         1.416     1.669       1.556
            Observations                         1017       1017       1017           1017     1017        1017
            Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at municipality level.
            sym* p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




   As in Table 3, most variables are not significant. There are two important differ-
ences with the results in Table 3, however. First, unlike in that Table, the coefficient on
the mother's IQ is not statistically different from zero. Second, and importantly, both
the intercept and the coefficient on child development at the beginning of the period
seem to be affected by the parenting stimulation program. In particular, the former
is significantly increased while the latter is decreased. The program parents seem to
perceive the process to be more effective and give less weight to the child development
at the beginning of the period.
   Finally, we check whether the parameters of the subjective technology of skill for-
mation affect investment. In Table 8 we regress different measures of investment on
various determinants of investment (such as household wealth), a dummy for treat-
ment and the subjective productivity of investment, as measured by µ2 . The table
indicates that investment measured by activities is positively related to the subjective
productivity of investment, regardless of whether we control for other variables. In-
stead, when we consider total investment, and investment in materials or activities), µ2
is important only when we do not control for additional variables. When we introduce
child development at the beginning of the period, household wealth and mothers Raven
tests results, the coefficient on µ2 becomes much smaller and not statistically different

                                                             41
from zero.

                             Table 8: Subjective Estimates and Investment
   VARIABLES                             Log Investment                 Time                Activities            Materials
   Standardized µ2                      0.024      -0.014     0.101         0.011       0.020       -0.022    0.033      0.003
                                       (0.030)    (0.031)     (0.052)      (0.026)     (0.023)     (0.020)   (0.026)   (0.030)

   Dummy for Treatment                 0.180      0.182        0.067        0.026       0.063    0.169        0.049     0.015
                                       (0.095)    (0.090)     (0.130)      (0.068)     (0.067)    (0.057)    (0.086)   (0.081)

   Dummy for Male                       0.007       -0.011     0.019        0.006       0.036      0.024      0.003     -0.029
   (child)                             (0.062)     (0.063)    (0.120)      (0.056)     (0.057)    (0.039)    (0.054)   (0.056)

   Standardized ln H0                             0.149                    0.067                  0.064                0.120
                                                   (0.035)                  (0.025)               (0.025)              (0.034)

   Standardized Household Wealth                  0.122                     0.025                 0.049                0.145
                                                   (0.035)                 (0.029)                (0.019)              (0.035)

   Mother's IQ                                    0.196                    0.074                 0.098                 0.144
   (standardized Raven's Score)                    (0.034)                  (0.029)               (0.021)               (0.032)
   Adjusted R2                          0.005       0.100                              0.001       0.073     -0.001      0.072
   F                                    1.045      15.500      1.324           4.506   1.626       7.027      0.643     10.756
   Observations                         1017        1017       1200            1017    1200        1017       1200       1017
   Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at municipality level.
   
     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                                 42
7    Conclusions

In this paper, we have proposed a new method to elicit maternal beliefs about the
technology of skill formation. While our basic measures allows us to compute very
simply the rate of return to parental investment under different scenarios, it also al-
lows us to compare our estimates of parental beliefs to the estimates of the actual
process of child development that we can obtain from child development and parental
investment data from the same population. We show that, in our context, mothers
tend to underestimate the productivity of parental investment.
   We also show that our estimates of subjective beliefs about the productivity of
parental investment covary with actual investment. Parents who report higher expected
returns also tend to invest more in their children. This is true both when we use simple
estimates of rates of return and we use the esimated parameters of the subjective
technology of skill formation.
    Finally, our expected return are not higher in the group of mothers that, a few
years before the belief elicitation module was implemented, received a stimulation
intervention.
    In the future, we think it is important to combine measures of subjective beliefs with
further measures about the way expenditure is allocated within families to estimate
parental preferences and how parental beliefs about the process of child development
change over time and with experience. Finally, it would be interesting to determine
how parental beliefs might affect the allocation of resources among different children.
    Understanding parental behaviour and its determinants is key to design of effec-
tive interventions to foster the development of children living in adverse environments.
Parental beliefs about the process of child development is obviously a key driver of
parental bbehaviour. Characterising parental beliefs and their potential biases is there-
fore important, both from a research and a policy point of view.




                                           43
A     Appendix
A.1    Appendix 1. Item Response Theory

In what follows, we use the indexes i and k to denote, respectively, a child in our
sample and a word in the MLI-I or MLI-II instrument. We remind the reader that the
index j is used to denote one of the three latent factors relating to child development at
the beginning of the period, child development at the end of the period, and parental
                                        
investment. We define the single index wi,j,k in the following way:

                             
                            wi,j,k = j,k,0 + j,k,1 zi + j,k mi,j,1 +      i,j,k

    where   i,j,k    N (0, 1), zi is a vector of observable variables (gender and age), which
                                
are allowed to shift the index wi,j,k . The variable age is adjusted for the age at which
the observation i is done but centering it around ages 18 months, so then, ai , which
denote the logarithm of the child's age, is equal to zero if the observation of the MLI-I
is done at age 18 months. The parameters j,k,0 and j,k capture the difficulty level and
information content of word k . The variable           i,j,k   is measurement error. With some
mild assumptions about the distribution in the cross section of mi,j,1 , and assumptions
about the distribution of error terms, it is possible to identify the parameters j,k,0 ,
j,k,1 , and j,k as well as the parameters of the distribution of the factor (see Kotlarski
(1967)).
    Let wi,j,k  {0, 1, 2} denote the observed score for child i in word k from the MLI-
                                                            
I. The relationship between the score wi,j,k and the index wi,j,k is determined by the
following rule:

                                                       
                                           
                                            0,    if wi,j,k  0,
                                                         
                                wi,j,k   =  1, if 0 < wi,j,k  cj ,
                                                             
                                            2,    if cj < wi,j,k
                                           

    where cj is the cut-off constant in the ordered discrete variable model. Assume,
for now, that we observe mi,j,1 . Let  denote the CDF of a standard normal random
variable. Let Gi,j,k denote the contribution to the likelihood of observing score wi,j,k
for child i in word k is:


    LI -I                                              1(wi,j,k =0)
GM
 i,j,k    =          -j,k,0 - j,k,1 zi - j,k mi,j,1                   ×
                                                                                            1(wi,j,k =1)
                     cj - j,k,0 - j,k,1 zi - j,k mi,j,1 -  -j,k,0 - j,k,1 zi - j,k mi,j,1                  ×
                                                            1(wi,j,k =2)
                    1 -  cj - j,k,0 - j,k,1 zi - j,k mi,j,1

                                                  44
   Second, note that MLI- II and MLI-III are dichotomous variable. Therefore:

                        
                       wi,j,k = j,k,0 + j,k,1 zi + j,k mi,j,1 +   i,j,k

   where i,j,k  N (0, 1) .Let wi,j,k  {0, 1} denote the observed score for child i in
word k from the MLI-II or MLI-III. It follows that:
                                                 
                                          0, if wi,j,k  0,
                              wi,j,k =           
                                          1, if wi,j,k > 0.
   The contribution to the likelihood can be written as:


                 LI -II                                           1(wi,j,k =0)
             GM
              i,j,k     =     -j,k,0 - j,k,1 zi - j,k mi,j,1                     ×
                                                                          1(wi,j,k =1)
                             1 -  -j,k,0 - j,k,1 zi - j,k mi,j,1

    and we can define a similar equation for the contribution to the likelihood for
    LI -III
GM
 i,j,k      .
   The data for MLI-I and MLI-II were collected at baseline. Therefore, depending
on the age of the child, we have data for MLI-I or for MLI-II, but never for both
instruments for the same child. Let the variable i,j = 0 if the observation for child i is
from MLI-I and i,j = 1 if the observation for child i is from MLI-II. The contribution
to the likelihood from child i and word k is:


                                         LI -I                     LI -II
              GM  LI
               i,j,k = 1 (i,j = 0) × GM
                                      i,j,1    + 1 (i,j = 1) × GM
                                                                i,j,1


   In our procedure, it is crucial to select words from the MLI instrument that are
informative and have different degrees of difficulty. One approach would be to estimate
the MLI IRT by itself and let the maximization algorithm find the optimal values of
the parameters of interest. We take a different approach. Because the BSID-III is
the "gold standard" in measuring child development, we add the BSID-III to the IRT
model for the MLI. In this sense, the parameters of the IRT model are now related
to the BSID-III. Therefore, informative items are items that also correlate with the
BSID-III. Difficult items are items who only the children with high scores in the BSID-
III (once we control for age and gender) can understand and say. Therefore, although
we only use the MLI in forming the beliefs elicitation survey questionnaire, the items
we choose have some information from the BSID-III. In what follows, we describe how
we use the BSID-III in our IRT model.

                                            45
   Unlike the MLI, the BSID-III is a continuous variable. Thus, let BSIDi,j,l denote
the observed score for child i in BSID-III subscale l. The relationship with the variable
mi,j,1 is captured by:

                   BSID - IIIi,j,l = j,l,0 + j,l,1 zi + j,l mi,j,1 + ui,j,l

where ui,j,l  N (0, l2 ). Therefore, the contribution to the likelihood is:
                                                                                            2
        -III       1     1                BSID - IIIi,j,l - j,l,0 - j,l,1 zi - j,l mi,j,1
 GBSID
  i,j,l        =                exp
                   l      2                                 2l2
   Finally, the likelihood takes into account the fact that mi,j,1 is not observed for any
child. Therefore, we must integrate out the distribution of mi,j,1 :

                                K                  L
                                                               -III
                       Li =          GM  LI
                                      i,j,k             GBSID
                                                         i,j,l      f (m) dm                (17)
                               k=1                l=1
   And the likelihood function is

                                                  N
                                         L=               Li                                (18)
                                                  i=1
   We can estimate the parameters of the IRT model by maximising the likelihood
(18).
    Finally, we use the estimates for j,k,0 , j,k,1 and j,k , to estimate a child-specific
mi,j,1 by maximising the following function for each child i:

                                              K
                               Li =               GM  LI
                                                   i,j,k f (m) dm                           (19)
                                          k=1
   Therefore, while we use the BSID-III to carefully select the words we use in the
beliefs elicitation survey instrument, we do not use the BSID-III to predict the child's
Bartlett scores in the MLI instrument. We follow a similar procedure for the IRT
model for the MLI-III.
  We also estimate an IRT model for parental investments (materials and activities).
However, in the estimation of parental investments, we do not use the BSID-III in any
way. Similar to the analysis of the MLI, we use the output of the IRT model to describe
the scenarios of investments and to produce Bartlett scores of investments in time and
material. These scores are then used as error-ridden measures of parental investments
in the estimation of the objective production function. We have a third measure,
directly reported by parents, that measure the amount of time parents interact with
the children on a given day.

                                                  46
A.2    Appendix 2. Beliefs Elicitation Survey Instrument

The final beliefs elicitation survey instrument was designed after extensive piloting in
which alternative wordings of the beliefs elicitation questions were tried. In particular,
we pilot multiple wordings to define a child with low or high levels of child development
at the beginning of the period, low and high levels of parental investments and levels of
child development at the end of the period. During the pilot, we also try different ways
to elicit expectations of child development: "What is the probability of a hypothetical
child can say...?" "What is the minimum and maximum age a hypothetical child can
say...?", "What is the minimum, the medium and maximum age a hypothetical child
can say...?" among others.
   Before asking to mothers of each child of our sample the expectation about child
development for different scenarios for a hypothetical child, mothers were trained in the
equipment (wooden tablets) used for the elicitation questions. For do so, we designed
a practice module. Figure A.1 shows the scenarios presented to mothers for which
the aim is to elicit maternal subjective beliefs about the effect of nutrition conditions
(high and low: top and bottom in the diagram) on what age a hypothetical baby
(aged 4 months) would start to crawl, walk and run. The use of different groups of
physical activities with different levels of difficulty allows us to investigate and address
measurement error in maternal responses about expected levels of physical activities.
To indicate their answers, mothers used wooden tablets that had been marked with
different ages (from 6 to 48 months) at the top and that contained a number of strings
with a bead. Figure A.1 shows the two-scenarios used in the practice module tablets
for which the mothers reported the age a hypothetical child would start to crawl, walk
and run. For each set of physical activities and scenario there was a string with a
bead (in total 6 strings). The mother was asked to put the bead at the age at which
the hypothetical child would be able to crawl, walk and run under a given scenario.
During these practice questions, the interviewer would point out to inconsistencies,
if, for instance, the mother would indicate that the hypothetical baby would start
to run before starting to crawl or she would indicate that a malnourished child (low
nutrition) would run before a well fed one. The point of this exercise was to familiarise
the mothers with an instrument that is not standard in field work and especially with
a population with low levels of education.




                                             47
          Figure A.1: Beliefs Elicitation Survey Instrument: Practice module



   The main module of the instrument to elicit maternal beliefs asks mothers to report
the expected level of child development at the end of the period. For each of the four
scenarios presented in Figure A.3, we asked the mother at what age a hypothetical
child would start saying 3 sets of words in that particular scenario. To explain the
scenarios to each mother, Figure A.2 was presented when explaining the combinations
                                          L
of scenario pairs s in the set S = {(H0                L
                                            , X L ), (H0            H
                                                         , X H ), (H0 , X L ), (H0
                                                                                 H
                                                                                   , X H )}. The
            L
scenario (H0  , X L ) is represented by the low amount of time doing activities like the
ones shown at the left in Figure A.2 and low didactic materials like the ones shown at
                                                                H
the right bottom in Figure A.2, on the opposite, the scenario (H0 , X H ) is represented
by the high amount of time doing activities like the ones shown at the left in Figure
A.2 and high didactic materials like the ones shown at the right top in Figure A.2.




                                              48
                                         L
 Figure A.2: Parental Investment: S = {(H0            L
                                           , X L ), (H0            H
                                                        , X H ), (H0 , X L ), (H0
                                                                                H
                                                                                  , X H )}



   The three set of words were chosen to be easy, more difficult and even more difficult.
To indicate their answers, mothers used wooden tablets that had been marked with
different ages (from 9 to 48 months) at the top and that contained a number of strings
with a bead. For each set of words and a scenario there was a string with a bead. At
the end of the exercise each mother was presented with two wooden tablets (left and
right diagrams from Figure A.3) with the 12 strings and beads and was asked whether
she would want to revise any of the questions.




Figure A.3: Beliefs Elicitation Survey Instrument: child development elicitation in-
strument




                                            49
A.3     Appendix 3. Estimation of the Subjective Technology of Skill Forma-
        tion
A.3.1    Consistency of Scenarios and Data

Before we describe the estimator we use to recover individual belief parameters, we
briefly provide additional details that explain an important feature of our analysis to
ensure comparability in location and scale between inputs in the estimation of the
objective technology of skill formation and the hypothetical scenarios we use in the
estimation of subjective parameters.
   The scenario ln H sh is derived from words that we selected from the MLI instrument.
However, the MLI is only one of the four measurements of child development at the
beginning of the period. Thus, to impose consistency in location and scale, we proceed
in the following way.
   First, we compute the values for the scenarios from the MLI using the IRT analysis.
   Second, we conduct an IV regression in which the BSID scores are the dependent
variable and the MLI is the predictor variable. The IV regression is necessary because,
under the assumptions of our measurement system, the OLS estimator is biased and
inconsistent. We then use the results from the IV regression to predict the values for
the scenarios for BSID.
   Third, we predict ln H sh using the same four variables, and the same prediction
rule (i.e., Bartlett), that we used to generate factors scores of ln Hi,0 , which we use in
the estimation of the objective technology.
   Fourth, we ensure that the location and scale of ln H sh are exactly the same as in
the factor scores for ln Hi,0 .
   We execute the same steps for the scenarios of ln X sx . Next, we provide the formulas
for the Swamy (1970) estimator.

A.3.2    Swamy estimator

We can use Swamy (1970)'s estimator to obtain, for each household, an efficient esti-
mator for the vector µi = (µi,0 , µi,1 , µi,2 , µi,3 ). This approach is efficiently equivalent to
a GLS estimator. Let µi denote the Swamy's estimator.
  Before we proceed, we introduce some notation. Let ln Hi,1 denote the vector of
maternal subjective beliefs reports. Note that, for each one of the three sets of words
q , mothers provide answers to four scenarios s. Therefore, ln Hi,1 is a vector with
twelve rows for each mother. Similarly, let i denote the vector of measurement error
in maternal reports. Let Zs = (1, ln H sh , ln X sx , ln H sh ln X sx ) denote the values for the

                                               50
scenarios. Thus, Zs is a vector with four columns. We can arrange the information in a
matrix Z which has twelve rows and four columns. This matrix Z has two properties.
First, it does not vary across mothers. Second, the rows 1 to 4 are identical to rows 5
to 8 as well as rows 9 to 12 as the description of the scenarios are identical across word
difficulty level q .
     Let T denote the number of measures for each mother. Let L denote the dimension
of the vector µi . In our case, T = 12 and L = 4. The first step is to run an OLS
regression for each i = 1, ..., N :

                                      ~i = (Z Z )-1 (Z ln Hi,1 )
                                      µ
                                       2      ~i ~i
                                      ~i =
                                           T -L
                                      ~i = 
                                      V     ~2 (Z Z )-1
                                             i

   The estimators µ
                  ~i ,  2
                       ~i       ~i are used as inputs in the second step which computes
                          , and V
      1     N
µ
¯=    N     i=1   µ
                  ~i and estimates:
                                              N                                 N
                           ^ =      1                       1                        ~i
                                       [    µ  ~i - N µ
                                            ~i µ      ¯µ¯]-                          V
                                  N - 1 i=1                 N                  i=1

                          ^i =    ~i
                                   2
                                     I   + Z^Z

   Then, we can efficiently estimate the first two moments of the distribution of the
vector µi : the mean, E (µi ), and the variance, V ar(µi ):
                                            N                    N
                            E (µi ) = (           Z^ i Z )-1 (         Z^ i ln Hi,1 )
                                           i=1                   i=1
                                              N
                                          1            ^ +V
                                                          ~i )-1
                          V ar(µi ) =                 (
                                          N     i=1

   The third step is to derive an efficient linear estimator of µ
                                                                ^i . To do so, we follow
                                              -1
Judge et al. (1985). Let Ai =   ^ +V
                                 - 1    ~ - 1    ^ :
                                                  - 1
                                                  i

                                                                       -1
                      µ
                      ^i = E (µi ) + ^Z            2
                                                  ~i I + Z^Z                (ln Hi,1 - ZE (µi ))
                                                ~ -1 - V ar(µi ) (I - Ai )
                   µi ) = V ar(µi ) + (I - Ai ) V
              V ar(^                              i



A.4       Estimation of the Objective Technology of Skill Formation

In this section we describe how to objectively estimate the technology of skill formation
so that we can compare maternal subjective beliefs against a model that describes the

                                                       51
process of child development as represented by equation (2) in Section 2. In this
methodology, we explore the dimensionality reduction provided by the measurement
system and only use the factor scores for each measure of child development (both in
baseline and follow-up one) and parental investments (in follow-up one).
    Let mi,ln H0 ,k denote continuous error-ridden measures of the natural log of child de-
velopment at the beginning of the period produced by child assessment instrument k ,
for k = 1, ..., K . As described in Section 3.2, we have three continuous subscales of the
BSID-III (cognition, expressive language, and receptive language), and the estimation
of the MLI data with the IRT model in Section 4.3.1 produces an additional continuos
scale of expressive language development. Therefore, we have K = 4 continuous mea-
sures of child development at the beginning of the period. Furthermore, all of these
measures have location and scale in age-equivalent scores:

                 mi,ln H0 = ln H0 ,0 + ln H0 ,1 zi + ln H0 ,2 ln Hi,0 + i,ln H0       (20)

   Note that the equation is written in vector form, so mi,ln H0 is a vector of dimension
K = 4 and so are ln H0 ,0 , ln H0 ,2 . i,ln H0 . Also, ln H0 ,1 is a (4x2) matrix. The same
data are available for child development at the end of the period. Thus:

                 mi,ln H1 = ln H1 ,0 + ln H1 ,1 zi + ln H1 ,2 ln Hi,1 + i,ln H1       (21)

   Because our measures of child development have location and scale according to
age-equivalent score, we could - in principle - fix the intercepts to zero and factor
loadings to one for all of the measures of child development at the beginning of the
period and at the end of the period. However, we adopt a less aggressive approach
and, consistent with our methodology, we only do so for BSID-III expressive language
scale which is also highly correlated with the MLI. Thus, we do not restrict the values
of any of the remaining measures of child development at any period.
    Finally, the IRT analysis of the FCI instrument and time spend with children in
activities, explained in Section 4.3.1, produces two continuous measures of parental
investments. The first measure summarizes parental investments as captured by activ-
ities and the second by materials. Therefore:

                   mi,ln X = ln X,0 + ln X,1 zi + ln X,2 ln Xi + i,ln X               (22)

   The objective estimation of the technology of skill formation has three steps. In
the first step, we factor analyze equations (20, 21, and 22) separately. Then, we use


                                              52
estimated intercepts, factor loadings, and variances of the factors, to generate the factor
scores:

                               ^i =  -1 ,2            -1
                                    ,2                     ,2 - 1
                                                               mi,                                   (23)

where -      1
               is the variance of factor     ^i and    ^i = ln H                         ^ i . Next, let  =
                                                                              ^ i,1 , ln X
                                                                   ^ i,0 , ln H
           
(0 , 1 , 2 , 3 ) and i = 1, ln H  ^ i,0 , ln X
                                             ^ i , ln H
                                                      ^ i,0 ln X
                                                               ^ i , so that we can write the tech-
nology of skill formation (2) in the following form:

                                          ^ i,1 = i  +
                                       ln H                 i   + i

                ~i = 1, ln H
    Now, define R          ^ i,0 , di , ln H
                                           ^ i,0 di . Note that we are using the random as-
signment to control or parenting stimulation program as a valid instrument for parental
investments in children. Now, consider the following inconsistent estimator of the vec-
tor  , ~:
                                       ~ = (R
                                            ~ )-1 (R
                                                   ~ ln H
                                                        ^ 1)

      ~ and  are matrix of dimensions (N × 4) and ln H
where R                                              ^ 1 is a row vector of dimension
N , where N is the number of children in the study. The inconsistency of the estimator
                         ~ )-1 that has a quadratic term of a predicted factor score.
arises in every cell of (R
Because we instrument parental investments with the dummy for random allocation to
                                                             ~ )-1 that have biased
control or parenting stimulation program, the only cells in (R
                                                                     ^ i,0 . The bias
estimates of moments are the ones that include quadratic terms of ln H
terms depends on the factor loadings and variances of the measurement errors in (20).
   The reason why this happens is because any predicted factor score contains not
only the contribution from the unobserved latent variable, but also inherits parts of the
measurement errors. We can use the estimated values of factor loadings and variances
                                                       ~ )-1 that are affected by this
of measurement errors to adjust the specific cells in (R
contamination. This is the central idea in Williams et al. (2019). We denote by R the
                         ~ . Let 
bias-corrected matrix of R       ^ denote the following consistent estimator of  :

                                       ^ = (R )-1 (R ln H
                                                        ^ 1)

    The standard errors of ^ are given by:

                                  ^ = (R )-1 (R R)-1 [(R )-1 ]
                                  




                                                    53
References
Andrew, A., Attanasio, O., Fitzsimons, E., Grantham McGregor, S., Meghir, C.,
 and Rubio-Codina, M. (2018). Impacts 2 years after a scalable early childhood
 development intervention to increase psychosocial stimulation in the home: A
 follow-up of a cluster randomised controlled trial in colombia. PLOS Medicine
 Https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002556.

Attanasio, O., Cattan, S., Fitzsimons, E., Meghir, C., and Rubio-Codina, M. (2018).
  Estimating the production function for human capital: Results from a randomized
  control trial in colombia. NBER Working Paper No. 20965.

Attanasio, O., Fern´
                   andez, C., Fitzsimons, E., Grantham-McGregor, S., Meghir, C., and
  Rubio-Codina, M. (2014). Using the infrastructure of a conditional cash transfer pro-
  gram to deliver a scalable integrated early child development program in colombia:
  cluster randomized controlled trial. BMJ 349:g5785.

Baker, A. J. L. and Piotrkowski, C. S. (1996). Parents and children through the school
  years: The effects of the home instruction program for preschool youngsters. New
  York: National Council of Jewish Women, Center for the Child .

Bayley, N. (2006). Bayley scales of infant and toddler development. harcourt assess-
  ment. San Antonio, TX 3rd edition.

Behrman, J. R., Calderon, M. C., Preston, S. H., Hoddinott, J., Martorell, R., and
  Stein, A. D. (2009). Nutritional supplementation in girls influences the growth of
  their children: prospective study in guatemala. The American journal of clinical
  nutrition 90(5):1372­1379.

Boneva, T. and Rauh, C. (2018). Parental beliefs about returns to educational in-
  vestments: The later the better? Journal of the European Economic Association
  16(6):1669­1711.

Caldera, B., D., L., K., Rodriguez, Crowne, S. S., Rohde, C., and Duggan, A. (2007).
  Impact of a statewide home visiting program on parenting and on child health and
  development. Child Abuse and Neglect 31(8):829­852.

Cunha, F., Elo, I., and Culhane, J. (2013). Eliciting maternal expectations about the
 technology of cognitive skill formation. NBER Working Paper No. 19144.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J., and Schennach, S. (2010). Estimating the technology of
 cognitive and non-cognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78(3):883­931.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., Lochner, J. L., and Masterov, D. (2006). Interpreting the
 Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation in E. Hanushek and F. Welch, eds., The
 Handbook of Economics of Education. Amsterdam: North Holland.



                                          54
Currie, J. and Thomas, D. (1999). Early test scores, socioeconomic status and future
 outcomes. Technical report, National bureau of economic research.

Del Boca, D., Flinn, C., and Wiswall, M. (2013). Household choices and child devel-
  opment. Review of Economic Studies 81(1):137­185.

Drotar, D., Robinson, J., Jeavons, L., and Lester Kirchner, H. (2009). A randomized,
  controlled evaluation of early intervention: The born to learn curriculum. Child:
  Care, Health and Development 35(5):643?649.

Eckenrode, J., Campa, M., Luckey, D. W., Henderson, C. R., Cole, R., Kitzman, H.,
  Anson, E., Sidora-Arcoleo, K., Powers, J., and Olds, D. (2010). Long-term effects
  of prenatal and infancy nurse home visitation on the life course of youths: 19-year
  follow-up of a randomized trial. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine
  164(1):9­15.

Frongillo, E., Sywulka, S., and Kariger, P. (2003). Unicef psychosocial care indicators
  project. final report to unicef. Mimeo, Cornell University.

Furrow, D., Nelson, K., and Benedict, H. (1979). Mothers' speech to children and
  syntactic development: Some simple relationships. Journal of child language 6:423­
  442.

Gertler, P., Heckman, J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeersch, C., Walker, S., Chang,
 S. M., and Grantham-McGregor, S. (2014). Labor market returns to an early child-
 hood stimulation intervention in jamaica. Science 344(6187):998­1001.

Grantham-McGregor, S., Powell, C., Walker, S., and Himes, J. (1991). Nutritional sup-
  plementation, psychosocial stimulation, and mental development of stunted children:
  the jamaican study. The Lancet 338:1­5.

Heckman, J. J., Moon, S. H., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P. A., and Yavitz, A. (2010). The
  rate of return to the highscope perry preschool program. Journal of public Economics
  94(1-2):114­128.

Jackson-Maldonado, D., Marchman, V., and Fernald, L. (2012). Short form versions
  of the spanish macarthur-bates communicative development inventories. In Applied
  Psycholinguistics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge .

Judge, G. G., Hill, R. C., Griffiths, W. E., Lutkepohl, H., and Lee., T. C. (1985). The
  Theory and Practice of Econometrics. 2d ed. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Kotlarski, I. (1967). On characterizing the gamma and normal distribution. Pacific
 Journal of Mathematics 20:729­38.

Lareau, A. (2003). Unequal Childhoods: Race, Class, and Family Life. University of
  California Press.


                                          55
Manski, C. F. (2004). Measuring expectations. Econometrica 72(5):1329­1376.

Masur, E. F. and Gleason, J. B. (1980). Parent-child interaction and the acquisition
 of lexical information during play. Developmental Psychology 16:404.

Michalopoulos, C., Faucetta, K., Hill, C. J., Portilla, L. B., Lee, H., Duggan, A.,
 Knox, V., Margie, N. G., and Nerenberg, L. (2019). Impacts on family outcomes of
 evidence-based early childhood home visiting: Results from the mother and infant
 home visiting program evaluation. Technical report, Mathematica Policy Research.

Olds, D., Henderson Jr, C. R., Cole, R., Eckenrode, J., Kitzman, H., Luckey, D.,
  Pettitt, L., Sidora, K., Morris, P., and Powers, J. (1998). Long-term effects of nurse
  home visitation on children's criminal and antisocial behavior: 15-year follow-up of
  a randomized controlled trial. Jama 280(14):1238­1244.

Putnam, R. (2015). Our Kids: The American Dream in Crisis. Simon Schuster.

Rubio-Codina, M., Attanasio, O., Meghir, C., Varela, N., and Grantham-McGregor, S.
 (2015). The socioeconomic gradient of child development: Cross-sectional evidence
 from children 6­42 months in bogota. Journal of Human Resources 50(2):464­483.

Swamy, P. A. (1970). Efficient inference in a random coefficient regression model.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society 311­323.

Weigel, D. J., Martin, S. S., and Bennett, K. K. (2006). Contributions of the home
 literacy environment to preschool-aged children's emerging literacy and language
 skills. Early Child Development and Care 176(3-4):357­378.

Williams, B., Heckman, J., and Schennach, S. (2019). Nonparametric factor score
 regression with an application to the technology of skill formation preliminary -not
 for circulation .




                                          56
