                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DECISION-MAKING IN COMPLEX HOUSEHOLDS

                                       Marcos Rangel
                                       Duncan Thomas

                                     Working Paper 26511
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26511


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




This research has benefited from comments by Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Yu Kyung Koh, Costas
Meghir and Christopher Udry. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marcos Rangel and Duncan Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Decision-Making in Complex Households
Marcos Rangel and Duncan Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 26511
November 2019
JEL No. J1,O13,Q15

                                          ABSTRACT

Extremely rich data on farm households in Burkina Faso are used to test whether resource are
allocated Pareto efficiently. The complexity of household structures, including multi-generation
and polygynous households, is taken into account to developing tests from theoretical models of
behavior. Credible measures of bargaining power are constructed exploiting the fact that
individuals within a household have well-defined property rights over the plots they own. Using
data on consumption choices, we establish that in farm households headed by a monogamous
couple (with no co-resident adult sons), resource allocations are consistent with efficiency. In
more complex household structures, including polygynous households, efficiency in allocations is
not rejected in models that allow more than two household members to have agency in decision-
making. In contrast, tests for efficiency based on whether the same farm households maximize
profits by equating marginal products across plots are rejected for all household types. Further,
these same tests indicate individuals do not equate marginal products across their own plots. We
conclude, therefore, that tests of models of resource allocation based on production-side decisions
are likely to be misleading. In contrast, the consumption-side tests provide novel insights into the
nature of decision-making within complex households.


Marcos Rangel
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
194 Rubenstein Hall
302 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
marcos.rangel@duke.edu

Duncan Thomas
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
d.thomas@duke.edu




A data appendix is available at see subdir of paper dir
1. Introduction
        Understanding decision-making within households is an important scientific and policy
issue. Consider, for example, the argument that female empowerment is key for economic
development (Duflo, 2012). Without a clear conceptual understanding of the processes underlying
decision-making, policies intended to improve the status of women may be ineffective and, in
some cases, even backfire precisely because intra-household dynamics are ignored (Dey, 1981).
While the unitary model of household decision-making, which assumes all members share the
same preferences or one member dictates all choices, has been a powerful tool for understanding
consumption behavior (Deaton and Muellbauer, 1980), the assumptions underlying that model
have been shown to be overly restrictive in a broad array of settings.1 Whereas no clear consensus
has emerged around the general applicability of a specific alternative model, one important class of
models that has received considerable attention in recent years assumes only that household
allocations are collectively rational in the sense that resource allocations are Pareto efficient. The
theoretical model was first described in seminal work by Chiappori (1988, 1992) and has been
extended by Browning and Chiappori (1998), Chiappori and Ekeland (2006) and Cherchye et al
(2012). From an empirical perspective, however, the extent to which household behavior is
consistent with efficiency has not been resolved in the literature. This paper provides new evidence
to fill that gap.
        On the one hand, the vast majority of studies based on consumption choices of households
fail to reject the hypothesis that household behavior is collectively rational (see, for example,
Chiapppori and Meghir, 2015, for a review). These studies use data from across the globe
including, for example, from Canada (Browning and Chiappori, 1998), France (Bourguignon et
al., 1993), Indonesia (LaFave and Thomas, 2017), Mexico (Bobonis, 2009; Attanasio and
Lechene, 2014), Taiwan (Thomas and Chen, 1994), Ghana (Rangel, 2004), the United Kingdom
(Blundell et al, 2007; Dauphin et al, 2011) and the United States (Chiappori et al, 2002). On the
other hand, seminal work by Udry (1996) and several follow-up studies of agricultural
productivity and input usage among farm households in West Africa cast doubt on this conclusion.
Udry (1996), Owens (2001) and Akresh (2008), for example, exploit the fact that in Burkina Faso
and Senegal, household members farm independent plots of land and fail to maximize farm profits



1
  See, for example, Schultz (1990); Thomas (1990); Lundberg et al (1997); Rubalcava and Thomas (2000);
Rangel (2006); Oreffice (2007) and Martinez (2013). See also Lafortune (2013) and Chiappori et al. (2017) for
extensions that include marriage market impacts of female empowerment.
                                                      1
at the household level.2 They conclude that holding all other inputs constant, reallocating land
between husbands and wives would result in about a twenty to thirty percent increase in total
agricultural output of the farm household. Corroborating evidence based on consumption behavior
has been reported for Burkina Faso by Dauphin et al (2018). These important and widely cited
results about inefficiency in resource allocation have been very influential in the development and
population literatures. They have spawned several experimental and non-experimental studies of
household dynamics emphasizing non-cooperation, asymmetric information and limited
commitment, with some attention to polygynous and extended households (Akresh et al, 2012,
2016; Ahsraf, 2009; Barr et al., 2019; Guirkinger et al., 2015; Kazianga and Wahhaj, 2013, 2017;
Robinson, 2012; Walther, 2018). At a broader level, it is a remarkable finding: it indicates that,
even in environments in which resources are extremely constrained with households eking out a
life of subsistence farming where survival is not assured, individuals in the same household fail to
allocate resources on their plots to come even close to maximizing agricultural profits of the entire
farm household. As Udry (1996) puts it, it is difficult to reconcile this behavior with Pareto
efficiency in the allocation of resources in the farm household. Recent work suggests that at least
part of the explanation of these results is likely due to contamination in the estimates arising from
measurement error and unobserved heterogenity at the plot level (Goldstein and Udry, 2008;
Gollin and Udry, 2019) or because of the failure of markets that differentially affects plots owned
by a household (Jones et al, 2019).
          Drawing on theoretical models of decision-making, we re-assess the evidence and, in so
doing, extend empirical investigation of farm household decision-making to incorporate not only
production but also consumption choices. Employing rich data collected from agricultural
households in Burkina Faso we contrast inferences drawn across both domains about how
resources are allocated within the household while also taking into account the complexity of
living arrangements in our study setting (as it is in many countries across Africa). Specifically,
using the 2014 Enquête Multisectorielle Continue, a Living Standards Measurement Survey
conducted by the World Bank in collaboration with the Burkina Faso national statistical agency
(INSD, 2016), we exploit detailed information about each plot of land, including individual plot
ownership, to measure control over resources within the household. Since land is key for
production, these measures are interpreted as indicative of agency in decision-making in the farm
household and play a key role in the models. Following Udry (1996), we determine whether


2
    See also Duflo and Udry (2004), Goldstein and Udry (2008), Jones (1983), and Von Braun and Webb (1989).
                                                      2
allocations to plots owned by different household members are consistent with profit
maximization. We then turn to the detailed consumption data to test whether demand behavior is
consistent with predictions of the collective model emerging from the assumption of Pareto
efficient allocations. Not only is it common for extended family members to coreside in Burkinabe
farm households but about a third of households are polygynous. This complexity of household
structure is key for advancing research on family decision-making as it provides opportunities to
reach beyond empirical tests with households headed by one or two people.
       We make three contributions to the literature. First, we replicate the finding that allocations
to plots on the farm do not appear to be consistent with profit maximization at the household level:
controlling observed characteristics of plots, those farmed by females are substantially less
productive than those farmed by males in the same household, even after accounting for
differences in crop choice. We also demonstrate, however, that following the same testing strategy
and comparing yields of plots owned by an individual farmer leads to the conclusion that
individual farmers fail to allocate resources efficiently. A more plausible interpretation is that the
estimates are contaminated by plot-specific heterogeneity that the farmer exploits but is not
observed in the survey data. We conclude that without an understanding of how specific plots are
allocated among household members, and how those allocations are linked to time-varying innate
productivity of each plot-holder combination, it is very difficult to rule out the possibility that
estimates are contaminated by unobserved heterogeneity that is correlated with the identity of the
plot owner/manager. This point has been made by Goldstein and Udry (2008) who document that
plots managed by females are less likely to be fallowed and are, therefore, less productive even
after adjusting for a broad array of observed plot characteristics including detailed measures of soil
fertility. Indeed, in sharp contrast with the production-side tests, when we examine the
consumption decisions of exactly the same farm households, we find no evidence that resource
allocations are not efficient after taking into account household structure. A key advantage of
consumption-based empirical tests is that contamination due to unobserved heterogeneity in
plot-specific productivity is less of a concern relative its impact on production-side tests.
       Second, a key element of models of decision-making is indicators of individual-specific
bargaining power that provide leverage so individuals may assert their preferences over others in
the distribution of resources within the household. A major challenge in the empirical literature on
household decision-making is the identification of "distribution factors" that are indicative of
resources under the control of each individual within the household. We directly address this
challenge exploiting the Burkinabe cultural setting in which individual males and females control
                                                   3
specific plots of land in conjunction with detailed information collected in the survey about the
characteristics of each plot including size and type of ownership. This unusually rich set of
information provides well-measured individual-specific distribution factors that provide credible
identification in our models. Drawing on the theory underlying distribution factors, we use the
amount of land an individual owns with a title or through inheritance as our primary indicator of
power within the household since this is the land over which the individual has greatest control and
should retain ownership in the event of household dissolution.
          Finally, if households are collectively rational, then theory provides predictions about
consumption behavior in response to price variation that shed light on the minimum number of
active decision-makers within the household. Exploiting these predictions, we establish that
single-headed households involve one decision-maker, monogamous couples with no adult sons
involve two decision-makers but other households, including males with multiple wives, involve
up to three decision-makers. These results underscore the richness of the theory of collective
rationality and the importance of taking the complexity of household structure into account in
testing models of household behavior.
          Dauphin et al (2018) draw a different conclusion based on tests using consumption data
they collected from about 500 households in Passoré, a province in northern Burkina Faso. They
do not have data on prices and so only test the implications of the collective model for distribution
factors. Moreover, because of data constraints, they impose the restriction that leisure and
consumption are separable and treat individual labor income as distribution factors. As they note,
this is not an appealing restriction, even if it is the standard in the literature. It is possible that
individual-specific preferences for substitution between time and consumption contaminate the
tests of the collective model and so we do not impose that restriction. We exploit the rich plot-level
ownership collected at the individual level in the survey of Burkinabe farm households to constuct
distribution factors that are plausibly exogenous. Our tests also exploit market-level variation in
prices. While our conclusion regarding the behavior of West African households is in keeping with
the recent empirical literature on household resource allocation in other countries across the globe,
it is important to note that our results do not imply that improving the status of women is either
infeasible or undesirable. Rather, the evidence suggests that thinking about these issues in the
context of a model of collective rationality is likely to be profitable both to policy makers and to
science.3 The results regarding decision makers within the extended family also has important


3
    To this end, the theory has laid the foundation for recent advances in the development of equivalence scales
                                                         4
implications for understanding families in a broader context in developing countries and more
advanced economies. In the U.S., for example, little is known about how parents and their non
co-resident adult children negotiate resource-sharing and whether those allocations are efficient in
an economic sense.


2. Conceptual framework
        A distinguishing feature of farm households is that production and consumption decisions
are inter-linked because they produce agricultural goods both for sale and for their own
consumption. Whereas empirical studies based of these models have advanced understanding of a
wide array of issues including, for example, the relationships between health and productivity,
welfare impacts of changes in prices, technological innovation and public policies and the
functioning of product, credit and labor markets (Strauss, 1986; Singh et al., 1986; Benjamin,
1998; Jayachandran, 2006; LaFave and Thomas, 2016; Dillon et al., 2019 and Kaur, 2019; for
example), there is little evidence in the economics literature about how farm household members
co-ordinate decisions among themselves.
        In the literature, the farm household is typically assumed to be unitary. That is, one
member (a dictator) makes all decisions (Becker, 1991) or there is consensus among all
decision-makers in which case they behave as if they have common preferences (Samuelson,
1956). However, studies in anthropology have documented examples of farm household responses
to policy and technological changes that suggest within households dynamics are important
(Guyer, 1997). For example a government intervention in the Gambia sought to improve the
economic status of women by introducing technology to raise the productivity of rice which had
traditionally been cultivated by women and was largely consumed by her family. As rice turned
from subsistence to a cash crop, males took over cultivation, marketing and, apparently, funds
from sales (Dey, 1981). Clearly, the program did not have the intended direct impact on the status
of women and persistently low levels of rice production suggest little improvements in family
welfare. Similarly, potential benefits of public-policy-induced innovation in cotton production in
Tanzania, a crop controlled by men, were not fully realized as women did not tend the cotton
plants but continued to cultivate maize (Fortman, 1986). These types of studies have been
interpreted as providing prima facie evidence that the dynamics of the allocation of time and
financial resources within farm households is not consistent with the unitary model and unlikely to

(Browning et al, 2013, for example), defining sharing rules (Laurens et al., 2015), and the analysis of
individual-specific poverty (Dunbar et al., 2013).
                                                        5
be efficient.
        This conclusion has particular appeal in the African context where, in many cases, a farm
household is headed by a male with multiple wives, each of whom manages their own plots.
Moreover, ethnographic studies indicate that it is neither the custom nor the practice for husbands
and wives to pool their resources in much of West Africa. Many of these studies document that
husbands and wives take responsibility for different domains of decision-making and resource
allocation, although the precise domains vary across cultures and societies (See Guyer, 1980;
Mook, 1986 and Orubuloye et al., 1991; Hill, 1975).
        Taking these insights into account, our integrated model of the farm household is general in
that it allows for heterogeneity in the preferences of individual members and permits each member
to have agency in decision-making about resource allocation in both production and consumption.
We assume each decision-maker in the household maximizes their own utility which depends on
own consumption and time allocation, as well as, in general, consumption and time allocation of
all other household members and consumption of public goods. Individual choices are limited by a
time and a money budget constraint that depends on that individual's claims on total farm
household resources; the individual budget constraints sum to the household budget constraint
which is given by the value of profits from all farm plots, income from household labor on the
farm, off farm labor of household members and non-labor sources. Decisions inherent in
maximizing individual felicity functions are aggregated into a household welfare function where
the weights assigned to each felicity function depend on total household resources, prices of goods
and services and "distribution factors" influencing the bargaining power of each member in
asserting their own preferences.
        Farms are made up of distinct plots, some of which are jointly owned while others are
individually owned. Since land is critical for agricultural production, and plot ownership conveys a
claim to the profits of that plot and, therefore, to household resources, land owned by an individual
household member is an ideal candidate for a distribution factor that reflects agency in
decision-making. In line with this reasoning, we focus primarily on plots that are individually
owned either with a title or through inheritance. In these cases, ownership is widely recognized
within the community, unlikely to be disputed and does not vary over the short or medium term. In
contrast, the amount of land managed by an individual is unlikely to be an appropriate distribution
factor. It likely reflects the outcome of bargaining over resources within the household including
time allocated to farming, off-farm work and production of services in the home and is not,
therefore, plausibly exogenous in the allocation of household resources. These concerns apply to
                                                  6
rented and communal land farmed by the household and would apply to assigning control over
jointly owned land to the individual who manages the plot.

2.1 Efficiency in production
        Farmers combine inputs to produce food and non-food crops on their plots; part of the
product is sold on the market and part is consumed by the household. Output on each plot, Q,
depends on land area, A, a set of variable inputs, V, that include labor, seed, fertilizer and water as
well as fixed inputs, Z, such as soil type and topography. Other inputs that are not measured, are
included in  ; these include soil fertility, farmer expertise and other dimensions of plot and farm
quality as well as environmental factors such as weather. Transformation of inputs to output is
constrained by the available technology.
        If a farm household faces parametric prices for all farm inputs and outputs, and allocates
resources efficiently, the farm household will maximize profits on the farm enterprise by setting
the marginal value product of each input, i , to equal its price, pvi ,

                  Q*  A, V , Z ,  
                                       pVi
                        Vi

        However, empirically establishing that profits are maximized is not straightforward for
several reasons. For example, the productivity of an input is likely to be correlated with many
dimensions of farm quality as indicated, for example, by the fertility of the soil. It is also likely to
depend on the characteristics of the farmer. These characteristics of the farm and farmer are
difficult to measure and are typically not observed in farm survey data and, therefore, potentially
contaminate estimates of marginal value products.
        In households with multiple plots, however, an immediate implication of profit
maximization is that the marginal value product of each input, including labor, should be equal
across all plots, l and m,
                  Ql*  A, V , Z ,              *
                                              Qm  A, V , Z ,  
                                       pVi 
                        Vli                         Vmi

        so that
                  Ql*  A, V , Z ,         *
                                         Qm  A, V , Z ,  
                                                            0                                   (0)
                        Vli                   Vmi

yielding a test that is not contaminated by unobserved heterogeneity at the farm household level.
This key insight is the foundation of the empirical tests in Udry (1996) and related studies, which

                                                     7
determine whether the marginal product varies with the identity of the plot owner or manager to
draw conclusions about whether household behavior is consistent with Pareto efficiency.
         Several additional assumptions are necessary to draw such inferences. First, all
decision-makers in the farm household must face the same parametric prices for all goods and
services including farm inputs, outputs and consumption goods. This includes the value of time, or
shadow wage, of each household member which, by assumption, must be the same irrespective of
whether the person is working on their own plot, another member's plot, a jointly owned plot or a
plot that is rented or provided out of the communal stock in the village. This is not an innocuous
assumption. For example, it rules out household members exerting greater effort on their own plot
or shirking on other plots. The key point is that rejection of the equality of marginal products
across plots within a farm household does not necessarily imply that households are not
collectively rational. To draw that inference requires additional assumptions that need to be
subjected to empirical scrutiny.4
         Second, it is necessary to assume there are no unobserved characteristics of plots that are
correlated with the marginal product of inputs that differ systematically with the identity of the plot
owner. This rules out a farmer having comparative advantage working on his/her own plot that is
not controlled in the empirical model. This might arise because of, for example, plot-specific
managerial skill, knowledge or learning from experience working on that plot. It is plausible that
farmers have a comparative advantage working on plots they own, because, for example, of
experience with those plots. This substantially complicates interpretation of comparisons of
productivity on plots managed by the farmer that are rented or from a communal pool.
         More generally, unobserved heterogeneity at the plot level has been shown to be a
substantively important concern in the literature comparing plots managed by males and females.
Across Africa, part of the land cultivated by farmers is communal and allocated by village leaders.
If a farmer has been granted the right to cultivate a communal plot and fails to do so, the farmer is
at risk of losing that right. As a result, relative to privately-owned plots, communal plots are less
likely to be fallowed at any time, and, since fallowing enhances soil fertility, communal plots are
also less productive than other plots. Goldstein and Udry (2008) document these patterns in Ghana
where plots managed by females are more likely to be drawn from the common pool. Failure to
take into account land tenure rights in productivity comparisons results in female plots being
4
  For example, it is necessary that the choice of effort on a plot to affect bargaining power in resource allocation
decisions. This is difficult to test because of, inter alia, the endogeneity and lack of observability of effort as well
as the possibility that decisions about effort are made as part of the contract struck at the time of marriage and
there may be difficulties enforcing that contract.
                                                           8
measured as less productive than male plots, even after controlling for a very rich set of measured
plot and soil characteristics. Without a model of the allocation of communal and privately-owned
plots managed by household members, it is extremely difficult to rule out the possibility that
unobserved plot-specific heterogeneity seriously compromises inferences about whether farm
households maximize profits based on comparisons of the productivity of plots. Moreover, such
comparisons are not likely to be informative about whether farm households are collectively
rational.5
        To summarize, if a household fails to increase total profits by shifting inputs from one plot
to another, it seems reasonable to infer that the household is unable to allocate resources Pareto
efficiently. There are, however, at least two key assumptions that must be true in order to draw
conclusions from comparisons of the productivity of plots about whether farm households
maximize profits. First, all household members must face the same parametric prices, including
the shadow wage of each member. Second, there can be no unobserved plot-specific
characteristics that are related to productivity and the identity of the plot owner (or manager in
studies that draw such comparisons). There are plausible conditions under which one or both of
these assumptions will be violated. We turn next to discuss consumption-based tests for whether
household behavior is consistent with Pareto efficiency for two reasons. First, the sources of
unobserved heterogeneity that influence results in production-side tests are not likely to be salient
sources of contamination in consumption-side tests. Second, the consumption-side tests provide
direct tests of efficiency that have a foundation in consumer demand theory which is a key
advantage over indirect tests based on production choices.

2.2 Efficiency in consumption
        Assume a farm household comprises individuals with heterogeneous preferences who
make decisions collectively. A theoretically appealing class of models proposed and developed by
Chiappori (1988, 1992, 1997) and Browning and Chiappori (1998) assumes that household
behavior is "collectively rational" in the sense that allocations are Pareto efficient. Although the
model is quite general and includes, for example, co-operative bargaining models (Manser and
Brown, 1980; McElroy and Horney, 1981), models with separate spheres of interest (Lundberg
and Pollak, 1993), it excludes a broad class of non co-operative bargaining models (Leuthold,
1968; Ulph, 1988). Anthropological studies have highlighted gender-differentiated domains of


5
 To assure the empirical analyses discussed below are not subject to this concern, we focus on plots that are
owned by household members.
                                                       9
control in decision-making in many African contexts and some studies have concluded that
polygynous households fail to achieve co-operative outcomes. Rigorous testing of whether farm
households with complex structures behave as if they are collectively rational is of substantial
interest, in general, and in this context.
          If resources are allocated efficiently within the farm household, the household welfare
function can be written as a weighted average of the individual-specific felicity functions, u , one
for each household decision-maker indexed by superscripts6
                         J
                                                       J
                   W  1      j   u 0  C; X,              j  u j  C; X,                                      (1)
                       j 1                         j 1


          where C is total household consumption, X are observed individual and household
characteristics that affect consumption choices and            are unobserved taste shifters. u0 is the
utility function of a reference decision-maker in the household (e.g.: the household head). The
Pareto weights,  j , play a key role in the model. They depend on distribution factors,  which is

a  J  1 1 vector that, at an intuitive level, reflects the bargaining power of each individual in

the farm household resource allocation decision. Bargaining power is likely to depend on
productive resources that the individual would control if he/she split from the household; in this
context, land owned by each individual is ideally suited to serve as an empirical counterpart of the
distribution factors. The weights also vary with prices, P, observed household characteristics, X,
and total household expenditure, e .
                    j   j  , P, X, , e                                                                (2)

          In our static framework, the household chooses consumption given resource and time
budget constraints so Marshallian demand is
                   C  C  P, e, ; X, , A, Z,  

where  is a J  1 vector. In reduced form, demand is

                   C  C  P, e, ; X, , A, Z,                                                           (3)

          Under the assumption that all current and future markets are complete, then farm profits
will only affect demand through total resources, e (LaFave, Peet and Thomas, 2019). Rather than
impose that strong assumption, we allow demand to be directly affected by the determinants of
profits: the amount of land owned, A , plot-specific observed characteristics, Z and plot-specific
unobserved characteristics,  .

6
    Weights are normalized to sum to one with individual-0 defined as the reference decision-maker.
                                                       10
        Unitary households
        The unitary model of the household is a special case of the collective model since
distribution factors play no role in resource allocation decisions in the unitary model. Thus, one
immediate and testable implication of the unitary model is
                 cs
                    0           goods s and individuals j                                              (4)
                  j
        The unitary and collective models also have different implications for the effects of prices
on demand. Let  sr be the effect of a change in the price of good r on demand for good s in

the collective model
                        cs cs
                  sr          cs                                                                       (5)
                        pr e

                      c c    cs cs  
                      s  s
                      p    p
                           
                              
                                e
                                  
                                     e  cr
                       r    r          

                       c c   c  cs  
                       s  s cr    s  cr                                  r  1,..., S
                       pr e    pr  e 

        Holding the vector of Pareto weights constant and holding total household welfare, W ,
constant, the compensated price effects in the unitary model are
                        cs                    cs cs
                  sr                                cr         r  1,..., S                             (6)
                        pr   dW  0, d  0
                                              pr e

        Substituting (6) into (5)
                               cs  cs  
                  sr   sr             cr                                                               (7)
                                pr  e 
        a compensated price response in the collective model comprises both the compensated (or
substitution) effect in the unitary model,  sr plus the effects in the square brackets which capture

the impact of the price change on the Pareto weights in the household optimization program. The
terms in the square brackets parallel an income effect as they effectively amount to the impact on
demand of shifting resources from a member whose Pareto weight declines with the price change
to a member whose Pareto weight increases.7 The key insight from (7) is that, in contrast with the

7
  The household optimization program in the collective model can be interpreted in terms of two stage
budgeting. In the first state, total household resources are distributed among household members with shares
depending on their Pareto weight; in the second stage, each member maximizes their own felicity function given
their own budget constraint. The impact of changes in prices on Pareto weights only affects the first stage when
                                                         11
unitary model (6), in general, the compensated price effects are not necessarily symmetric in the
collective model precisely because the price effect has an additional income effect through the
redistribution of resources. Thus, symmetry of the Slutsky matrix is a second testable implication
of the unitary model that is not a restriction imposed by the collective model:
                 sr  rs  0        s, r                                                          (8)

        Rejection of the unitary model says nothing about how decisions by individuals with
different preferences are made within a household. We turn, next, to test specific implications of
the model of collective rationality.

        Collectively-rational households
        First, if allocations are efficient then distribution factors only affect resource allocation
decisions by shifting outside options (or bargaining power) of each household decision-maker.
That is, each element of  is restricted to only affect demand through its impact on  which is
constant across all goods. Intuitively, the shift in bargaining power plays the same role as a shift in
the distribution of exogenous income in the household. This weak separability restriction implies
that the ratio of marginal propensities to consume with respect to two decision-makers, as
indicated by each having their own distribution factor,  0 and  1 , respectively, should be the
same for any pair of goods, r and s

                 cs cs         1  1   cr
                              
                     1         0
                                   1  
                  0                0   0
                                                       s  r                                     (9)
                 cs cs         1
                                      cr
                               1  1 
                                       1
                  1
                     1
which simplifies to
                 cs cr cr cs
                             0                s  r                                              (10)
                  0 1  0 1
        If there are two decision-makers in a household, these proportionality restrictions amount
to cross-equation restrictions in the demand system that are straightforward to test. It is important
to note that if there are more than two decision-makers then the equality of ratios in (10) is not
implied by the collectively rational model. Take, for example, the case of three decision makers, 0,
1 and 2. Household demand is

                        
                 C  C P, e, 1 ,  2 ; X, , A, Z,    

total resources are shared and thus has only an income effect on household demand.
                                                      12
so that the effect of a change in  0 is
                   cs cs 1 cs  2
                                                                                                  (11)
                    0 1  0  2  0
and the effect of a change in  1 is
                   cs cs 1 cs  2
                                                                                                  (12)
                   1 1 1  2 1
          It is clear from inspection of (11) and (12) that, in general, the proportionality restriction,
(10), only holds when there is one independent Pareto weight because each of the distribution
factors,  , affects all the Pareto weights, in this case,  1 and  2 , and thus  0  1  (  1   2 ).
Therefore, tests based on (10) are interpreted as testing the joint hypothesis that household
behavior is consistent with collective rationality and that there are no more than two
decision-makers in the household. This is an unappealing restriction in many developing country
contexts; it is particularly unappealing in our West African context where household structures are
complex and polygeny is practiced.
          It turns out that under the assumption of collective rationality, the compensated price
effects are well suited to examine efficiency in those contexts. Let the matrix of price responses
under the collective rationality assumption be defined as  , the pseudo-Slutsky matrix. Its
counterpart under the unitary assumption is the traditional Slutsky matrix,  . Define
                                                                                                  (13)
          where the matrix  collects the terms associated with the changes in the distributional
weights in (5) that are not in (6).
          Browning and Chiappori (1998), show that this "symmetry perturbation matrix" has to
obey specific rank conditions under the assumption of collective rationality. In the collective
model, the matrix  has rank equal at most to the number of decision-makers minus one. That is,
if there are two decision-makers, the rank of  is one. They called this the SRJ restriction over

 ("symmetric matrix plus a rank J matrix"). The restriction arises because, as shown in (11)
and (12), bargaining power effects depend on the dimension of the vector of weight functions  ,
and this is reflected in the number of rows (or columns) in  that are linearly independent.8 As
discussed in more detail below, this insight provides an opportunity to infer the number of
household members with agency in the allocation of resources in the farm household. This is a


8
    See, also, Chiappori and Ekeland (2006) and Dauphin et al. (2011).
                                                       13
powerful insight that is especially important in our context.
          In practice,  and  cannot be identified in this general formulation. However,
Browning and Chiappori (1998) show the collective rationality restrictions can be indirectly
tested. In particular, consider the matrix
                                                                                               (14)
          It follows that, if the unitary model is valid,   0 and  inherits the symmetry property
of  . Under the assumption of collective rationaloty, the matrix  is antisymmetric (or "skew
symmetric"),9 which implies that its eigenvalues are imaginary and its rank is an even number.
Browning and Chiappori (1998) suggest a sequential approach to testing collective rationality
using price sensitivity of households' consumption decisions. First, test whether the pseudo-
Slutsky matrix is symmetric by testing whether the rank of  is zero. If that restriction is not
rejected, behavior is consistent with the unitary model. If that restriction is rejected, then proceed
to sequentially test whether rank(  )=2 x J where J+1 is the number of decision-makers in the
household. For example, failure to reject the restriction rank(  )=2 indicates behavior is
consistent with collective rationality and there are 2 decision-makers; failure to reject rank(  )=4
indicates there are 3 decision-makers and behavior is collectively raitionally. If, however,
rank     2  J , the collective model is rejected and we conclude that household behavior is not

consistent with efficient allocations, including co-operative bargaining equilibria.


3. Description of the data
          Few household surveys collect detailed information on both production and consumption
in the same farm households, prices faced by these households and sufficient information to
construct measures of distribution factors that plausibly affect bargaining power within the
household. We use data from Enquête Multisectorielle Continue, a nationally-representative
household survey conducted in Burkina Faso in 2014, which is ideally suited for this research.
There are five features of the survey that are key.
          First, detailed information is reported about each plot farmed by the household including
crops planted, the quantity and value of output, quantity and value of inputs used, plot size
measured by GPS, plot location relative to the homestead and indicators of land quality including
soil type and typography. Second, the identity of the owner(s) of each plot is recorded along with
whether each plot is held with a formal title or whether it was inherited. Title or inheritance
9
    A matrix M is antisymmetric if M=-M.
                                                  14
conveys clear property rights and forms the basis for our construction of distribution factors that
are linked to control over resource allocation decisions within the household. Other plots are
owned without a title or use-rights are assigned by the local chief, usually from the village
communal pool. Most of the analyses are restricted to 4,664 farm households headed by a man and
at least one woman who own one or more productive plots of agricultural land.10 Third,
production and consumption information was collected in each of four rounds over 12 months.
Combining data across rounds, we construct annual measures of inputs, outputs and consumption
in order to put aside the important issue of seasonality in an agrarian economy. Fourth,
consumption measures in the survey include not only expenditures but also the value, at market
prices, of consumption from own production. Fifth, to estimate price effects in the demand system,
we use prices for consumption goods, farm outputs and inputs collected at local markets for
specific homogeneous goods and thereby avoid problems with using unit prices that reflect the
combination of household choices, quality variation and potential quantity discounts.
         Table 1 provides an overview of land ownership and household structure in the analytical
sample. As shown in the first column, the average farm household owned almost 5 Ha of land that
spanned 3.37 plots. Almost every male head owns land with the average male owning 4.84 Ha on
3.18 plots. In households headed by monogamous couples, we refer to the wife of the male head as
the female head; in polygynous households, all wives are referred to as female heads. Slightly over
one in twelve female heads own land, they own 1.54 Ha and 1.81 plots on average. On average,
female plots are slightly larger than half the size of male plots.
         The complexity of household structures in Burkina Faso is another important reason to
investigate household decision-making in this context. As shown in columns 2 through 5 of Table
1, we have stratified households into four types. Households headed by a male and female couple
with no other adults (column 2) have played a central role in studies of household
decision-making; they are unlikely to have more than two decision-makers. We have separated
households headed by a couple with another adult who is not a son (column 3) from those with an
adult son (column 4). Both of these household types potentially have more than two
decision-makers particularly in the latter household type. Since a co-resident adult son is likely to
work in the farm enterprise and inherit land ownership rights from his parents, he is also likely to
play a significant role in decision-making. Polygynous households (column 5) are interesting
because, at one extreme, it is possible their behavior is consistent with the unitary model, if one


10
     Plots that use some labor input and produce output that is consumed or sold.
                                                       15
household member dictates all decisions and, at the other extreme, the household may have
difficulty achieving a co-operative equilibrium.
        On average, the amount of land owned and number of plots owned tends to increase with
household complexity. On average, monogamous couples and no cohabiting adults have the least
land and fewest plots while polygynous households have the most land and largest number of
plots. A female owns at least one plot in 9.4% of polygynous households and together they own far
more plots than females in monogamous households.
        While the differences in land ownership across household types are modest, there are very
large differences in household size and composition, as shown in panel B of Table 1. Overall, there
are 8.9 members in the average household with 2 male adults, slightly more female adults and 4.5
children. Monogamous couples with no other adults are much smaller because, by definition there
is only one male and one female adult in the household and because there are fewer children. Other
households headed by a monogamous couple are very similar to the average household and
polygynous households are much larger with 12.9 members, on average of whom 2.4 are male
adults, 3.6 are female adults and 6.8 are children. Male heads are younger in monogamous couples
without an adult son and there is little variation in literacy and religion of household heads across
the household types except that polygynous households are more likely to be Muslim.
        Consumption includes both purchases in the market and consumption out of own
production. Food consumption over the previous 7 days and non-food over the previous 90 days
from each of the four survey rounds are converted to annual values. In our central analysis results
are reported for seven semi-aggregates which have been chosen in an effort to group similar goods
together while avoiding the complexities that arise with estimation and interpretation of models of
budget shares that include large fractions of households who report zero consumption of a
semi-aggregate.11


4. Empirical implementation and results
        Our investigation of whether the behavior of Burkinabe farm households is consistent with
collective rationality, we begin with production-side tests as implemented by Udry (1996) and
others. Consistent with that literature, profit maximization is rejected. Recall from Section 2 that
we argue that failure of collective rationality is not the only potential explanation for this result.

11
   Among our seven semi-aggregates only three have incidence of zero expenditures. Specifically, 0.19% of the
households do not report any housing expenditures; 2.94% of the households transportation expenditures, and;
1.65% of households recreation expenditures.
                                                     16
We therefore turn next to the consumption-side tests. If the restriction that there are no more than
two decision-makers in each farm households is imposed on the data, collective rationality is
rejected. There is, however, no a priori reason to impose that restriction given the complexity of
Burkinabe farm household structures described above. This turns out to be key: allowing the
number of decision-makers to differ across household types, collective rationality is not rejected
for any of the household types. With this result, we return to production-side choices and assess
whether behavior is consistent with profit maximization within any of the household types
described in the previous section.

4.1 Production-side tests
       If a farm household maximizes profits, then the marginal value product of any inputs
should be equal across all plots farmed by that household, (0), which implies that the marginal
value product of a plot should not depend on the identity of the plot owner. Marginal products are
difficult to estimate and so, following Udry (1996), we take a Taylor series approximation and
compare the average yield per hectare of plots owned by males with the yield on female owned
plots. In order to compare of yields of plots owned by males and females within each farm
household, we translate such notion into a regression framework and estimate
                                                       G
                Rht   1 femaleht   2 Aht  Z'ht  3  h    g  ht                                    (15)
                                                       g 1


       where Rht is the yield per hectare on plot t , owned by a member of household h and

female is an indicator variable for a female-owned plot. The model includes a farm household

fixed effect,  h to assure comparisons are made between plots owned by males and females in the
same farm household. Further, the model includes an indicator variable for the primary crop
planted on the plot, g , for G crops to assure comparisons across plot owners are not

contaminated by crop choice. Since plot productivity is typically inversely correlated with plot
size, the model includes an indicator for each quantile of land area, Aht , and, to adjust for

plot-specific quality differences, the model semi-parametrically includes measures of plot
topography, soil type and distance from the homestead, Z ht .

       Results from estimation of (15) are reported in Table 2. As shown in the first row of panel
A, taking all plots owned by the male or female household head, on female-owned plots, the
ln(yield per Ha) evaluated at market prices is 10.17 (about CFAF 26,000 or $50) but only 9.96 on
male plots, a 21% gap that is large and statistically significant. Drawing comparisons between men
                                                  17
and women in the same household by including a farm household fixed effect,  h , the gap is

reduced to 11% and it is not significant. However, female-owned plots are about half the size of
male plots (panel C, row 1) and, in general, there is a negative correlation between plot size and
productivity. Further, females are more likely to grow peanuts which are higher value than millet
which is grown by males. Adjusting for plot size and including indicators for crops, male-owned
plots are 25% more productive than female-owned plots (row 3, column 3). Adding plot
characteristics to the model does not change the estimated effect or inference. This is not
surprising since, as shown in panel C.3 of the table, the differences in observed plot characteristics
of males and females are small. Restricting attention to households in which both the male and a
female head own land, the gender gap increases to 32% (column 4) and further restricting to plots
that grow the same crop, the gap is 29% (column 5).
       Goldstein and Udry (2008) document that plots managed by females are less frequently
fallowed because many are communally owned) which affects the fertility of the soil and
productivity of the plots. We avoid this source of unobserved heterogeneity by examining only
plots that are owned by the individual and, as shown in panel C.4 of Table 2, only 3% of plots are
fallowed and there is no difference by gender of the owner.
       Key for the tests of collective rationality is measurement of individual-specific indicators
of control over resources (or bargaining power). It is possible that not all land owned conveys
control over the resource which may depend on the nature of the ownership and how the land is
likely to be allocated if the household splits. We restrict attention to plots for which the individual
has a title or plots that were inherited by the individual. As shown in panel C.5, almost all land
owned by male heads carries a title or is inherited whereas only about two-thirds of the plots
owned by female heads are secured in this way. Nonetheless, results reported in panel B of the
table, are almost identical to the broader measure: adjusting for plot characteristics and comparing
the same crops within households, female plots are 27% less productive than male plots and
restricting to households that have both male and female owned plots with titles or through
inheritance, the gap is 36%.
       This evidence replicates the central empirical finding in the literature: plots owned by
females are substantially and significantly less productive than plots owned by males. The result
has been interpreted as inconsistent with efficient resource allocations by households (Udry, 1996
and others) and evidence of co-operation failure between husbands and their wives (Akresh et al,
2016). The validity of this interpretation depends critically on assuming that the plots owned by

                                                  18
males and females are exchangeable. As discussed above, this is a strong assumption that is
difficult to establish empirically. More generally, it is difficult to rule out gender-specific
unobserved heterogeneity in the productivity of inputs in these models particularly in models that
ignore inter-temporal dynamics and how plots are allocated between male and female heads
(Chiappori and Mazzocco, 2017).
        One approach to assess the empirical importance of contamination in the estimates of
productivity due to unobserved heterogeneity across plots is to estimate the models comparing
plots that are owned by a single individual. There is no reason for this farmer to not maximize
profits and so the only reason productivity will differ across plots is because the assumptions
underlying the empirical specification are violated. Restricting attention to 1,481 individuals who
report owning multiple plots (with a title or through inheritance), we have re-estimated (15) for
ln(yields/Ha) replacing the indicator for gender of the owner with an indicator for whether the plot
was the last to be listed on the individual's plot roster. There are 4.594 plots so the average farmer
owns slightly over 3 plots. The survey provided no instructions on the order in which plots should
be listed by the respondent and, the plot listed last on the roster is 1.4% more productive
(s.e.=2.9%) overall and 0.5% more productive (s.e.=3%) if comparisons are drawn within plots
owned by an individual (i.e. including plot owner fixed effects). However, taking into account
crop choice and plot characteristics, on average, the productivity of the plot listed last is 9.2%
lower than all other plots owned by the farmer; this gap is both large and statistically significant
(se=2.5%). Following Udry (1996), this indicates that the individual farmer fails to maximize
profits and is, thereby, not Pareto efficient. A more plausible interpretation is that farners allocate
resources to plots that are more productive and this plot-specific heterogeneity which is
unobserved in the data contaminates the estimates.12 This seriously compromises inferences about
efficiency in resource allocations based on production-side tests. Therefore, to empirically assess
whether Burkinabe farm households allocate resources Pareto efficiently, we turn to
consumption-based tests.

4.2 Heterogeneity of preferences and consumption decisions
        In each of the four survey rounds, detailed consumption is collected for food items (over
the previous 7 days) and non food items (over the previous 90 days) taking into account both
purchases in the market and consumption out of own production. The four rounds of data are

12
   One indicator of the extent of contamination due to unobserved heterogeneity is provided by drawing comparisons
between a farmers highest and lowest yielding plots: the productivity gap is 60% (s.e.=4.2%) after controlling
individual farmer fixed effects, crop fixed effects and observed plot characteristics.
                                                       19
combined and converted to annual consumption which we have aggregated to create budget shares
for seven semi-aggregates. The average shares are displayed in panel A of Table 3. The staples,
cereal (millet, corn and rice), accounts for one-quarter of the budget, meat, fish and vegetables
account for about one-sixth and other foods another one-sixth. On average, food accounts for 55%
of the budget. Household and personal goods accounts for one-fifth of the budget and includes
household furniture and semi-durables, clothing, health and education spending. The shares of the
budget allocated to housing and transport are small. Recreation accounts for about one-tenth of the
budget and includes leisure-related spending and spending on festivals and holidays.
        The semi-aggregates have been chosen so that similar goods are grouped together (such as
all cereals). We selected a demand system with seven shares as the tests for collective rationality
lack power when income effects are poorly determined.13 To test the theoretical predictions on
demand behavior of collective rationality, we estimate (3) a flexible Almost Ideal Demand type of
specification that is extended to include distribution factors. Specifically,
                   4                              G
            s
           whl    q
                  s
                   1lnPCEqhl   ln  P
                  q 1
                              s
                                    l     g ln pl
                                          s      g
                                                    X'hl s2   s1 hl
                                                  g 1
                                                                 m
                                                                      s2 hl   hl
                                                                         f    s
                                                                                                         (16)

 where whl
        s
           is the share of the budget spent on semi-aggregate s by household h living in

locality l . Budget shares depend on the logarithm of per capita expenditure (PCE) specified as a
spline with knots at each quartile of the PCE distribution to allow flexibility in the shape of the
income effects, household characteristics, X ,14 an overall price index, P , and the relative price
of each semi-aggregate, p . Market prices, collected in each survey round at the locality level, are
used to create locality-specific share-weighted price indices where the weight is the locality area
mean budget share for each good in the sub-aggregate and all price indices are specified in
logarithms.
        The distribution factors are measured by the amount of land that is individually owned with
a title or through inheritance by the male head,  m , and by the female head(s),  f .15 Each model
includes an indicator for whether any land is owned and the quartic root of the amount of land
owned, separately for females and males.16

13
    We examine the robustness to this choice below.
14
   Specifically, ln(household size), the share of members that are children, adult males adult females and senior
males, the age, literacy and religion of the male head and female head (the senior female head in polygynous
households) and indicator functions for province of residence.
15
   In the case of polygynous households, holdings across all wives are aggregated in order to mimic the gender
differential highlighted in the exercise focused on data from production decisions.
16
   The quartic root function closely approximates the logarithmic function for all values other than 0 and has the
advantage of being defined at zero; results using the inverse hyperbolic sine function are substantively the same.
                                                        20
        Estimates of the coefficients on the distribution factors,  , are reported in panel B of
Table 3 for each of the 7 semi-aggregates. Tests for the joint significance of land owned by
females, by males and land owned by all household heads are reported in panel C, with associated
p-values. Since lnPCE enters the demand functions very flexibly, the estimates of  s can be
interpreted as conditional on taking into account the effects of total resources on demand and are
indicative of the effects of resource control or bargaining power. Under the assumptions of the
unitary model, they play no role in the allocation of the budget.
                 1s  2s  0        s                                                                   (17)
        The restriction is rejected. For example, in the first column of the table, a greater share of
the budget is allocated to cereals as females own more land and the female land ownership
coefficients are jointly significant. Although male land ownership is not significantly related to
cereal shares, taken together, male and female land ownership are significant predictors of cereal
shares. This is not consistent with the unitary model. Overall, the restriction of the unitary model is
rejected for five of the 7 goods at a 5% size of test. (It is not rejected for household and personal
goods and for housing) with rejections for two and five of the shares for female and male land
ownership, respectively. Panel D.1 displays p-values for tests of the unitary model for the entire
demand system. The tests for no effects of land ownership are rejected for female ownership, male
ownership and ownership by all household heads.
        Whereas many studies have tested whether resource control predicts outcomes, there are
relatively few tests of the unitary model based on price effects in the literature on intra-household
resource allocation. Panel D.2 tests the 21 cross-equation restrictions that the pseudo-Slutsky
matrix is symmetric: it is rejected. Taking each pair of price effects at a time, 52% are significantly
different at a 5% size of test and 71% at a 10% size of test. Taking all of the pairs together, the
symmetry restriction is rejected (p-value  0.001).
        It is possible that rejection of the unitary model is driven by model mis-specification. To
assess this concern, the models are re-estimated for households with a single head since the
behavior of those households should be consistent with the unitary model.17 Results are reported
in column 1 of Table 4. Conditional on household resources, neither of the predictions of the
unitary model is rejected. As shown in panel A, female land ownership does not predict budget

17
   Attention is restricted to households with a female head, many of whom co-reside with children and other
adults. These households are not combined with households headed by a single male because the latter tend to be
old, live alone and have different budget allocations from female-headed households. There are too few single
male heads to reliably estimate demand functions for those households alone.
                                                      21
shares at a 5% size of test and, in panel B, Slutsky symmetry is not rejected. These results provide
reassurance regarding the empirical specification of the model.
       Results from Table 3 for households with a male and at least one female head are repeated
in column 2 of Table 4. These households are stratified into the four household types described in
Table 1. Monogamous couples are stratified into those with no other adult household members (in
column 3), those living with other adults, none of whom is an adult son (in column 4) and those
co-residing with at least one adult son (in column 5). Polygynous households (column 6) are
separated from monogamous couples.
       As shown in panel A of the table, for polygynous households and those monogamous
households with more than 2 adults (columns 4-6), male land ownership and female land
ownership are significant predictors of budget shares alone and taking land owned by all heads
together. For monogamous couples with no co-resident adults (column 3), land owned by the male
head and the joint test for the male and female head indicate they are significant predictors of
budget shares whereas female land ownership alone is not. Thus, for all households headed by a
male and at least one female, the restriction of the unitary model that the distribution of land
ownership does not affect resource allocation is rejected. Further, as shown in panel B of the table,
for all four household types, Slutsky symmetry is also rejected. We conclude that the unitary
model is soundly rejected for all households other than those headed by a single female.

       Testing the collective model: Proportionality
       Turning to the empirical implications of the collective model for consumption behavior,
we begin by testing the proportionality restriction. When resource allocations are collectively
rational, the ratio of the effects of distribution factors should be the same for all goods in the
demand system
                1s  2s
                       0                                                                       (18)
                1r  2r
       These ratios vary in ways that are economically meaningful and substantively
important.From the estimates in panel B of Table 3, taking all household types together, the ratio
of the effect of the amount of land owned by females, relative to males, on the share of the budget
allocated to household and personal goods is 8.8 ( s.e.=1.0). These goods are likely to more highly
valued by females relative to males. In contrast, the ratio is negative for the share spent on
transport (-0.28, s.e.=0.02): shares rise with the amount of land owned by males and decline with
the amount of land owned by females. It is likely that males value higher cost transport (motor

                                                  22
bikes, for example) more than females.
        In order to formally test the cross-equation restrictions (18), it is useful to recast the
restrictions in product form
                  1s 2r  1r 2s  0         s, r                                                             (19)
        as the resulting non-linear Wald test statistic has improved numerical properties (Gregory
and Veall, 1985). The chi-squared test statistics and associated p-values for the demand system are
displayed in the first panel of part A of Table 5 for households headed by a male and one or more
females (column 1) and for each of the four households types (columns 2 through 5). Collective
rationality is not rejected for any of the four household types. There are, however, legitimate
questions about the power of tests based on the entire demand system. As an example, the impact
of a small number of poorly determined coefficients may be propagated across the entire test
rendering failure to reject the test uninformative. In panel A.2 of the table, therefore, we
summarize results for pair-wise tests of equality and display the number of pairs that are not equal
at a 5 and 10% size of test. Of course, by design, we expect 5% and 10% to not be equal,
respectively.
        Taking all households together (column 1), the pair-wise results are ambiguous: the
restriction is rejected for 2.4% of pairs at a 5% size of test but for 14.3% of pairs at a 10%. It turns
out this ambiguity is due to heterogeneity across households which is clear from the remaining
columns in the table. For monogamous couples with no other adult household members (in column
2), there is no evidence that the proportionality restriction is rejected. However, for all other
monogamous couples and for polygynous households (columns 3 through 5), the proportionality
restriction is rejected for both the 5 and 10% test sizes. The second and third panels of the table
report pair-wise tests for the coefficients on the intensive margin (amount of land owned) and
extensive margin (whether or not land is owned) respectively. It is clear that rejection of the
proportionality restriction is driven by variation in the amount of land owned (panel A.2.2) and not
at the extensive margin (panel A.2.3).18


18
   It is useful to note that these results have implications for the unitary model when the distribution factors, or
plot characteristics in our case, are measured with error. Error that is common across all plots is unlikely to be a
concern because it will be absorbed by the farm household fixed effect under reasonable conditions. Error that is
correlated with the gender of the owner is a potential concern. Since most of the plot sizes are calculated from
GPS measures taken by the enumerator, measurement error is likely to be modest and is unlikely to be related to
the gender of the owner. However, other observed characteristics are reported by the household, typically the
male head and if knows more about his own plots, there is a potential for gender-specific measurement error.
Moreover, plot productivity, conditional on observed characteristics, is not measured but is likely to be known to
the household members and it is possible that it is correlated with gender of the owner. In general, if
                                                        23
         Testing the collective model: Rank of the pseudo-Slutsky matrix
         We turn next to empirically assess the restrictions on the pseudo-Slutsky matrix under the
assumption that allocations are collectively rational first described by Browning and Chiappori
(1998). Allowing the distribution factors to affect price effects, the pseudo-Slutsky matrix
comprises the usual symmetric matrix and another matrix, the rank of which is directly related to
the number of decision-makers in the household.
         These tests can be formulated in terms of the rank of an antisymmetric matrix formed by
the difference between the matrix of price responses and its transpose. Tests of rank two and rank
four have direct counterparts in terms of non-linear restrictions over the parameters of the demand
system, as shown in Browning and Chiappori (1998) and Dauphin et al. (2011), respectively. On
the other hand, there is no direct parametric restriction when testing higher rank conditions.
Moreover, since estimated matrices are subject to statistical errors and the discreteness of the rank
function, their ranks will most likely not correspond to the rank of the matrix of interest. This rules
out simple comparisons of ranks directly computed from estimates of  .
         Following Browning and Chiapppori (1998), we take a sequential approach to testing.
Beginning with SR1 , we test the null hypothesis that rank     2 against the alternative that

rank     2 . This is the case if  has S  2 of its rows as linear combinations of the other two.

                                                                                     S  2    S  3
Browning and Chiappori (1998) show that this corresponds to testing
                                                                                             2
restrictions of the form
                   sr12  1s 2r  1r2s  0               r s2
         If SR(1) is rejected, we proceed to test whether the rank is higher order and test the null
hypothsis that rank     4 against the alternative that rank     4 . Following Dauphin et al.

(2011), this test relies on a non-linear combination of parameters that yields the non-linear
Wald-statistic

measurement error in  is additive, then, under the assumptions of the unitary model, the ratio of the effects of
the distribution factors will be constant across goods (Thomas, 1990; see, also, Black et al, 2000, who show the
result holds making other assumptions about the nature of the measurement error). This is exactly the same as the
proportionality restriction under the assumption that allocations are collectively rational. We conclude,
therefore, that allowing for measurement error in the distribution factors, the unitary model is rejected for all but
monogamous couples with no other adults. Tests of the symmetry of the compensated price effects is not
affected by this type of measurement error and, for those tests, our conclusion that the unitary model is rejected
for all four types of households remains.
                                                         24
                   sr (1234  1324  1423 )  12 (3s4r  3r4s )
                      - 13 ( 2r 4s   2s 4r )  14 ( 2s3r   2r3s )

                      1 s( 23 4 r 24 3r  2) 4 
                                          r +
                                            3 ( 1 r 2 3 4 s  2 4 3 s )            0
                                                                                 2s   34   rs             4
          The non-linear Wald test is complemented with a test based on the singular values of the
pseudo-Slutsky matrices (i.e., the norm of their eigenvalues). We calculate the number of non-zero
singular values which correspond to the rank of the matrix19 and estimate variability of that
estimate using the boostrap.20 Details are presented in the Technical Appendix.
          These tests of the restrictions on the pseudo-Slutsky matrix are presented in panel B of
Table 5 beginning, in the first row, with Browning and Chiappori's SR1 test which is test for rank

2. It is rejected for all households with more than one head (in column 1). This result is, again,
driven by heterogeneity among households. Restricting attention to monogamous households with
no other adults (column 2) and those with no adult sons (column3), the restriction is not rejected.
For these household types, consumption behavior is consistent with collective rationality and two
decision-makers. The restrictions are rejected for monogamous households with an adult son
(column 4) and also for polygynous households (column 5). This may be because allocations are
not Pareto efficient or because the number of decision makers is greater than two, or both. To
distinguish between these explanations, the second row in the panel reports results of the tests that
the pseudo-Slutsky matrix has rank 4 for these two types of households. It is not rejected in either
case and the evidence is consistent with the allocations of these households being Pareto efficient
and that there are 3 decision-makers in the households.
          A key strength of this paper, and an important advantage of the farm household context, is
that the amount of land owned is a plausible distribution factor which is likely to be indicative of
bargaining power of the owner in household allocation decisions. The consumption side tests have
included the amount of land that is owned with a formal title or through inheritance. This has the
advantage of identifying land that the owner is likely to control even if the household dissolves and
is, therefore, indicative of an individual's threat point bargaining position. This definition accounts
for almost all land owned by males but only two-thirds of the land owned by females. All of the
consumption-side tests are repeated in Appendix Table 1 using any land owned, with or without a
title. None of the conclusions regarding rejection of the unitary model or failure to reject Pareto
efficiency described above is changed using this broader definition to identify the effects of the

19
     Leon (1990).
20
     Eaton and Tyler (1994), Bullock (1995) and Ratsimalehelo (2003).
                                                      25
distribution factors.21
         The power of the consumption-side tests likely varies with the number of sub-aggregates
and price indices included in the demand system. This is likely to be particularly important in tests
of income ratios and tests based on estimated price effects. As the number of sub-aggregates is
increased, the number of zero shares also increases; we have limited attention to demand systems
with 9 and 8 sub-aggregates and also report results for systems with 6 and 5 sub-aggregates.
Results using the more narrow definition of land ownership are presented in Appendix Tables
2a-2d, respectively. In none of these cases do our conclusions differ from those described above
for the demand system with 7 sub-aggregates. We conclude our results are robust to varying the
number of sub-aggregates, at least within this range.
         Taken together, these results based on consumption behavior are striking. Not only do they
establish that resource allocations among Burkinabe farmers are consistent with Pareto efficiency
but they are also informative about how decision-making varies with the complexity of the
household composition. Specifically, households headed by a man and a woman with no adult
sons behaves as if there are two decision-makers whereas polygynous households and
monogamous households with at least one son in the household behaves as if there are three
decision-makers.

         Production efficiency and household structure
         The consumption-side tests have highlighted the importance of heterogeneity across the
four household types for understanding decision-making within households. With this in mind, we
return to the production side of the farm household and examine whether the gender-specific
productivity differentials vary with household type. Results are reported in Table 6. The
(female-male) gender gap in ln(yields/Ha) are displayed in panel A for plots owned with a title or
by inheritance in the first row and for all land owned in the second row. All models include farm
household and crop fixed effects along with measures of plot quality. All farm households are
included in the models reported in the first column which repeats results from Table 2: plots owned
by females are 25 to 27% less productive than plots owned by males. Among monogamous
couples with no other adults in the households, the productivity differential is cut by half to 14%
and is not statistically significant. The gap is largest for couples with a co-resident adult son


21
   There are relatively few households in which land is owned by a third member. In households with an adult son, for
example, few of the sons own land although it is very likely they will inherit the land in the future. As a result, this
study is not powered to implement tests based on the rank of the matrix of the effects of three distribution factors on
consumption (or the relationship between its columns and those of the antisymmetric matrix  )
                                                          26
(36-39%) and significant for both those households and polygynous households. However, none
of the gaps across household types is significantly different from each other. As shown in panel B
of the table, the gender differences are apparent in input usage: female plots are less intensively
cropped as indicated by the negative gender gap in labor input per Ha. The difference is largest and
statistically significant in polygynous households. Those households are also significantly less
likely to use chemical fertilizer or manure on female-owned plots although that is not the case in
any of the households headed by a monogamous couple. Panel C of the table establishes that the
gender gaps in yields cannot be explained by the differences in type of labor inputs (although the
gap remains large for monogamous couples with a co-resident adult son but it is poorly determined
and not statistically significant). Land preparation is traditionally dominated by males: there is no
evidence of gender differences in the fraction of labor that is allocated to plot preparation across
male and female plots.
       Taking the production results together, they are suggestive that the behavior of polygynous
households may be different from monogamous households. However, it is also plausible that
there are differences in the nature and extent of unobserved characteristics of plots owned by males
and females in the different types of households. It is, therefore, difficult to draw firm conclusions
about whether behavior of any of these types of farm households is collectively rational. Results
from the consumption-side tests suggests that households allocate labor inputs taking into account
unobserved differences in the plots and the opportunity costs of time of male and female farmers.
The production-side evidence is far from being as informative as the consumption tests we
conducted above in terms of highlighting complexity in decision-making within West African
farm households.


5. Conclusions
       Comparisons of the productivity of farm plots controlled by different people within the
same Burkinabe households indicate that those households do not maximize profits since marginal
products are not equalized across plots. This has been interpreted as evidence that these
households do not allocate resources efficiently. However, theoretical models of decision-making
by households provide predictions about consumption behavior and we find no evidence that the
same farm households can reallocate resources so that at least one member is better off without
another being worse off. That is, we do not reject the hypothesis that resource allocations are
Pareto efficient. We establish this is not because the consumption-side tests lack power and

                                                  27
conclude that tests based on production choices are not well-suited to provide information about
efficiency of resource allocations as they are likely to be contaminated by unobserved
heterogeneity at the plot level that is correlated with agricultural output and land ownership.
       After establishing the implications of the unitary model of the household for consumption
choices is not rejected for households headed by one person (a single woman), we document that
model is rejected for all other household types. We find no evidence that these more complex
households do not behave as if they are "collectively rational" in the sense that their allocations are
Pareto efficient. Exploiting insights from the theoretical literature in combination with the richness
of household structures in Burkinabe farm households, we establish that in households headed by
monogamous couples with no adult sons, decision-making is consistent with there being two
players in the allocation of resources. In more complex households - those headed by a
monogamous couple with an adult son and those headed by polygynous couples - there are more
decision-makers and, once that is taken into account, consumption choices are consistent with the
predictions of the Pareto efficient model. These are powerful results since they involve tests based
on the shape of the price-responsiveness matrix and are difficult to attribute to contamination from
measurement error or unobserved heterogeneity.
       The methods used in this paper provide an empirical example of how the combination of
theory with survey data from farm households can advance understanding of decision-making in
complex households across the globe and, potentially, lay the groundwork for assessing the impact
of changes in resource availability, technology and environmental factors on well-being of
individuals. To wit, these models are likely to provide valuable insights for mechanisms that will
advance the empowerment of women. More broadly, the research presented here suggests that
thinking about household behaviors in the context of a model of collective rationality is likely to be
profitable for both science and policy.




                                                  28
References
Akresh, R. (2008). "(In)Efficiency in Intrahousehold Allocations." IZA Discussion paper 1858.
Akresh, R.; J. Chen and C. Moore (2016). "Altruism, Cooperation and Intrahousehold Allocation: Agricultural
   Production in Polygynous Households." Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 64(4), pp.
   661-696.
Akresh, R.; J. Chen and C. Moore (2012). "Productive Efficiency and the Scope for Cooperation in Polygynous
   Households." American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 94 (2): pp 395-401.
Ashraf, N. (2009). "Spousal Control and Intra-household Decision Making: An Experimental Study in the
   Philippines." American Economic Review, 99(4), pp. 1245­77.
Attanasio, Orazio and Valerie Lechene (2014). "Efficient Responses to Targeted Cash Transfers." Journal of
    Political Economy, Vol. 122, No. 1 (February), pp. 178­222.
Barr, Abigail, Marleen Dekker, Wendy Janssens, Bereket Kebede, and Berber Kramer (2019). "Cooperation in
    Polygynous Households." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11 (2): 266­83.
Becker, G. (1991); A Treatise on the Family, Harvard University Press.
Black, D.; M. Berger, and F. Scott (2000). "Bounding Parameter Estimates with Nonclassical Measurement
    Error." Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 95 (451), September.
Bobonis, G (2009);"Is the Allocation of Resources within the Household Efficient? New Evidence from a
   Randomized Experiment." Journal of Political Economy, 3 (06), pp. 453-503.
Bourguignon F.; M. Browning; P. A. Chiappori & V. Lechene (1993);"Intra Household Allocation of
   Consumption: a Model with some evidence from French data." Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 29,
   pp. 137-156.
Blundell, R., P. A. Chiappori, T. Magnac and C. Meghir (2007). "Collective Labour Supply: Heterogeneity and
   Non-Participation." Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 74(2), April, pp. 417-445.
Browning, M. and P. A. Chiappori (1998). "Efficient Intra-Household Allocations: a general characterization
   and empirical tests." Econometrica, Vol. 66(6), November, pp. 1241-1278.
Browning, M.; P. A. Chiappori; and A. Lewbel (2013). "Estimating Consumption Economies of Scale, Adult
   Equivalence Scales, and Household Bargaining Power." Review of Economic Studies, vol. 80, issue 4,
   1267-1303.
Bullock, D. (1995). "Are Government Transfers Efficient? An Alternative Test of the Effficient Redistribution
    Hypothesis." Journal of Political Economy, Vol 103 (6), pp. 1236-1274.
Cherchye, L.; B. De Rock and F. Vermeulen (2012). "Married with Children: A Collective Labor Supply Model
   with Detailed Time Use and Intrahousehold Expenditure Information." American Economic Review, Vol.
   102(7), December, pp. 3377-3405.
Chiappori, P.A. (1988). "Rational Household Labor Supply." Econometrica, Vol 56(1), January, pp. 63-89.
Chiappori, P.A. (1992). "Collective Labor Supply and Welfare." Journal of Political Economy, Vol.100(3),
   June, pp. 437-767
Chiappori, P.A. (1997). "Introducing Household Production in Collective Models of Labor Supply." Journal of
   Political Economy, Vol. 105, pp. 191-209.
Chiappori, P.A. and I. Ekeland (2006). "The micro economics of group behavior: General characterization."
   Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. Volume 130, Issue 1, September, pp. 1-26.
                                                       29
Chiappori, P. A.; B. Fortin; and G. Lacroix (2002). "Marriage Market, Divorce Legislation and Household
   Labor Supply." Journal of Political Economy; 110(1), February, pp. 37-72.
Chiappori, P. A.; M. Iyigun; J. Lafortune and Y. Weiss (2017). "Changing the Rules Midway: The Impact of
   Granting Alimony Rights on Existing and Newly Formed Partnerships." The Economic Journal; 127(604),
   September, pp. 1874-1905.
Chiappori, P. A. and M. Mazzocco (2017). "Static and Intertemporal Household Decisions." Journal of
   Economic Literature; 55(3), September, pp. 985-1045.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre and Costas Meghir (2015), "Intrahousehold inequality." In Handbook of Income
   Distribution (Anthony B. Atkinson and Francois Bourguignon,eds.), 1369-1418, North Holland,
   Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Dauphin A. A.-R. El Lahga; B. Fortin and G. Lacroix (2011). "Are Children Decision-Makers within the
   Household?." The Economic Journal, Volume 121, Issue 553, June, pp. 871-903.
Dauphin, A. B. Fortin and G. Lacroix. (2018) "Is consumption efficiency within households falsifiable?"
   Review of Economics of the Households, 109:737-766.
Deaton, A. and J. Muellbauer (1980); Economics and consumer behavior, Cambridge University Press.
Dey, J. (1981). "Gambian Women: Unequal Partners in Rice Development Projects? "Journal of Development
   Studies, 17(3):109-22.
Dillon, B.; P. Brummun and G. Mwabu (2019). "Asymmetric non-separation and rural labor markets." Journal
    of Development Economics, Vol. 139 (June), pp. 78-96.
Duflo, Esther (2012). "Women Empowerment and Economic Development." Journal of Economic Literature,
   50(4): 1051-79.
Duflo, E. and C. Udry (2004). "Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Cote d'Ivoire: Social Norms, Separate
   Accounts and Consumption Choices." NBER Working Papers 10498, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Dunbar, G., A. Lewbel and K. Pendakur (2013). "Children's Resources in Collective Households:
   Identification, Estimation and an Application to Child Poverty in Malawi." American Economic Review,
   103, 438-471.
Eaton, N. and E. Tyler (1994);"The asymptotic distribution of singular values with applications to canonical
    correlations and correspondence analysis." Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 34, pp. 439-446.
Fortmann, L. (1986). "Women's Role in Small Farm Agriculture." unpublished, University of California at
    Berkeley.
Goldstein, M. and C. Udry (2008). "The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural Investment in
   Ghana."Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 116, No. 6 (December), pp. 981­1022.
Gollin, D. and C. Udry. (2019). "Heterogeneity, measurement error and misallocation: Evidence from African
   agriculture." NBER Working Ppaer 25440.
Gregory, A. and M. Veall (1985). "Formulating Wald Tests of Nonlinear Restrictions." Econometrica, Vol.
   53(6), pp. 1465-1468.
Guirkinger, C.; J-P. Platteau and T. Goetghebuer (2015). "Productive inefficiency in extended agricultural
   households: Evidence from Mali" Journal of Development Economics, Volume 116, September, pp 17-27.
Guyer, J. (1997). "Endowments and assets: The anthropology of wealth and the economics of intrahousehold
   allocation." in in L. Haddad, J. Hoddinott and H. Alderman (eds.) Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in
   Developing Countries, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
                                                        30
Guyer, J. (1980). "Household Budgets and Women's Incomes." African Studies Center Working Paper Series #
   28, Boston University.
Hill, P (1975). "The West African Farming Household." in J. Goody (ed.) Changing Social Structure in Ghana;
    University of Cambridge Press, United Kingdom.
INSD (2016). "Burkina Faso ­ Enquête Multisectorielle Continue 2014." Institut National de la Statistique et
   de la Démographie ­ Ministère de l'Economie et des Finances. Retrieved October 13, 2016.
   https://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2538/pdf-documentation
Jayachandran, S (2006). "Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in Developing
    Countries." Journal of Political Economy, vol. 114(3), pages 538-575, June.
Jones, C. (1983). "The Mobilization of Women's Labor for Cash Crop Production: A Game Theoretic
    Approach." American Journal of Agricultural Economics, December, pp. 1049-1054.
Jones, M. F. Kondylis, J Loeser and J. Magruder. (2019). Factor market failures and the adoption of irrigation in
    Rwanda. Monograph.
Kaur, S. (2019). "Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets." American Economic Review, vol 109(10)
   pages 3585-3616, October.
Kazianga, H. and C. Udry (2006). "Consumption smoothing? Livestock, insurance and drought in rural Burkina
   Faso." Journal of Development Economics, vol. 79(2), pp 413-446, April.
Kazianga, H. and Z. Wahhaj (2013). "Gender, Social Norms, and Household Production in Burkina Faso."
   Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 61, No. 3 (April), pp. 539-576.
Kazianga, H. and Z. Wahhaj (2017). "Intra-Household Resource Allocation and Familial Ties." Journal of
   Development Economics, vol 127, July, pp. 109-132.
LaFave, D., E. Peet and D. Thomas (2019). "Farm profits, prices and household behavior, ." unpublished, Duke
   University.
LaFave, D. and D. Thomas (2017). "Extended Families and Child Well-being." Journal of Development
   Economics, 126:52-65.
LaFave, D. and D. Thomas (2016). "Farms, Families, and Markets: New Evidence on Completeness of Markets
   in Agricultural Settings." Econometrica, Volume 84, Issue 5, September, pp. 1917-1960.
LaFave, D. and D. Thomas (2017). "Extended families and child well-being." Journal of Development
   Economics, Vol. 126, pp. 52-65.
Lafortune, J. (2013). "Making yourself attractive: pre-marital investment and the returns to education in the
    marriage market." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 5(2), pp. 151-78.
Laurens, C., B. De Rock, A. Lewbel, and F. Vermeulen (2015). "Sharing Rule Identification for General
   Collective Consumption Models." Econometrica, 83, 2001-2041.
Leon, S. (1990); Linear Algebra with Applications, Third Edition, New York, McMillan.
Leuthold, Jane H. (1968). "An Empirical Study of Formula Income Transfers and the Work Decision of the
   Poor.." Journal of Human Resources 3 (3): 312-23.
Lu, Z and M. King (2004). "A Wald-type Test of Quadratic Parametric Restrictions." Economic Letters, Vol.
    83, pp. 359-364.
Lundberg S. and R. Pollak (1993). "Separate spheres bargaining and the marriage market". Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol 93(5), pp. 901­918.

                                                         31
Lundberg, S; R. Pollak and T. Wales (1997). "Do Husbands and Wives Pool their Resources? Evidence from
   the UK Child Benefit." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 32(3), Summer, pp. 463-480.
Manser, M. and M. Brown (1980). "Marriage and Household Decision-Making: a bargaining analysis."
   International Economic Review, Vol.21(1), February, pp.31-44.
Martinez, C. (2013). "Intra-Household Allocation and Bargaining Power: Evidence from Chile." Economic
   Development and Cultural Change Vol. 61, No. 3 (April), pp. 577-605.
McElroy, M. and M. J. Horney (1981);"Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: toward a generalization of the
   theory of demand." International Economic Review, Vol. 22, pp. 333-349.
Mook, J. L. (1986); Understanding Africa's Rural Households and Farming Systems, Westview Special
  Studies on Africa, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Oreffice, S. (2007). "Did the legalization of abortion increase women's household bargaining power? Evidence
   from labor supply." Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 5(2), pp. 181-207..
Owens, J. (2001). "Gender-Differentiated Household Resource Allocation: Empirical Evidence in Senegal."
  M.Sc. Dissertation, Michigan State University, Department of Agricultural Economics, Michigan.
Orubuloye, I. O., J. Caldwell, P. Caldwell, and C. Bledsoe (1991). "The Impact of Family and Budget Structure
   on Health Treatment in Nigeria" Health and Transition Review, Vol 1(2), pp. 189-210.
Rangel, M. A. (2011). "Allocation of Resources Within the Extended-Family." unpublished manuscript,
   Department of Economics, University of Sao Paulo.
Rangel, M. A. (2006). "Alimony Rights and Intrahousehold Allocation of Resources: Evidence from Brazil."
   The Economic Journal, 116 (July), pp. 627­658.
Rangel, M. A. (2004). "Intra-Household Allocation of Resources and Family Decision-Making." Ph.D.
   Dissertation, University of California at Los Angeles.
Ratsimalahelo, Z. (2003);"Strongly Consistent Determination of the Rank of a Matrix." unpublished,
    Department of Economics, University of Frenche-Comte.
Robinson, Jonathan (2012). "Limited Insurance within the Household: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
   Kenya." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4 (4): 140­64.
Rubalcava, L. and D. Thomas (2000). "Family Bargaining and Welfare." unpublished, Department of
   Economics, University of California at Los Angeles.
Samuelson, P. (1956). "Community Indifference Curves." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70, pp.1-22.
Schultz, T. P. (1990). "Testing the Neoclassical Model of Family Labor Supply and Fertility." Journal of
   Human Resources, Vol. 25(4), Fall, pp. 599-634.
Shaban, R. (1987). "Testing between Competing Models of Sharecropping." Journal of Political Economy,
   Vol. 95(5):893-920.
Singh, I., L. Squire, J. Strauss (eds.) (1986);Agricultural Household Models - Extensions, Applications, and
    Policy, World Bank Research publication, John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Strauss, John (1986). "Does Better Nutrition Raise Farm Productivity?." Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
    94(2), April, pp. 297­320.
Thomas, D. (1990). "Intrahousehold Resource Allocation: an inferential approach." Journal of Human
   Resources, Vol. 25(4), Fall, pp. 635­664.
Thomas, D. and Chien-Liang Chen (1994). "Income Shares and Shares of Income: Empirical Tests of Models
                                                        32
    of Household Resource Allocations." RAND Labor and Population Program Working Paper Series, 94-08,
    Santa Monica, California.
Udry, C. (1996). "Gender, Agricultural Production, and the Theory of the Household." Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol. 104(5), October, pp. 1010­1046.
Ulph, D. (1988). "A General Non-Cooperative Nash Model of Household Consumption Behavior."
   unpublished, University of Bristol.
von Braun, J. and P. Webb. (1989);"The Impact of New Crop Technology on the Agricultural Division of Labor
    in a West African Setting". Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol 37, pp. 513­514.
Walther, Selma (2018). "Noncooperative decision making in the household: Evidence from Malawi." Journal
   of Development Economics, vol. 134(C), pages 428­442.




                                                       33
Technical Appendix.
Implementing hypothesis tests based on bootstrapped singular value decomposition (SVD)
Since the rank function has the property that for any matrices M1 and M 2

                rank  M1  M 2  rank  M1   rank  M 2  ,

 will be SRJ , or  will be of rank J , if and only if:

                rank    rank     rank   

                            2  rank   

                            2 J
Consider the hypothesis test regarding the antisymmetric matrix  (of dimensions S  S )
                H o : rank     s      , where s S

  ve r s u s    H A : rank     s

The SVD of  yields the following factorization (all matrices are S  S )
                  M1DM 2
                       '



where D (a diagonal matrix) collects the singular values d s in decreasing order, and M 1 and

M 2 are orthogonal matrices. Singular values are unique for a given matrix  , but the orthogonal
matrices are not (the diagonal matrix of singular values is invariant to pre- and post-multiplication
by orthogonal matrices). Partitioning the matrices in the factorization

                       '                     D1   0   M 2,1
                                                         '
                                                             
                M 1 DM  
                       2 M 1,1       M 1,2  0          ' 
                                                  D2   M 2,2 
                                    '              '
                            M1,1D1M 2,1  M1,2 D2 M 2,2

where D2 is a  S  s    S  s  matrix.

Under the null hypothesis, D2  0, (i.e., only s of the S singular values are different from

zero)which suggests an equivalent description of the null hypothesis
                H o : D2  0

Alternatively, since the singular values are in decreasing order in the diagonal of D , one can
explore the contrast between the following paired hypotheses
                H o : rank    s  H o : d s 1  0

   ve r s u s   H A : rank     s

                                                    34
where d s 1 is henceforth referred as a borderline singular value.

Therefore, our alternative estimation is based on the singular value decomposition of the estimated

matrix ^ . Let the estimation of such random matrix be denominated ^ , for which the singular
                                                                    0

           ^ and d
values are D     ^
            0      0, s 1 (the rank- s borderline singular value). Therefore by generating K


bootstrap replications of the estimation of  and the computation of the singular values one can
obtain draws from the small sample distribution of the variables of interest -- in this case,

^                              
       k K                     k K
                   ^
               and d                 .
   k                 k , s 1
       k 1                     k 1

In order to perform inferences, however, one has to draw singular values from the small sample
distribution under the null hypothesis. Following Bullock(1995) and Hinkley (1988), the objective
is to find * such that
                       *  argmin   F
                            rank  F   s


                    1 K ^
where                   k .
                    K k 1
                                                                     '
Considering the singular value decomposition, M  M1DM 2 , the solution to this minimization

problem can be approximated by computing
                                          '
                       *  M1D* M 2

where D* is exactly like D , except that the S  s smallest singular values are substituted by
zeros.
Finally, define the antisymmetric matrix drawn under the null hypothesis as
             H
             k  *   ^   
                    k   
Hence, the bootstrap procedure can produce a sequence of singular value decompositions of  k
                                                                                           H
                                                                                             ,

d^ 
             k K
  H
  k , s 1          , against which one can perform the rank tests described above.
             k 1


The p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that rank    s is, therefore

                                  1 K ^H
             p _ valueboot                         ^0
                                      1 d k , s 1  d
                                  K k 1
                                                     s 1   



                                                              35
Table 1. Characteristics of farm households
Households in which at least one male or female household head owns at least one productive plot with a formal title or through inheritance
                                    All farm           Couples w/ no          Couples w/ other          Couples w/                Polygynous
                                  households             other adults        adults, no adult son        adult son(s)
                                       [1]                    [2]                     [3]                    [4]                      [5]
A. Land ownership
Amount owned (Ha)                     4.97                   4.14                    4.59                   5.42                     5.57
                                     (0.18)                 (0.35)                  (0.44)                 (0.45)                   (0.26)

# plots                                  3.37                 2.81                   3.19                    3.33                   3.95
                                        (0.03)               (0.04)                 (0.07)                  (0.06)                 (0.06)

# individual owners                      1.14                 1.09                   1.13                    1.12                   1.21
                                        (0.01)               (0.01)                 (0.02)                  (0.01)                 (0.02)

% male head owns                         98.9                 99.4                   98.5                    98.3                   99.1
  Amount owned (Ha)                      4.84                 4.00                   4.46                    5.30                   5.42
   (conditional on owning)              (0.18)               (0.34)                 (0.44)                  (0.44)                 (0.26)

    # plots                              3.18                 2.71                   2.99                    3.18                   3.69
   (conditional on any plots)           (0.03)               (0.04)                 (0.06)                  (0.06)                 (0.06)

% female head owns                       8.4                  7.5                    8.3                     8.2                    9.4
   Amount owned (Ha)                     1.54                 1.72                   1.11                    1.81                   1.47
   (conditional on >0 plots)            (0.25)               (0.67)                 (0.24)                  (0.81)                 (0.18)

    # plots                              1.81                 1.33                   1.67                    1.55                   2.35
   (conditional on >0 plots)            (0.06)               (0.07)                 (0.14)                  (0.10)                 (0.12)


B. Housheold size and composition
# of members                             8.9                  4.8                    8.0                     8.8                    12.9
                                        (0.08)               (0.05)                 (0.12)                  (0.13)                 (0.16)

# male adults                            2.0                  1.0                    1.7                     2.9                    2.4
                                        (0.02)                                      (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.05)

# female adults                          2.4                  1.0                    2.5                     2.2                    3.6
                                        (0.03)                                      (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.05)

# children                               4.5                  2.8                    3.8                     3.7                    6.8
                                        (0.05)               (0.05)                 (0.08)                  (0.08)                 (0.10)


C. Characteristics of heads
Male head age                            48.2                 40.1                   41.1                    57.4                   52.5
                                        (0.22)               (0.38)                 (0.46)                  (0.38)                 (0.37)

% literate male head                    24.7                 27.1                    27.0                   22.4                    23.0
% Muslim male head                      60.3                 58.7                    55.9                   53.8                    68.9

Sample                                  4,664                1,228                   884                    1,058                  1,494

Note: Standard-errors in parentheses.
Table 2. Land ownership and yields by gender of owner of land
Plot-level statistics
Only households in which either male or female head owns land
                                      Owned         Owned                      Difference       Difference          Difference
                                     by female      by male                   female-male   if both own land    if both own land
                                       head          head                                                      and farm same crop
                                         [1]          [2]                         [3]             [4]                   [5]
A. ln(yield per hectare, CFAF/Ha) in owned plots

1. No controls                                10.17                   9.96       0.21
                                              (0.06)                 (0.02)     (0.07)
2. Include HH FE                                                                 0.11
                                                                                (0.08)
3. add plot area and crop FE                                                    -0.25
                                                                                (0.07)
4. add plot characteristics                                                     -0.25            -0.32               -0.29
                                                                                (0.07)           (0.09)              (0.12)

Number of plots                        1,069            15,253           16,322                  2,242                380
Number of households                                                      4,945                   527                 128
B. ln(yield per hectare, CFAF/Ha) in plots inherited or owned with title

1. No controls                                10.12                   9.96       0.16
                                              (0.09)                 (0.02)     (0.09)
2. Include HH FE                                                                 0.07
                                                                                (0.10)
3. add plot area and crop FE                                                    -0.27
                                                                                (0.09)
4. add plot characteristics                                                     -0.27            -0.36               -0.28
                                                                                (0.09)           (0.11)              (0.13)

Number of plots                         694                      14,339         15,033           1,454                328
Number of households                                                             4,664            341                 107
C. Plot size, crop choice and plot characteristics

1. Plot size (Ha)                              0.79                   1.56      -0.77            -0.74               -1.06
                                              (0.11)                 (0.06)     (0.11)           (0.12)              (0.60)
2. Crop choice
  % Monoculture                                77.5                  79.0         -1.4             8.5
  % Sorghum or millet                          21.2                  49.2        -28.0           -48.7
  % Peanuts                                    47.1                  11.1         35.9            46.4
3. Plot characteristics
  % Flat topography                            64.4               57.7             6.7             1.0                -4.7
  % Sandy soil                                 52.5               49.0             3.5             3.7                 0.0
  % Near homestead                             36.8               35.8            0.9              3.2                -1.9
4. % plots fallowed                             2.8                3.3            -0.6            -0.8
5. % Inherited or has title                    64.9               94.0           -29.1           -30.9               -11.9
Number of plots                               1,069              15,253         16,322           2,242                380

Note: Standard-errors in parentheses clustered at household level.
Table 3. Budget share demand function, land owned by males and females, and price-effects
Household-level statistics
Households in which either male or female head owns inherited or titled land
                                                         Cereal              Meat + veges                                    Other food            HH & personal gds        Housing   Transport   Recreation
                                                            [1]                  [2]                                            [3]                       [4]                 [5]        [6]         [7]
A. Budget shares
   Budget share                                            25.4                 15.7                                             14.6                       19.9              4.9        8.2        11.3
                                                           (0.2)                (0.1)                                            (0.1)                      (0.1)            (0.1)      (0.1)       (0.1)

B. Impacts of individual land ownership over consumption
   (1) if female owns land                                -1.16                                       -0.67                     -1.20                       1.16              0.11      0.72         1.04
         [p value]                                       [0.28]                                       [0.40]                    [0.06]                     [0.25]            [0.89]    [0.53]       [0.16]
   Amt owned by female (quartic root)                                       2.49                       0.85                      0.56                      -1.55             -0.22     -0.59        -1.54
       [p value]                                                           [0.02]                     [0.28]                    [0.39]                     [0.12]            [0.78]    [0.63]       [0.04]
   (1) if male owns land                                                    1.06                       0.00                      1.42                       0.95             -0.27     -2.47        -0.69
         [p value]                                                         [0.33]                     [0.99]                    [0.13]                     [0.35]            [0.72]    [0.01]       [0.53]
   Amt owned by male (quartic root)                                         0.04                       1.10                     -1.37                      -0.18             -0.69      2.09        -1.00
       [p value]                                                           [0.91]                     [0.00]                    [0.00]                     [0.69]            [0.02]    [0.00]       [0.00]


C. Joint tests of significance
   Female own land & amount owned                                          11.83                       1.32                      8.50                       3.08             0.19       0.52         5.49
        [p value]                                                          [0.00]                     [0.52]                    [0.01]                     [0.22]           [0.91]     [0.77]       [0.06]

   Male own land & amount owned                                             1.21                      19.90                     18.13                       0.95             8.02      34.45        14.55
       [p value]                                                           [0.55]                     [0.00]                    [0.00]                     [0.62]           [0.02]     [0.00]       [0.00]

   All land ownership covariates                                           12.03                      20.22                     24.38                       7.64             8.48      34.80        19.20
         [p value]                                                         [0.02]                     [0.00]                    [0.00]                     [0.11]           [0.08]     [0.00]       [0.00]

D. System-wide tests of unitary model
   1. Significance of land owned effects (p value)
                       Female ownership      [0.02]
                         Male ownership      [0.00]
                   Joint (male & female)     [0.00]


   2. Symmerty of 21 cross-price effects in pseudo-Slutsky matrix
                     % p-values <=0.05        52.4
                     % p-values <=0.10        66.7
                     joint test (p value)    [0.00]

Note: Sample is 4,664 households. (Standard errors) below budget shares and [p values for significance] below regression coefficient estimates and joint test statistics.
Table 4. Testing implications of unitary model
Significance of distribution factors and Slutsky symmetry in budget share demand system with 7 sub-aggregates

                                                     I. HHs with                                    II. HHs headed by one male and at least one female
                                                    single head                                              HHs headed by monogamous couple
                                                   Single female,                                        Couple, no   Couple + other    Couple + >1
                                                                                       All
                                                   no other adult                                       other adults  adults, no son     adult son     Polygynous HHs
                                                         [1]                           [2]                  [3]             [4]              [5]             [6]


A. Tests of significance of land ownership distribution factors (p values)
          Female ownership               [0.09]               [0.02]                                      [0.24]                [0.01]               [0.01]                [0.00]
          Male ownership                                      [0.00]                                      [0.00]                [0.00]               [0.00]                [0.00]
          Joint (male & female)                               [0.00]                                      [0.00]                [0.00]               [0.00]                [0.00]


B. Tests for symmetry of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
              Pairwise tests (21)
                    % pvalues<=0.05                       0.0                         52.4                 23.8                  23.8                 42.9                  28.6
                    % pvalues<=0.10                       0.0                         66.7                 38.1                  23.8                 47.6                  33.3
                Joint tests (p values)                  [0.22]                       [0.00]               [0.00]                [0.00]               [0.00]                [0.00]

Number of households                                     555                         4,664                1,228                  884                 1,058                 1,494

Notes: Land ownership measures are gender-specific amount of land owned with title plus individual-specific amount of land inherited. Controls include indicator (1) for land ownership
and area owned (quartic root) conditional on ownership, separately for males and females. All test statistics based on robust estimates of variance-covariance matrices taking into account
clustering at the village level.
Table 5. Testing implications of Pareto efficiency
              Tests for equality of ratios of distribution factor effects and rank of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
              in budget share demand system with 7 sub-aggregates

                                                 HHs headed               HHs headed by monogamous couple                                           Polygynous
                                              by man + >1 wives Couple, no other   Couple + other Couple + >1 adult
                                                                                                                                                        HHs
                                                                    adults         adults, no son        son
                                                     [1]              [2]                [3]              [4]                                            [5]

A. Equality of ratios of distribution factor effects
   1. Equality of all ratios C 2         13.69                                 7.59                   14.20                    17.49                   15.93
                                 [p value]            [0.75]                  [0.98]                  [0.72]                   [0.49]                  [0.60]

    2. Pair-wise tests of equality
     2.1 Distribution factors: All
                       % pvalues<=0.05                  2.4                     0.0                     4.8                      7.1                    11.9
                       % pvalues<=0.10                 14.3                     0.0                     9.5                     14.3                    16.7

     2.2 Distribution factors: Amount of land owned
                       % pvalues<=0.05                  4.8                     0.0                     9.5                     14.3                    19.0
                       % pvalues<=0.10                 28.6                     0.0                    19.0                     28.6                    19.0

     2.3 Distribution factors: (1) if own land
                       % pvalues<=0.05                 0.0                      0.0                     0.0                     0.0                      4.8
                       % pvalues<=0.10                 0.0                      0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     14.3

B. Tests based on rank of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
   1. Rank 2
                               2
      Browning-Chiappori SR1 C       29.32                                     6.31                    7.30                    19.24                   27.17
                                 [p value]            [0.00]                  [0.79]                  [0.70]                   [0.04]                  [0.00]

    2. Rank 4
                                  2
        Dauphin-Fortin-Lacroix C                       0.52                      -                        -                     0.49                    2.14
                          [p value]                   [0.92]                                                                   [0.92]                  [0.54]

        Bootstraped-SVD
                                 [p value]            [0.74]                     -                        -                    [0.99]                  [0.15]

Number of households                                  4,664                   1,228                    884                     1,058                   1,494
Notes: Land ownership measures are gender-specific amount of land owned with title plus individual-specific amount of land inherited. Controls include indicator (1)
for land ownership and area owned (quartic root) conditional on ownership, separately for males and females. All test statistics based on robust estimates of variance-
covariance matrices taking into account clustering at the village level.
Table 6. Differences in farm outputs and inputs by gender of land owner (female-male)
By household type, plot-level statistics
                                                                                               Monogamous couples
                                                                      All            Couple, no    Couple +    Couple + >=1                   Polygynous
                                                                      HHs           other adults other adults,  adult son                         HHs
                                                                                                    no son
                                                                      [1]                 [2]               [4]                [3]                  [5]
A. ln(yield/Ha)
    1. Plots owned with title or by inheritance                     -0.27               -0.14             -0.23              -0.39                -0.30
                                                                    (0.09)              (0.21)            (0.20)             (0.19)               (0.13)
    2. All owned plots                                              -0.25               -0.19             -0.24              -0.36                -0.25
                                                                    (0.07)              (0.17)            (0.15)             (0.15)               (0.10)

B. Inputs on plots owned with title or by inheritance
    1. ln(labor days/Ha)                                            -0.30               -0.17             -0.26              -0.15                -0.41
                                                                    (0.05)              (0.09)            (0.11)             (0.09)               (0.07)

    2. (1) if use chemical fertilizer                               -0.09                0.01             -0.03              -0.03                -0.17
                                                                    (0.03)              (0.04)            (0.06)             (0.06)               (0.05)

    3. (1) if use manure                                            -0.13               -0.08             -0.05              -0.02                -0.20
                                                                    (0.03)              (0.06)            (0.06)             (0.06)               (0.05)

C. Allocation of labor
    1. ln(yield/labor day)                                           0.03                0.03              0.03              -0.24                 0.11
                                                                    (0.10)              (0.20)            (0.24)             (0.20)               (0.15)

    2. % of total labor allocated to                                 0.47                1.79             -1.79               2.05                 0.22
       plot preparation                                             (0.96)              (1.75)            (1.63)             (1.73)               (1.63)

D. Sample sizes
    1. Plots owned with title or by inheritance
      plots                                                        15,030              3,343              2,669              3,352               5,666
      households                                                    4,664              1,228               884               1,058               1,494
    2. All owned plots
      plots                                                        16,322              3,636              2,860              3,597               6,229
      households                                                    4,945              1,318               933               1,110               1,584

Notes: Standard-errors in parentheses clustered at household level. Samples restricted to households with male and female heads who own plots that
generated income and used own or hired labor. Controls include household fixed effects, main crop fixed effects and plot characteristics (indicator variables
for plot area, topography, location, soil type and monoculture).
Appendix Table 1. Consumption side tests with broader definition of land ownership
Gender-specific distribution factors are whether land is owned and amount of land owned

                                       HHs headed           HHs headed by monogamous couple        Polygynous
                                       by man + >1      Couple, no   Couple + other  Couple + >1
                                                                                                      HHs
                                          wives        other adults  adults, no son   adult son
                                           [1]             [2]             [3]           [4]          [5]
A. Testing unitary model
  1. Tests of significance of land ownership distribution factors (p values)
  Female ownership                       0.007             0.114             0.063      0.005        0.000
  Male ownership                         0.000             0.000             0.000      0.000        0.000
  Joint (male & female)                  0.000             0.000             0.000      0.000        0.000

  2. Tests for symmetry of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
  Pairwise tests of equality
                   % pvalues<=0.05      52.4               28.6              23.8        42.9         33.3
                   % pvalues<=0.10      71.4               38.1              28.6        47.6         33.3
                Joint tests (p value)  0.000              0.000             0.000       0.000        0.000

B. Equality of ratios of distribution factor effects
                               2
   1. Equality of all ratios C          14.05              7.59            17.35        18.30        19.66
                           [p value]     [0.7261]        [0.9842]         [0.4992]     [0.4360]     [0.3524]

  2. Pair-wise tests of equality
   2.1 Distribution factors: All
                  % pvalues<=0.05           9.5             0.0              0.0         9.5          11.9
                  % pvalues<=0.10          14.3             0.0             11.9        19.0          26.2
   2.2 Distribution factors: Amount of land owned
                  % pvalues<=0.05         19.0              0.0             0.0         19.0          19.0
                  % pvalues<=0.10         28.6              0.0             14.3        33.3          33.3
   2.3 Distribution factors: (1) if own land
                  % pvalues<=0.05            0.0            0.0              0.0         0.0          4.8
                  % pvalues<=0.10            0.0            0.0              9.5         4.8          19.0

C. Tests based on rank of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
   1. Rank 2
                               2
      Browning-Chiappori SR1 C      30.19                  7.49             10.19       18.50         21.94
                           [p value]     [0.0008]        [0.6785]         [0.4243]    [0.0472]      [0.0154]

  2. Rank 4
                                2
      Dauphin-Fortin-Lacroix C             0.73              -                -          0.52         1.58
                        [p value]        [0.8657]                                      [0.9139]     [0.6632]
     Bootstraped-SVD
                           [p value]      [0.938]            -                -        [0.976]      [0.376]

Sample sizes                              4,971           1,324             941        1,118         1,586
Appendix Table 2a. Consumption-side tests with 9 sub-aggregate demand system

                                          HHs headed              HHs headed by monogamous couple                Polygynous
                                          by man + >1         Couple, no   Couple + other  Couple + >1
                                                                                                                    HHs
                                             wives           other adults  adults, no son   adult son
                                              [1]                [2]             [3]           [4]                  [5]
A. Testing unitary model
  1. Tests of significance of land ownership distribution factors (p values)
  Female ownership                       0.001             0.001             0.000                     0.000       0.000
  Male ownership                         0.000             0.000             0.000                     0.000       0.000
  Joint (male & female)                  0.000             0.000             0.000                     0.000       0.000

  2. Tests for symmetry of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
  Pairwise tests of equality (36)
                   % pvalues<=0.05      50.0                    25.0               25.0                36.1        30.6
                   % pvalues<=0.10      63.9                    41.7               36.1                44.4        47.2
                 Joint test [p value]  0.000                    0.000              0.000               0.000       0.000
B. Equality of ratios of distribution factor effects
   1. Equality of all ratios C 2        25.00                   17.02              21.10               35.10       22.58
                             [p value]      [0.5189]           [0.9085]           [0.7369]            [0.1095]    [0.6569]

   2. Pair-wise tests of equality
    2.1 Distribution factors: All
                   % pvalues<=0.05            0.0                 1.4                5.6               16.7         9.7
                   % pvalues<=0.10            15.3                2.8                9.7               22.2         13.9
    2.2 Distribution factors: Amount of land owned
                   % pvalues<=0.05          0.0                   2.8                8.3               33.3         11.1
                   % pvalues<=0.10         25.0                   5.6               11.1               41.7         13.9
    2.3 Distribution factors: (1) if own land
                   % pvalues<=0.05            0.0                 0.0                2.8                0.0         8.3
                   % pvalues<=0.10            5.6                 0.0                8.3                2.8         13.9

C. Tests based on rank of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
   1. Rank 2
      Browning-Chiappori SR1 C 2    45.12                       25.72              13.10               26.55       68.27
                             [p value]      [0.0017]           [0.2172]           [0.9052]            [0.1862]    [0.000]
   2. Rank 4
       Dauphin-Fortin-Lacroix C 2             1.53                 -                  -                 4.27        2.40
                         [p value]          [0.9988]                                                  [0.9346]    [0.9922]
      Bootstraped-SVD
                             [p value]       [0.044]               -                  -                [.086]     [0.030]

Sample sizes                                  4689               1234               892                1066        1496
Notes: Inherited and/or titled land are used in computing individual holdings. System with 9 goods.
Appendix Table 2b. Consumption-side tests with 8 sub-aggregate demand system

                                          HHs headed              HHs headed by monogamous couple                Polygynous
                                          by man + >1         Couple, no   Couple + other  Couple + >1
                                                                                                                    HHs
                                             wives           other adults  adults, no son   adult son
                                              [1]                [2]             [3]           [4]                  [5]
A. Testing unitary model
  1. Tests of significance of land ownership distribution factors (p values)
  Female ownership                       0.000             0.015             0.000                     0.007       0.000
  Male ownership                         0.000             0.000             0.000                     0.000       0.001
  Joint (male & female)                  0.000             0.000             0.000                     0.000       0.000

  2. Tests for symmetry of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
  Pairwise tests of equality (28)
                   % pvalues<=0.05      53.6                    32.1               21.4                25.0        32.1
                   % pvalues<=0.10      64.3                    35.7               25.0                32.1        39.3
                 Joint test [p value]  0.000                    0.000              0.000               0.000       0.000

B. Equality of ratios of distribution factor effects
   1. Equality of all ratios C 2        23.73                   10.42              19.88               20.16       20.88
                             [p value]      [0.3616]           [0.9821]           [0.5905]            [0.5730]    [0.5281]

   2. Pair-wise tests of equality
    2.1 Distribution factors: All
                   % pvalues<=0.05            0.0                 0.0               7.1                10.7         8.9
                   % pvalues<=0.10            16.1                0.0               10.7               14.3         16.1
    2.2 Distribution factors: Amount of land owned
                   % pvalues<=0.05          0.0                   0.0               10.7               21.4         10.7
                   % pvalues<=0.10         25.0                   0.0               14.3               25.0         17.9
    2.3 Distribution factors: (1) if own land
                   % pvalues<=0.05            0.0                 0.0                3.6                0.0         7.1
                   % pvalues<=0.10            7.1                 0.0                7.1                3.6         14.3

C. Tests based on rank of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
   1. Rank 2
      Browning-Chiappori SR1 C 2    34.50                       18.52              10.04               16.87       19.36
                             [p value]      [0.0029]           [0.2361]           [0.8170]            [0.3265]    [0.1979]
   2. Rank 4
       Dauphin-Fortin-Lacroix C 2             2.12                 -                  -                 2.63        2.49
                         [p value]          [0.9084]                                                  [0.8540]    [0.8700]
      Bootstraped-SVD
                             [p value]       [0.646]               -                  -               [0.562]     [0.106]

Sample sizes                                  4689               1234               892                1066        1496
Notes: Inherited and/or titled land are used in computing individual holdings. System with 9 goods.
Appendix Table 2c. Consumption-side tests with 6 sub-aggregate demand system

                                          HHs headed              HHs headed by monogamous couple                Polygynous
                                          by man + >1         Couple, no   Couple + other  Couple + >1
                                                                                                                    HHs
                                             wives           other adults  adults, no son   adult son
                                              [1]                [2]             [3]           [4]                  [5]
A. Testing unitary model
  1. Tests of significance of land ownership distribution factors (p values)
  Female ownership                       0.014             0.238             0.020                     0.019       0.000
  Male ownership                         0.000             0.001             0.000                     0.000       0.020
  Joint (male & female)                  0.000             0.003             0.000                     0.000       0.000

  2. Tests for symmetry of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
  Pairwise tests of equality (15)
                   % pvalues<=0.05      60.0                    53.3               26.7                53.3        40.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10      60.0                    60.0               33.3                53.3        53.3
                 Joint test [p value]  0.000                    0.000              0.000               0.000       0.000
B. Equality of ratios of distribution factor effects
   1. Equality of all ratios C 2        11.24                    5.00              10.18                13.89       2.14
                             [p value]      [0.6671]           [0.9058]           [0.7486]            [0.4576]    [0.9520]

   2. Pair-wise tests of equality
    2.1 Distribution factors: All
                   % pvalues<=0.05             0.0                0.0               3.3                6.7          0.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10             6.7                0.0               10.0               20.0         6.7
    2.2 Distribution factors: Amount of land owned
                   % pvalues<=0.05          0.0                   0.0                6.7               13.3          0.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10         13.3                   0.0               20.0               33.3         13.3
    2.3 Distribution factors: (1) if own land
                   % pvalues<=0.05            0.0                 0.0                0.0                0.0         0.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10            0.0                 0.0                0.0                6.7         0.0

C. Tests based on rank of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
   1. Rank 2
      Browning-Chiappori SR1 C 2    16.15                        6.95               2.18               11.57       23.80
                             [p value]      [0.0130]           [0.3258]           [0.9028]            [0.0724]    [0.001]
   2. Rank 4
       Dauphin-Fortin-Lacroix C 2             0.86                 -                  -                 0.25        0.59
                         [p value]          [0.3529]                                                  [0.6184]    [0.4418]
      Bootstraped-SVD
                             [p value]       [0.320]               -                  -               [0.630]     [0.456]

Sample sizes                                  4689               1234               892                1066        1496
Notes: Inherited and/or titled land are used in computing individual holdings. System with 9 goods.
Appendix Table 2d. Consumption-side tests with 5 sub-aggregate demand system

                                          HHs headed              HHs headed by monogamous couple                Polygynous
                                          by man + >1         Couple, no   Couple + other  Couple + >1
                                                                                                                    HHs
                                             wives           other adults  adults, no son   adult son
                                              [1]                [2]             [3]           [4]                  [5]
A. Testing unitary model
  1. Tests of significance of land ownership distribution factors (p values)
  Female ownership                       0.007             0.204             0.045                     0.054       0.000
  Male ownership                         0.000             0.003             0.005                     0.000       0.008
  Joint (male & female)                  0.000             0.004             0.008                     0.000       0.000

  2. Tests for symmetry of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
  Pairwise tests of equality (10)
                   % pvalues<=0.05      70.0                    40.0               40.0                60.0        60.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10      70.0                    60.0               50.0                70.0        70.0
                 Joint test [p value]  0.000                    0.000              0.000               0.000       0.000
B. Equality of ratios of distribution factor effects
   1. Equality of all ratios C 2        10.86                    4.57               6.86               10.18        6.08
                             [p value]      [0.3689]           [0.9180]           [0.7385]            [0.4252]    [0.8088]

   2. Pair-wise tests of equality
    2.1 Distribution factors: All
                   % pvalues<=0.05            0.0                 0.0               0.0                10.0         0.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10            15.0                0.0               10.0               25.0         10.0
    2.2 Distribution factors: Amount of land owned
                   % pvalues<=0.05          0.0                   0.0                0.0               20.0          0.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10         30.0                   0.0               20.0               40.0         20.0
    2.3 Distribution factors: (1) if own land
                   % pvalues<=0.05            0.0                 0.0                0.0                0.0         0.0
                   % pvalues<=0.10            0.0                 0.0                0.0               10.0         0.0

C. Tests based on rank of Pseudo-Slutsky matrix
   1. Rank 2
      Browning-Chiappori SR1 C 2    16.88                        1.36               1.34                9.92       15.81
                             [p value]      [0.0007]           [0.7158]           [0.7189]            [0.0192]    [0.0012]

   2. Rank 4
       Dauphin-Fortin-Lacroix C 2              ND                  -                  -                 ND          ND
                         [p value]
      Bootstraped-SVD
                             [p value]         ND                  -                  -                 ND          ND

Sample sizes                                  4689               1234               892                1066        1496
Notes: Inherited and/or titled land are used in computing individual holdings. System with 5 goods.
