                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOT SHOTS: AN ANALYSIS OF THE `HOT HAND' IN NBA FIELD GOAL AND
                        FREE THROW SHOOTING

                                           Robert M. Lantis
                                            Erik T. Nesson

                                        Working Paper 26510
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26510


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2019, Revised December 2020




We would like to thank Grace McLain and Vanessa Ramos for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert M. Lantis and Erik T. Nesson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Hot Shots: An Analysis of the `Hot Hand' in NBA Field Goal and Free Throw Shooting
Robert M. Lantis and Erik T. Nesson
NBER Working Paper No. 26510
November 2019, Revised December 2020
JEL No. D91

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate the hot hand hypothesis using detailed data on free throws and field goal attempts for
the 2004-2005 through 2015-2016 NBA regular seasons. Free throws represent a more controlled
setting, allowing a closer examination of the potential physiological mechanisms behind success in
repeated motions, while field goal attempts represent the setting most observers have in mind when
commenting on a player's repeated shooting success. We examine these two settings together, within
the same players in the same games, permitting a more comprehensive analysis of the hot hand. We
find a small hot hand effect for free throws, which more than doubles for longer streaks of consecutively
made free throws. Building on previous research, we find that both offenses and defenses respond
to made field goals as if the hot hand exists. However, if a player makes a field goal, he is no more
or less likely to make his next field goal attempt, and longer streaks of consecutively made field goals
reduce the probability that a player makes his next field goal attempt. Finally, we find that a made
field goal reduces the player's expected points from his next field goal attempt. If a teammate takes
the next field goal attempt, the shot distance increases, the probability of making the field goal attempt
only changes slightly, and the expected points from the field goal attempt is lower. Overall, the expected
points from the team's next shot decreases, and in general, these effects grow in magnitude with longer
streaks of made shots.


Robert M. Lantis
Ball State University
2000 West University Ave.
Muncie, IN 47306
rmlantis@bsu.edu

Erik T. Nesson
Department of Economics
Ball State University
Muncie, IN 47306
and NBER
etnesson@bsu.edu
1    Introduction

The question at the center of research into the hot hand concerns the common belief that previous

shot success predicts future shot success. This research began with Gilovich et al. (1985), who

state their research question in the opening sentences of their paper as follows, "In describing an

outstanding performance by a basketball player, reporters and spectators commonly use expressions

such as `Larry Bird has the hot hand' or `Andrew Toney is a streak shooter.' These phrases express

a belief that the performance of a player during a particular period is significantly better than

expected on the basis of the player's overall record." Gilovich et al. (1985) find no existence of the

hot hand in professional free throw and field goal shooting, or in collegiate field goal shooting in a

controlled experiment, and thus, they conclude that the widespread belief in the hot hand is the

result of a cognitive bias. Gilovich et al. (1985) spawned a large interest in the hot hand across a

variety of settings and sports.

    Recent research into the hot hand often focuses on controlled settings such as shooting ex-

periments, the NBA 3-point contest, and in-game free-throw shooting (e.g. Arkes, 2010; Aharoni

and Sarig, 2012; Miller and Sanjurjo, 2014, 2015, 2018; Yaari and Eisenmann, 2011). In a series

of papers, Joshua Miller and Adam Sanjurjo find evidence of shooting streaks in controlled and

semi-controlled settings, including controlled shooting experiments and the NBA 3-Point Contest

(Miller and Sanjurjo, 2014, 2015, 2018). Importantly, Miller and Sanjurjo (2018) demonstrate that

the type of conditional probability analysis commonly used in controlled studies of the hot hand

is biased against finding a hot hand effect. Correcting this bias produces strong evidence of a hot

hand in controlled shooting experiments, including in the data originally used by Gilovich et al.

(1985). Results from other movement patterns, such as pitching horseshoes, tennis, and bowling,

also suggest that success in repeated movement patterns can increase the probability of success in

future movements (Smith, 2003; Klaassen and Magnus, 2001; Dorsey-Palmateer and Smith, 2004).

    However, the original question posed by Gilovich et al. (1985) is not whether a physiological

mechanism exists for success in repeated movement patterns, but rather whether the widespread

belief in the existence of periods of elevated ability in basketball shooting, the hot hand, is correct.

As referenced in the quote above from Gilovich et al. (1985), the most relevant setting for testing

these beliefs is the run of play. Gilovich et al. (1985) conduct surveys suggesting that players and


                                                   1
coaches believe the hand exists in the run of play, and general basketball fans also exhibit gambling

habits that reflect beliefs in the hot hand (Brown and Sauer, 1993). It is unclear whether the results

from controlled shooting situations will translate to game situations, as players' shots in games

can be many minutes apart, may be from very different locations, and possibly in very different

game situations. An additional challenge in testing for the hot hand effect in game situations are

endogenous responses by both offenses and defenses in response to made shots. Previous papers

find that both offenses and defenses react to previously made shots (Aharoni and Sarig, 2012; Rao,

2009; Csapo and Raab, 2014; Csapo et al., 2015; Attali, 2013; Bocskocsky et al., 2014), although the

few papers that do examine the hot hand in field goals have been mixed in their findings, perhaps

because of the difficulty in accounting for the endogenous responses to made field goals (e.g. Rao,

2009; B¨
       uhren and Krabel, 2015; Csapo and Raab, 2014; Bocskocsky et al., 2014).

   In this paper we analyze the hot hand in the NBA for both free throws, a more controlled shoot-

ing environment, and field goals in the run-of-play, which while not a controlled environment, are

more relevant to evaluating spectators' beliefs in the hot hand. We compile detailed data regarding

the universe of free throws and field goal attempts for the 2004-2005 through 2015-2016 NBA regu-

lar seasons, representing over 500,000 free throws and two million field goal attempts, and combine

them with a large set of player, game and shot characteristics. We introduce into the analysis of

the hot hand in basketball new methods of controlling for players' underlying shooting ability, new

methods of accounting for previous shot difficulty, and we examine multiple measures of previous

shot success, including whether a player made his previous shots and also whether the player made

streaks of shots. Finally, we use two seasons for which we have additional shot and defensive player

characteristics available to examine whether additional shot and defense characteristics affect our

results.

   We find a small hot hand effect in free throws, similar to Arkes (2010), although smaller in

magnitude. If a player makes his previous free throw, he is about two percentage points more likely

to make his next free throw, and the effect is larger for the second and third free throws in a set.

These effects grow further for players who take more free throws in a game, and are even more

pronounced when players make streaks of free throws. If a player makes four free throws in a row,

he is 4.5 percentage points more likely to make his next free throw.

   In the run of play, we find that both offenses and defenses respond to field goals as if the hot

                                                  2
hand effect exists, but we do not find any evidence of a hot hand effect. We find a negative and

statistically significant relationship between a player making his last field goal attempt and the

probability that he makes his next field goal attempt, although once we account for previous shot

characteristics, making a field goal does not change the probability that a player makes his next

field goal attempt, and we can bound the coefficient to extremely small magnitudes. However, we

do find statistically significant negative coefficients when examining longer streaks of consecutively

made field goals, even when accounting for previous shot characteristics. When a player makes

three field goals in a row, the probability he make his next field goal decreases by 0.6 percentage

points. Our results are not affected by including the additional controls in the 2013-2014 and

2014-2015 seasons; if anything, these extra controls increase the magnitude of the negative effect

of making a previous field goal on the probability of making the next field goal.

   Finally, we examine the effects of making a field goal on the shooting performance of teammates

and the team's overall expected points. When a teammate takes the team's next shot, he takes the

shot from farther away from the basket, and the shot is more likely to be a 3-point shot. When

we examine the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 seasons, we also find that the defender distance increases

for the teammate's shot, even when accounting for the increased shot distance. Overall, we find

that, if a teammate takes the next shot, he is slightly less likely to make the shot, although once we

account for the increased shot distance and defender distance he is slightly more likely to make his

shot. We then examine changes in expected points from the next shot. We find that the expected

points from the player who made the next field goal's next field goal attempt decreases by 0.024

points, although this effect doubles for longer streaks of made field goals. The expected points if a

teammate takes the team's next field goal doesn't change or is slightly positive for longer streaks.

Put together though, we find that the team's expected points on its next shot decreases by 0.017

points, and this effect grows for longer streaks of made shots.

   Our paper makes a number of contributions to the literature on the hot hand. First, we examine

roughly 516,000 free throw attempts and 2,074,000 field goal attempts taken by the same players

within the same games. This allows a more direct comparison of the existence and magnitude

of the hot hand effect in more controlled and less controlled settings. We also bring a larger

set of controls than used in previous literature, and we demonstrate the importance of controls,

even in fairly controlled settings such as free throw shooting. Earlier studies focusing on streak

                                                  3
statistics can not account for these when not using experimental data. We further advance the

literature by including controls for both current and previous shot characteristics. Finally, we

examine the importance of potential omitted variable bias by adapting a methodology developed in

Oster (2019) to create bounds for our coefficients of interest under different assumptions regarding

omitted variable bias.

   Second, we also introduce a new methodology to control for differences in players' shooting

ability, adapted from Chen et al. (2016) and Green and Zwiebel (2017), but to our knowledge not

previously used in studying the hot hand in basketball. Previous work has included player fixed

effects to account for shooting ability and other time-invariant player characteristics (e.g. Arkes,

2010; Bocskocsky et al., 2014), although including fixed effects in a lagged-dependent variable

model will lead to biased coefficients (Nickell, 1981; Nerlove, 1967, 1971). Instead, we include

two measures of player's shooting percentage which do not include the current game, following a

strategy employed by Chen et al. (2016) in testing the gambler's fallacy in three settings, refugee

asylum court decisions, reviews of loan applications, and calls made by Major League Baseball

umpires, and by Green and Zwiebel (2017) to determine whether the hot hand that exists in at

bats in baseball.

   Third, we introduce new methods of testing for streaks of shots. We first test for the hot hand

using a straightforward regression framework where we regress an indicator for a player making his

current shot on an indicator for making his previous shot, similar to Arkes (2010)'s examination of

free throws and some specifications in Chen et al. (2016). We also introduce a new test for success

in streaks of previous shots. Here we examine the interactions of indicator variables for success in

each of the previous four shots to estimate the effect of different lengths of streaks of success. Our

strategy again builds upon Chen et al. (2016), and we are, to our knowledge, the first to apply

it to the analysis of the hot hand in basketball shooting. Although other papers have analyzed

shooting success over more than just the previous shot in a regression framework (e.g. Bocskocsky

et al., 2014; Green and Zwiebel, 2017), our strategy allows us to examine different streak lengths

separately as opposed to analyzing the average or shooting percentage or batting average over a

period of shots or at-bats.

   Fourth, we add to the existing literature analyzing the response by the shooter, defensive player,

and offensive teammates to a made field goal (Aharoni and Sarig, 2012; Rao, 2009; Csapo and Raab,

                                                  4
2014; Csapo et al., 2015; Attali, 2013; Bocskocsky et al., 2014). Similar to previous work, we find

that if a player makes a field goal, his is more likely to take his team's next shot, take his next shot

sooner, take his next shot from further away, but also more likely to make an assist on the team's

next play. The defense is more likley to make a substitution and call a time-out within the next

two minutes following a made shot as well. In general, we find that the responses to made shots

grow in magnitude for longer streaks of shots, but the offensive responses respond more.

   We extend the analysis of responses to made field goals to consider the effect of a player making

a field goal or streak of field goals on his team's future scoring. We find that following a shooter's

made field goal, if one of his teammates takes the team's next shot, that shot is on average further

from the basket and more likely to be a 3-point shot, leading to a decreased probability that

the teammate's shot is made. The combination of taking shots further from the basket and the

increased points from 3-point shots leads to no change in the expected number of points contributed

by the teammates if they take the team's next shot. A similar analysis for the shooter indicates

that his expected points from his next shot decrease following a made shot. Looking at the team's

performance on its next shot, the lack of change in points if a teammate takes the next shot

combined with the decresed points if the shooter takes the next shot (and the increased likelihood

that the shooter takes the team's next shot) decreases the expected number of points from the

team's next shot following a player's made shot. Put together, we find that these offensive and

defensive responses lead to a reduction in the expected number of points from the shooting team's

next shot.

   Although previous studies have used a multivariate framework to approach the hot hand in

basketball, as we outline above, our approach offers advances over previous work in this area. Some

previous work has focused only on a few specific players or game situations. For example, Rao

(2009) find no evidence of a hot hand when employing a random effects probit model for a set of

players on the Los Angeles Lakers, while B¨
                                          uhren and Krabel (2015) use OLS and tobit models

to estimate the impact of making a shot which forced overtime on the field goal shooting of that

player in overtime. Arkes (2010) estimates fixed effects logit models for free throws taken during

the 2005-2006 NBA regular season, and he finds that if a player makes his previous free throw in

a set, he is about three percentage points more likely to make his next free throw. Aharoni and

Sarig (2012) use 2004-2005 NBA regular season data to analyze the hot hand in field goal shooting.

                                                   5
They identify players as "hot" if they made at least three consecutive field goals in a half and find

that if these players are the one who shoots that the shot is no more or less likely to be made.

They perform a similar analysis for free throws, but require the player to have made at least four

consecutive field goals in the half to be considered hot, and find that if a hot player shoots a free

throw it is nine percent more likely to be made relative to other players. Green and Zwiebel (2017)

examine at-bats in baseball using a methodology to control for players' batting averages which is

similar to our approach. They argue that the allocation of offensive and defensive resources is less

fluid in baseball than in basketball, thus endogenous responses are less of a concern. Green and

Zwiebel (2017) find a hot hand effect in at bats for various measures of previous batting success.

       Finally Bocskocsky et al. (2014) control for other factors which may affect shot success, and

they find mixed evidence of whether the hot hand exists, depending on which of their measures of

previous success is used. Bocskocsky et al. (2014) develop two measures of previous shot success,

"simple heat" and "complex heat." Simple heat is the player's shooting percentage over the previous

four shots within each game. Complex heat adjusts for previous shot difficulty. Bocskocsky et al.

(2014) first predict the difficulty of each shot. They then adjust actual shooting percentage over the

previous four shots with the predicted shooting percentage to construct complex heat. In a similar

manner, Bocskocsky et al. (2014) include a predicted shot difficulty measure to control for current

shot difficulty. However, including a predicted value in a regression in the manner of Bocskocsky

et al. (2014), instead of directly controlling for the characteristics of shots, likely generates biased

coefficients.1

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews our play-by-play shot data

and statistical methods, Section 3 discusses our results, and Section 4 concludes.
   1
     We reproduced many of the results in Bocskocsky et al. (2014) using our data, including their finding of a hot
hand. Our reproduction suggests that their finding of a hot hand is driven by the inclusion of predicted shot difficulty
instead of directly controlling for shot characteristics. When predicted shot difficulty is replaced with controls for shot
difficulty, we find that previous shot success is negatively correlated with current shooting success. Details regarding
our reproduction are available upon request.




                                                            6
2        Data and Methods

2.1       Data

We use three data sources for our analysis. Our main data source is play by play data for the 2004-

2005 through 2015-2016 NBA regular seasons from http://www.bigdataball.com.2 This data set

provides the date and teams for every game and detailed information for every event in each game,

including field goal attempts, free throws, rebounds, fouls, timeouts, etc., as well as the players

who were on the court at the time of each event. For field goal attempts, this data contains the

time of the field goal attempt, whether the field goal attempt went in, the shot type, and the shot

location in x-y coordinates, which we use to calculate the shot distance from the basket. We use

the bbr package in R, available here: https://github.com/mbjoseph/bbr, to obtain and merge in

player characteristics for the offensive player, including position, height, and weight, and age, from

http://www.basketball-reference.com. Additionally, we add game characteristics, also from

http://www.basketball-reference.com, including which team was the home team and away

team and the crowd size.

        In addition to this primary data set, we take advantage of additional shot characteristics and

defensive player characteristics which are available for the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 seasons. We

start with our primary data set and merge in these additional field goal attempt characteristics,

which we collected from http://www.nbasavant.com.3 Representing the universe of field goal

attempts taken during these seasons, this data contains the number of dribbles taken before shooting

and number of seconds on the ball before shooting. Importantly, the data also contain information

on the defense, including the name of the nearest defender and distance from the nearest defender

to the shooting player, which allows for additional analysis of defensive responses to made field

goals.
    2
    See https://www.bigdataball.com/datasets/nba/play-by-play/ for more information on this data set.
    3
    NBA Savant collects the additional characteristics from ESPN's Shot Tracker and stats.nba.com. See http:
//www.nbasavant.com/shot_search.php for more information about the data from NBA Savant.




                                                     7
2.2     Methods

2.2.1    The Determinants of Made Shots

To examine the effects of previous shot success on current shot success, we estimate variations on

the following regression model:


                         sp,i,g,t = 0 + s sp,i-1,g + vp,i,g v + s
                                                                ¯p,-g +   p,i,g ,                  (1)


where the dependent variable, sp,i,g , is an indicator variable equal to 1 if player p makes shot i

in game g in season t, and the independent variable of interest, sp,i-1,g is an indicator variable

for whether the same player made the previous shot in the same game. If s is positive and

statistically significant, it provides evidence for the hot hand effect, and if s is negative and

statistically significant, it not only provides evidence that a hot hand does not exist, but that

making the previous shot actually decreases the probability of making the current shot.

   We begin these analyses by estimating naive models using the lagged shot indicator as the only

independent variable. We add in additional controls in vp,i,g . For both free throws and field goals,

we include controls for the game situation, including indicators for month, day of the week, team

by season, and opponent by season, an indicator for the player being on the home team interacted

with game attendance, and the period interacted with the seconds remaining in that period. We

also include controls for player characteristics, including a quadratic function of the player's age, a

quadratic function of the player's height and weight, an interaction between height and weight, and

indicators for player position. We additionally control for free throw or field goal characteristics.

For free throws, we include indicators for the second and third free throws in a set, whether the free

throw resulted from a personal, shooting or other foul (with flagrant foul as the omitted category),

whether there was a substitution before the free throw, and whether there was a timeout before

the free throw. We also include the point gap before the current set of free throws interacted with

indicators for the home team and with the period.

   For field goals, we control for the point gap before the current shot interacted with the home

team and with the period, the number of points the opposing team scored on their last possession,

the play length in seconds, indicators for whether the player took his team's previous shot, whether



                                                  8
the player was fouled on his previous shot, the time between the player's shots, the distance between

the player's previous shot and current shot, shot distance (and its square), indicators for and the

interaction between shot types and shot distance, an interaction between shot type and season, and

indicators for and the interaction between the angle of the shot to the rim and whether it was on

the left side of the court. Finally, we analyze whether the difficulty of previous field goals affects

the estimation of the hot hand, following Bocskocsky et al. (2014). The intuition is that making a

more difficult shot, like a long-range jump shot, is a stronger indication of shooting success than

making an easier shot, like a layup. To this end, we additionally estimate specifications which

include lagged time-varying controls in addition to our contemporaneous controls.4

       Finally, it is important that we control for a player's underlying probability of making a shot and

Simpson's Paradox (Wardrop, 1995). To this end, we adapt the methodology employed by Chen

et al. (2016) and Green and Zwiebel (2017) and control for the player's "leave-out" field goal or free

throw percentage, denoted by s
                             ¯p,-g . We include two measures, the player's field goal or free throw

percentage in the relevant season, excluding the current game, and a four week moving average of

the player's field goal or free throw percentage, including two weeks on either side of the current

game, again excluding the current game. One other strategy for controlling for player ability could

be to replace the observable player characteristics with player fixed effects, which would control for

all time-invariant player characteristics. Including fixed effects with a lagged dependent variable

would bias our coefficients downward (Nickell, 1981; Arellano and Bond, 1991; Nerlove, 1967, 1971).

We show in Appendix Tables B1 and B2 that including fixed effects in our regressions instead of

the leave-out field goal or free throw percentages does bias our results significantly downward. In

all shooting models, we cluster our standard errors at the player by season level.


2.2.2      Changes in Behavior Following Made Field Goals

When examining field goals, we additionally examine whether making field goals induces changes

in offensive and defensive behaviors. We estimate fixed effects panel data regression models as
   4
    The lagged game and shot controls already correspond to a player's previous shot. We do not lag shot measures
which incorporate the second lagged shot, as this would limit our sample to only including third and higher shots in
a game. Thus, we do not include lagged indicators for whether the player was fouled on his previous shot, took the
team's previous shot, the lagged time between shots and the lagged distance between shots.




                                                         9
follows,

                     yp,i,g,t = 0 + s sp,i-1,g + wp,i-1,g w + xp,i,g x + pt +           p,i,g ,                (2)

where yp,i,g is a shot-related outcome for player p's shot i in game g in season t. We examine shot-

related outcomes for both offensive and defensive players. We create three variables measuring the

confidence of offensive players: an indicator for whether the same player who took the previous

shot takes the next shot, the time before taking the next shot, and the shot distance in feet.

Additionally, we measure the distance in feet between a player's shots. We also create an indicator

variable for whether the player has an assist in the next play to measure whether, if players are

guarded more closely by the defense, they respond by passing to increasingly open teammates.

We create two variables measuring possible defensive adjustments: whether the defending team

substitutes a player in the next two minutes and whether the defending team calls a timeout in the

next two minutes. We extend this analysis to two seasons where we can measure two additional

defensive adjustments, assigning a new defender to a player on his next shot and the defender

distance from the shooter in Section 3.5.

       The independent variable of interest is again sp,i-1,g , the indicator for player p making shot

i - 1 in the same game. The vector wp,i-1,g includes controls for the game characteristics and shot

characteristics of the lagged shot as well.5 In all specifications, p,t represents player by season

fixed effects for the player who took shot i - 1, which account for time-invariant observable and

unobservable differences across players and seasons, allowing us to examine changes within players

and seasons across shots. Including fixed effects will not bias our coefficients here, as we do not

have a lagged dependent variable. In all offensive and defensive response models, we cluster our

standard errors at the shooting player by season level.

       In addition to the response of the shooter to their previous shot success, we also analyze the

effect that success has on that shooter's teammates. We estimate equation 2 where yp,i,g,t is a

teammate-related outcome that follows player p's shot i in game g in season t. We create an

indicator for whether a teammate makes the next shot, the distance of that teammate's shot, the

number of points that come from that teammate's the next shot, and an indicator for whether
   5
    The game and shot controls already correspond to a player's previous shot, so we do not include lagged shot
measures which incorporate the second lagged shot as this would limit our sample to only including third and higher
shots in a game. Thus, we do not include lagged indicators for whether the player was fouled on his previous shot,
took the team's previous shot, the time between shots and the distance between shots.


                                                        10
or not that teammate's shot was a 3 point shot. In the two seasons in which we have additional

defensive measures we also include an additional dependent variable for the distance that the

defender is from the teammate who takes the next shot. In addition to this analysis, we also use as

dependent variables the points that come from the player's next shot and the points that come from

the next shot regardless of whether the same player or a teammate is the one who takes it. The

variables which capture the number of points scored captures the not only changes in the player or

teammate's probability of making the shot but the value of the shots being taken.


2.2.3     Extensions to Baseline Specifications

We expand our definition of previous shooting success to examine streaks of shooting success for

both free throws and field goal attempts, as success from previous shots further back in a shooter's

history may impact the probability of making the current shot as well as the responses to made

field goals. To this end, we modify equation 1 as follows,

                        -1                      -1   -1
        sp,i,g = 0 +           sj sp,i+j,g +                 sjk sp,i+j,g × sp,i+k,g + vp,i,g v + s
                                                                                                  ¯p,-g +   p,i,g .   (3)
                       j =-4                   j =-4 k=-4,
                                                      k>j


Here, our independent variables of interest are the first through fourth lagged shot indicators and

their interactions. We calculate linear combinations of the lagged shot coefficients to measure the

additional impact that comes from making several shots consecutively. Thus, we can separately

estimate the effect of one shot, two shot, three shot and four shot streaks on the probability of

making the next shot.6 We also modify equation 2 in a similar manner to examine how offenses

and defenses respond to streaks of made field goals.7 Our strategy here follows from Chen et al.

(2016)'s analysis of the gambler's fallacy, and to our knowledge, it has not been adopted to examine

the hot hand hypothesis in basketball. We show these results in Section 3.4.
   6
     For example, the effect of making two shots in a row is the sum of the coefficient on the indicator for making the
previous shot, the twice lagged shot, and the interaction of the previous and twice lagged shot.
   7
     We only extend the analysis to the fourth lagged shot, and any shots made prior to that could create omitted
variable bias. Although it limits our sample size, we ran the same analysis for only shots that had exactly four shots
prior to it and found similar results, which are available upon request.




                                                               11
2.3      Summary Statistics

The free throw data covers 697,238 free throws during the 2004-2005 through 2015-2016 NBA

regular seasons. To be in our analysis, free throws cannot be a player's first free throw of a game,

which removes 180,536 free throws. Thus, our final sample for the free throw analysis is 516,699

free throws. Table I shows summary statistics for our free throw sample. Some of our results are

previewed by the difference between free throw success following a made and a missed free throw.

The percent of free throws made following a made free throw is approximately 78 percent but only

72 percent following a missed free throw. Many of the other observable characteristics, however,

are similar between a previously made and missed free throw.

       The field goal data covers 2,375,873 field goals during the 2004-2005 and 2015-2016 NBA regular

seasons. To be in our analysis, field goal attempts cannot be a player's first field goal attempt of

the game, which removes 301,372 field goal attempts. Our final sample contains 2,074,501 field

goal attempts across all 12 seasons.8 Table II shows summary statistics for our field goal sample.

Of our sample of field goal attempts, about 46 percent came after that player made his previous

field goal in the same game. Here again, the differences between field goals following a made and

a missed field goal preview some of our main results. First, the field goal percentage following a

made field goal is about 45 percent, lower than the field goal percentage after a missed field goal of

46 percent.9 Following a made field goal, players shoot from nearly eight tenths of a foot farther

away, take their next field goal about 20 seconds sooner, are 4.5 percentage points more likely to

take the next field goal on their team, and the opposing team is about two percentage points more

likely to substitute in the next two minutes and six percentage points more likely to call a timeout

in the next two minutes.

       Table II also illustrates how different consecutive shots often are for players. Players have

a 22 percent chance of taking consecutive shots, an average of over three and a half minutes

elapse between a player's shots, and a player's consecutive shots are nearly 16 feet away from each

other. These characteristics again call into question how generalizable the results from shooting

experiments and semi-controlled settings like free throws are to the analysis of the hot hand in field
   8
     Importantly, field goal attempts are not recorded if there is a shooting foul and the field goal attempt is missed.
Field goal attempts are counted if there is a shooting foul and the shot is made.
   9
     Since these are averages, the bias identified by Miller and Sanjurjo (2018) may affect these averages.




                                                          12
goal shooting.



3     Results

3.1   The Hot Hand Hypothesis in Free Throws

We begin by examining free throws. Results from estimating equation 1 for our sample of free throws

are shown in Table III. The first six columns show regressions estimated over all free throws. We

add in different levels of controls, culminating in the addition of the leave-out free throw percentages

in Column (5) and lagged controls in Column (6). In Column (7) we exclude the first free throw in

any set, keeping all the same controls as in Column (6). Thus, we are only examining free throws

immediately following another free throw by the same player to identify whether any psychological

or physiological aspects of the hot hand decrease with time between shots.

    In Columns (1) and (2), making the previous free throw increases the likelihood of making the

next free throw by about six percentage points. However, once we control for player characteristics

in Column (3) the effect is lowered to 4.0 percentage points. Including the leave-out free throw

percentages decreases the size of the effect to 2.1 percentage points, which illustrates the importance

of accounting for Simpson's Paradox. Column (6) demonstrates that the hot hand effect is not

meaningfully impacted by including lagged free throw controls. In Column (7), the effect size

increases slightly from 2.1 to 2.4 percentage points, which indicates the time in between free throw

shots does matter although the importance is of relatively low magnitude. In the Appendix we

highlight the importance of using a player's leave out free throw percentage as compared to player

fixed effects. Table B1 provides the results of using fixed effects and shows significantly lower in

magnitude as a result of the bias caused by including fixed effects with a lagged dependent variable

as a regressor.


3.2   Offensive and Defensive Adjustments to Field Goals

We next examine potential offensive and defensive adjustments to field goals. Table IV shows

results from these regressions. We examine five outcomes for offensive responses, whether the

player that took the previous field goal attempt takes the next field goal attempt, the seconds

before the player takes his next field goal attempt, the shot distance of the next field goal attempt,

                                                  13
the distance between the current and previous shot, and whether the player who took the previous

field goal attempt creates an assist on the next play. We examine two outcomes for defensive

responses, whether the defending team substitutes a player in the next two minutes, and whether

the defending team calls a timeout in the next two minutes.

   Starting with offensive adjustments, if a player makes his previous field goal attempt, he is

about five percentage points more likely to take the next field goal attempt on his team, the time

before he takes his next field goal attempt decreases by almost 20 seconds, and he takes his next

field goal attempt about 1.5 feet further away from the basket, although the distance between shot

locations is not affected by a large amount, and he is 0.9 percentage points more likely to make an

assist on the next play. Combining this result with the increased probability of taking the next field

goal attempt, a player is more likely to be involved in his team's next scoring attempt if he makes

his previous field goal attempt. Defenses also react to made field goals, where they are about two

percentage points more likely to make a substitution and five percentage points more likely to call

a timeout in the next two minutes.

   Below the coefficients and standard errors, we report the means of the dependent variables

to help put the coefficient sizes into context. Roughly translating our marginal effects into semi-

elasticities, the size of the effects of field goals on the offensive adjustments are substantial. Players

are about 24 percent more likely to take the next field goal attempt, decrease the time between

their field goal attempts by about nine percent, increase their shooting distance by about twelve

percent, and 18 percent more likely to record an assist. However, the distance from their previous

shot only increases by 0.3 percent, evidence they are not attempting shots from different locations

of where the last shot was made. The size of the defensive adjustments are smaller, although still

notable. Teams are 4.4 percent more likely to make a substitution and 23 percent more likely to

call a timeout.


3.3   The Hot Hand Hypothesis in Field Goals

Next, we examine the hot hand hypothesis for field goals in Table V. As with free throws, we begin

our analysis of the hot hand with a pared back specification where we only include whether or not

the player in question made his previous field goal attempt as the independent variable. Moving

from left to right, we add in additional controls to create a more apples-to-apples comparison

                                                   14
between field goal attempts. In Columns (2) through (4), we sequentially add in controls for the

game situation, player characteristics, and shot characteristics. In Column (5) we add controls

for the player's leave-out field goal percentages, and finally in Column (6) we add in lagged shot

characteristics to further control for the difficulty of the previous shot.

   We find a negative and statistically significant relationship between making the previous field

goal attempt and making the next field goal attempt across a majority of the specifications. In

Columns (1) through (3), the negative effect of making a shot on the probability of making the next

shot grows in magnitude from -0.6 to -1.1 percentage points. Controlling for shot characteristics

reduces the effect of a previous field goal on the probability of making the current field goal attempt,

while accounting for the player's leave-out field goal percentages increases the magnitude and

statistical significance of the negative correlation between field goal success. Finally, including

lagged controls reduces the estimated effect of making a previous field goal on making the next

field goal to nearly zero, with an extremely tight confidence interval.

   We investigate which lagged controls are the most important variables for decreasing the mag-

nitude and statistical significance of the results between Columns (5) and (6) in Table V. In Table

VI, we start with the estimate in Column (5) of Table V, and successively add in lagged controls to

finally arrive at the estimate in Column (5) of Table V in the last column. We find that lagged game

controls (period indicators fully interacted with the seconds remaining in the period and the point

gap and its interactions with indicators for the home team and the period) and possession in order

to determine what best captures the difficulty of the prior shot) and lagged possession controls

(points scored by the opposing team on the last possession and the play length) do not markedly

affect the results. The lagged shot type influences the estimates the most, providing estimates that

are no longer statistically significant and negative, but not statistically different than zero.


3.4   Streaks of Previous Success

Next, we expand our definition of previous shot success to include streaks of free throws and field

goals as described in Section 2.2.3. Tables VII, VIII, and IX present estimates for the effect of

making the previous shot, the previous two shots, the previous three shots, and finally making the




                                                  15
previous four shots.10 Comparing these estimates will show whether the effect of previous success

on the current shot varies with the the length of consecutive previous successes.

       Table VII shows results estimating the effects of streaks in past free throw shooting on current

free throw shooting success. Column (1) of Table VII replicates the results from Column (6) of Table

III, and Columns (2) through (4) show estimates for players who took two, three, and four previous

free throws within the same game. We find that when only including success in the previous two

free throws that there is no significant difference in our estimate of the effect of making only the

previous free throw. However, Column (2) shows that the effect of making two consecutive free

throws increases the chances of making a current shot by about 3.5 percentage points. There is a

stronger effect still if the player has made two or three consecutive free throws in a row, as shown

in Column (4). When limiting the analysis to players who took at least five free throws in a game,

the estimates for longer streaks of success grow in magnitude, but are not statistically different

from each other.11

       In Table VIII we repeat the analysis for the offensive and defensive adjustments in Table IV.

Each panel shows the estimates for different lengths of consecutively made field goals that are

included in the regression. For the offensive adjustments of taking the next field goal, time in

between field goal attempts, and shot distance, longer streaks of made field goals have increasingly

larger effects on these adjustments. Most notably, making the previous field goal increases the

distance of the next shot by approximately 1.5 feet while making the previous four field goals

increases the distance of the current shot by over three feet. The difference in shot location from

the previous shot also grows in magnitude for longer streaks of success, however, the effect of

just making the previous shot becomes statistically no different from zero once four lagged shot

outcomes are included. The offensive adjustment of recording an assist on the next play is larger

for longer streaks of success, however, very similar in magnitude.
  10
     Specifically, we present linear combinations of the coefficients which represent the effect of making a specific
number of consecutively made shots. For example, the effect of making the previous three shots in Column (3) of
Tables VII and IX is calculated by L1 + L2 + L3 + L1,L2 + L1,L3 + L2,L3 + L1,L2,L3 , where L1 , L2 , and L3
refer to the coefficient of the indicator for making the first second and third lagged shots, respectively, and L1,L2 ,
L1,L3 , L2,L3 , and L1,L2,L3 represent interactions. Point estimates for any combination of makes and misses in the
previous four shots can be calculated, but are not presented.
  11
     One potential issue is how quickly our sample size falls in Columns (3) and (4) due to many players not having
the required number of free throws in a game. The selection of players that may exist into these sub-samples may be
a result of defenses' fouling behavior responding to the successes in prior free throw shooting or in offenses' behavior
in getting the ball into the hands of players having free throw success. Our detailed game, player and season/moving
average free throw shooting percentage controls should mitigate these concerns.


                                                          16
    Similar to the offensive adjustments, the probability a defense makes a substitution or calls

a timeout in the next two minutes increases for longer streaks of made field goals. The effect of

making just the previous shot increases the probability the defensive team makes a substitution

in the next two minutes by 2.2 percentage points, while the effect of making the previous four

field goals increases that probability to 3.4 percentage points. Similarly, the effect of making just

the previous field goal increases the probability the defensive team calls a timeout in the next two

minutes by five percentage points, while making the previous three field goals increases it to six

percentage points.

    In Table IX we repeat the analysis for field goal attempts. Column (1) of Table IX replicates

the estimates from Column (6) in Table V, and the additional columns show the results from

progressively adding in additional lags of previously made field goals and their interactions terms.

The effect of making just the previous field goal or previous two field goals on the probability

of making the current field goal is extremely small, with a very small 95% confidence interval,

no matter how many lagged shots are included. However, we find a statistically significant and

negative effect from making three or four consecutive field goals in a row, which both decrease the

probability of making the current shot by 0.6 percentage points (p<.05).12


3.5    Additional Shot and Player Characteristics in 2013-2014 and 2014-2015
       Seasons

As a further check of the robustness of our estimates we limit our sample to the 2013-2014 and

2014-2015 seasons, for which have additional shot and defensive characteristics. Representing the

universe of field goal attempts taken during these seasons, this data additionally contains the

number of dribbles taken before shooting and number of seconds on the ball before shooting, as

well as the name of the nearest defender and distance from the nearest defender to the shooting

player, which allows for additional analysis of defensive responses to made field goals.13

    We first identify the effect of making a field goal on the offensive and defensive adjustments in
   12
      In Appendix Tables A3 and A4 we re-estimate Tables VII and IX without including the lagged shot characteristics.
While our results for free throws are very similar, we do find negative and statistically significant results for field
goals. Specifically, the small negative effect of making a field goal on the probability of making the next field goal is
still statistically no different than zero, however, grows in magnitude for longer streaks. Here, making the previous
3 or 4 field goals in a row decreases the probability of making the current field goal by 0.9 percentage points.
   13
      Summary statistics for this subset of our primary data set can be found in Appendix Table A5.



                                                           17
Table IV, as well as the defensive adjustments of assigning a new defender and defender distance

from the shooter. Table X shows results from these regressions. We find similar estimates for all

offensive and defensive adjustments as in Table IV, except for the change in shot location now

becomes statistically no different from zero. The effect of making the previous field goal increases

the probability a new defender is assigned to that player by 0.7 percentage points, while the distance

of the nearest defender decreases by 0.07 feet. These translate to changes that are about one and

1.8 percent of the dependent variable's mean, respectively.

   We also repeat the analysis of Table V with the sub sample of data that includes additional

shot and defensive characteristics. These results are presented in Table XI. Once again we present

estimates of the effect of making the previous field goal on the probability of making the current field

goal, including growing levels of controls. We add opponent controls in Column (4), which include

a quadratic function for the defensive playerâs age, indicators for the defensive playerâs

position and for a new defender covering the shooting player, a quadratic function of defender

distance from the shooting player, and the height and weight difference between the shooting and

defensive player and their interactions with defender distance. We also replace the time-invariant

opponent controls with defender fixed effects in Column (7). As in Table V, we find a persistent

and statistically significant negative relationship between making a previous field goal and the

probability of making the next field goal across the majority of the models, although the majority

of the coefficients are greater in magnitude than in Table V. Additionally, as in Table V, the most

important controls are shot controls and controls for players' shooting ability as well as accounting

for the characteristics of the previous shot. Neither the inclusion of opponent controls in Column

(4) nor defender fixed effects in Column (7) change the magnitude or statistical significance of

the estimate. The final estimate, including lagged shot controls, is now negative and statistically

significant at the 10 percent confidence level.

   We also reproduce the models in Table IX with the sub sample, including the additional shot and

defender controls from Column (7) in Table XI. We show these results in Table XII. Here again, we

find results that are similar to Table XI, although in general slightly larger in magnitude. However,

the standard errors in these models are in general twice as large as those in Table IX, and this

eliminates the statistical significance of many of the coefficients. The model which only uses three

lagged shots finds only finds a significant effect from a player making their previous three field goals,

                                                   18
which decreases the probability of making their next shot by 0.7 percent, statistically significant

at the 10% level. Additionally, the model which uses four lagged shots finds that making the

previous four field goals has a large, negative impact on the probability of making the current field

goal, decreasing the probability of making the current shot by 1.1 percentage points, statistically

significant at the 10% level.


3.6   Robustness Checks and Heterogeneity

To ensure the robustness of our estimates of the hot hand and examine any further heterogeneity

in our findings, we examine a large number of robustness checks for both our free throw and

field goal samples. For free throws, we impose additional restrictions on the four specifications

found in Columns (5) through (7) of Table III. We estimate these specifications separately for

each of the following restrictions: home team only, away team only, excluding free throws from

overtime, excluding free throws within the last two minutes of the game, excluding free throws with

substitutions made in between them, using only free throws from shooting fouls, and using only free

throws from personal fouls. We show these results in Appendix Table A1. Across the different sub

samples, we find similar coefficient sizes and statistical significance levels as in the baseline results

in Table III. In general, making the previous free throw increases a player's probability of making

his next free throw by about two percentage points, and the effects are larger for second and third

free throws in a set.

   Next, we impose several additional restrictions on the field goal sample. We estimate equations

1 and 2 separately for each of the following restrictions; home team only, away team only, shots

within the same half, shots within the same quarter, no overtime shots, no shots within five seconds

of each other, no shots within the last two minutes of the fourth quarter of the game, and shots

only within two minutes of each other. Finally, we categorize player-season combinations into the

best shooters and worst shooters, as defined by being in the top 10% or bottom 10% of field goal

percentage for that season. We show these regression results in Appendix Table A2 and briefly

describe them here. The effect of making the previous shot on the likelihood of that player taking

their team's next shot and the following shot's distance from the rim are similar across the different

sub samples, each with a few exceptions. Excluding shots within five seconds of each other increases

the effect of making the previous shot on the probability of taking the next shot by about eight

                                                   19
percentage points, as many shots within five seconds of each other are rebounds. We find the

distance of a player's shot increases to an even greater degree under the restrictions of only using

shots within the same half, only shots within the same quarter and only shots within two minutes

of each other. Defenses also consistently adjust for made shots across the different sub samples.

The effect of prior field goal success on the probability of making the current field goal is relatively

constant across all sub samples, and in most sub-samples it is not statistically different from zero

and of small magnitude. However, the effect becomes negative and statistically significant when

excluding shots taken over two minutes from each other, excluding shots taken within five seconds

of each other, or examining shots within the same quarter.

      Finally, neither the top 10% of shooters or bottom 10% of shooters show evidence of a hot hand

in field goal shooting, although there are interesting differences between the two groups. First, the

top 10% of shooters take nine times as many shots as the bottom 10% of shooters. Second, the

best shooters actually increase the time between shots if they make their previous shot, while the

worst shooters take shots over 50 seconds sooner, despite the overall average time between shots

being higher for the worst shooters. While both groups increase their shot distance by over a foot

after a made shot, the best shooters change their shot location by nearly half a foot while the

worst shooters do not change their shot location by a statistically significant amount. Here the

overall averages between the two groups are interesting as well, as the best shooters take shots that

are closer to the basket and move less between shots. Both the best and worst shooters are more

likely to provide an assist on the next play if they made their previous shot, although the worst

shooters are a bit more likely. Finally, the defensive adjustments to made shots are roughly the

same between the two groups.

      To examine omitted variable bias, we follow a method outlined in Oster (2019) to create a

bounding set for the true effect of making the previous shot on current shot success for both free

throws and field goals after taking into account potential omitted variable bias. The methodology

uses three pieces of information to create a bounding set for the true value of a coefficient under

potential omitted variable bias: (1) coefficients on the independent variable of interest with and

with other controls; (2) the R2 values from these two regressions; and (3) a value of the proportional

selection between the independent variable of interest and the omitted variable, called  .14
 14
      More formally, Oster (2019) considers a model of the form Y = X + W1 + W2 , where W1 is a linear combination


                                                        20
    For free throws, we find that the bounded set for the effect of making the previous free throw

on the probability of making the current free throw using the regression found in Column (6) of

Table III is [0.007; 0.021], which suggests that unobservable variables may be biasing our estimated

hot hand effect for free throws downward. For field goals, the bounded set for the effect of making

the previous field goal attempt on the current probability of making the next field goal attempt

using the regression found in Column (8) of Table V is [-0.0005; 0.003].15 Therefore, we can say

that even if we are missing some important unobservable variables the true effect is at the most

slightly positive and very close to zero. Furthermore, we find that the estimate would still be

negative as long as the unobservables were 17% as important as the observables we included in the

regression. The extensive set of controls we are able to include in our regression alleviate concerns

that there are unobservables which would be able to explain 17% of what our observables can.

Furthermore, the bounded set for our subset of data which includes additional controls for current

and previous shot difficulty is [-0.0029; 0.0008], and the estimate would remain negative as long

as the unobservables are less than 79% as important as this more extensive set of controls. Thus,

we believe that omitted variable bias is unlikely to explain why our results differ from those in

controlled shooting experiments.

    We additionally re-estimate our results in Tables III, V, VII and IX using player fixed effects

instead of controlling for the leave-out free throw or field goal percentage. These results can be

found in Appendix B. In general, these results show the size of the negative bias that exists when

including a lagged dependent variable as a control with the use of fixed effects. Finally, in results

available upon request, we demonstrate that our results for models with a dichotomous dependent

variable are robust to a probit specification (Spector and Mazzeo, 1980).16
of a vector of observed controls and W2 is a is a linear combination of a vector of unobserved controls. Then  is
defined as  2X
            22
               , where 2X is the covariance between W2 and X and 22 is the variance of W2 .
  15
     For both free throws and field goal attempts, we use the method for the selection of RM ax suggested by Oster
(2019) which uses the R2 found from the controlled model multiplied by 1.3.
  16
     One further potential issue is whether our analyses have enough statistical power to detect a hot hand effect
under different potential data generating processes (DGPs). To further examine this issue. We adapt DGPs from
Wetzels et al. (2016) and Stone (2012), and the results of these exercises suggest that our models have sufficient
power to detect hot hand effects, should they exist in the true data generating process. Results and an additional
appendix describing these simulations can be provided upon request.




                                                       21
3.7   Future Teammate Shooting and Overall Expected Points

Finally, we examine broader results regarding the effects of made field goals on overall offensive

efficiency. Our results up until now indicate that when controlling for offensive and defensive

adjustments a player is more likely to take the team's next field goal attempt but slightly less likely

to make that attempt following a previously made field goal. However, our results also indicate

that the defense responds to a made shot by guarding that player more closely on their next shot,

assigning a new defender, making a defensive substitution or calling a timeout within the next

two minutes. This additional defensive attention could compromise the defense's ability to prevent

other players on the offensive team from scoring.

   A remaining question then is how these different reactions combine to affect future scoring.

Our results already suggest an answer, since following a made field goal players are more likely to

take their team's next shot and take a more difficult shot, as proxied by shot distance and defender

distance. But to measure this more explicitly, we examine a set of outcomes measuring the shooting

behavior and success of the teammates of players after they make or miss a field goal attempt, the

expected points from the player's next shot, and the expected points from the team's next shot.

Our models here follow closely to the models in Table VIII, with the exception that in models

examining teammate's behavior we additionally include fixed effects for the teammate in addition

to the player taking the previous field goal attempt.

   Table XIII shows results from these models. The first five models shows results which are

conditioned on a teammate taking the team's next field goal attempt after a player makes or misses

a field goal. We first measure the shot distance of the teammate's field goal attempt and whether

the teammate's field goal attempt is a 3-point shot. Then we estimate changes in the probability

that the teammate makes his field goal attempt, first without controlling for shot distance, then

controlling for shot distance. Finally, we examine the expected points if a teammate takes the

team's next shot, the expected points from the player's next shot, and finally the expected points

from the team's next shot.

   Starting in Columns (1) and (2), if a player makes a field goal and his teammate takes the

team's next shot, that teammate's shot is about 0.74 feet (or nine inches) farther away from the

basket and 1.5 percentage points more likely to be a 3-point shot. Interestingly, both effects are



                                                  22
fairly stable across streaks of consecutively made field goals. Without controlling for shot distance,

the teammate is about 0.2 percentage points less likely to make his field goal attempt, although

most coefficients when examining longer streaks of shots are not statistically significant. However,

since Columns (1) and (2) show that the teammate's field goal attempt is likely to be a more

difficult shot following a made field goal, in Column (4) we include the distance of the teammate's

shot and its square as additional controls. Controlling for shot distance, we find that teammates

are 0.6 percentage points more likely to make the next shot if they take it. Again, this effect is

fairly consistent, if not a little larger, for longer streaks of make field goals.

       In Column (5)-(7) we present a broader picture of how shot success impacts the team's future

offensive success. We move from measuring the probability that field goals are made to measuring

the expected points from future shots. This provides a more complete picture of the overall effects

of offensive and defensive responses to made field goals because, although shots taken farther from

the basket are, in general, lower probability shots, a 3-point shot is worth 50% more points than a

2-point shot. In Column (5) we find that making a field goal does not affect the expected number

of points if a teammate takes the next shot, although a few coefficients on longer streaks of made

field goals are positive and statistically significant. This is likely due to the offsetting effects of the

teammate being slightly less likely to make the shot (Column (3)) but more likely to shoot a 3-point

shot (Column (2)). Our previous findings suggest players are less likely to make their next field

goal attempt following a made field goal, but also take shots from further away from the basket.

Column (6) translates these effects into expected points, where following a made shot a player is

expected to contribute 0.024 fewer points on their following shot. These effects grow in magnitude

following longer streaks of made field goals, such that if a player makes four field goals in a row, he

contributes 0.05 fewer points on his next shot. Finally, Column (7) shows that following a player's

made shot, the team's expected points decrease by 0.017 on the team's next shot, which aligns with

our earlier findings that player's are less likely to made their next shot but more likely to take it,

and that teammates are no more likely to add additional points, following a player's made shot.17
  17
     One concern is that our previous findings could be capturing the fact that defenses are allocating more resources
to the player who made the previous spot than to that shooter's teammates. We explore this with our two seasons of
data which include additional measures such as defensive distance in Appendix Table A6. We include an additional
dependent variable, the distance of the defender when the next shot is taken from a teammate, as well as control for
defender distance and the additional offensive controls we discuss above in Table X. Column (3) of Table A6 shows
that following a player's made field goal, when a teammate takes the team's next field goal attempt the defender
is 0.33 feet further away. Column (6) of Table A6 includes controls for both the distance of the teammate's shot


                                                         23
4     Conclusion

Recent hot hand research has focused on experimental settings due to their ability to remove ex-

ternal factors.18 However, the original question posed by Gilovich et al. (1985) regards observers'

perceptions of shooting success in game situations. Thus, although controlled experiments can

uncover whether a physiological mechanism for repeated shot success exists, external validity con-

cerns mean that controlled experiments cannot directly speak to players' performance in game

situations. We use detailed data on the universe of free throw shots and field goal attempts during

the 2004-2005 and 2015-2016 NBA regular seasons to investigate the hot hand hypothesis. Free

throws are a more controlled shooting environment, allowing a closer examination of the possible

physiological mechanisms at play in repeated shot motions. But field goals are the setting that

observers most often refer to when describing a player's shooting performance as "hot" or "streaky,"

although changes in shot characteristics and endogenous responses by the offense and defense to

made shots make it more difficult to examine the hot hand in field goals. We examine both free

throws and field goal attempts together within the same players in the same games to more directly

compare the results of hot hand analyses in each setting. We examine a wide variety of controls

for game, team, player and shot characteristics to reduce the possibility of omitted variable bias,

and we additionally use the methodology devised by Oster (2019) to bound the effect that omitted

variable bias may have on our results.

    We find a small, persistent hot hand effect in free throws. If a player makes his previous free

throw, he is about two percentage points more likely to make his next free throw, and the effect

of making the previous free throw grows to 2.4 percentage points for free throws within a set. Our

free throw results are roughly in line with Arkes (2010), who finds that making the previous free

free throw in a set increases the probability of making the next free throw in the set by about

three percentage points. However, the free throw hot hand effect grows for streaks of free throws.
and the defender's distance from that teammate, and still shows that following a made shot a player's teammates
are 0.6 percentage points more likely to make the following shot. This could be capturing other defensive actions
that make that player's next shot more likely to be successful that we do not possess in our dataset, however the
proximity in which the defender guards the teammates does not appear to be driving this. However, in Column (7)
we still see that the overall expected points from the team's next field goal (if it is taken by a teammate), does not
change a statistically significant amount following a made field goal. Column (7) still shows a decreased number of
expected points from a player's next field goal if he made his previous field goal, and Column (8) shows that the
team's expected points from its next shot decreases following a made field goal.
  18
     See Miller and Sanjurjo (2014) for more on the argument that controlled shooting experiments are preferred to
in-game data.


                                                         24
Making three or four free throws in a row increases the probability a player makes their current

shot by about 4.5 percentage points. Atlhough our estimates are smaller than those found from

experimental studies, our players have a much higher free throw percentage which leaves less room

for growth. For example, Miller and Sanjurjo (2018) reevaluate the controlled shooting experiment

in Gilovich et al. (1985) and find that a player who has made three shots in a row is 13 percentage

points more likely to make his or her next shot than if the player missed three shots in a row.

However, their average player's shooting percentage is 50 percent compared to 75 percent for our

average player's shooting percentage.

   In stark contrast to free throws, we find no relationship between making a previous field goal

and the probability that a player makes his next field goal, although when we examine a subset

of two seasons with additional controls, we find a negative association between a player making a

field goal and making his next field goal. Additionally, we show that introducing controls for the

game situation and difficulty of the current and previous shots does not produce a hot hand effect,

as previous research suggests (Bocskocsky et al., 2014). Most surprisingly, we find that making

consecutive field goals reduces the probability that a player makes his next field goal. Specifically,

we estimate that if a player makes three field goals in a row, he is 0.6 percentage points less likely

to make his next field goal attempt. Both offenses and defenses respond to made field goals as if

the hot hand effect exists. Following a made shot, players are more likely to make an assist on their

team's next made shot, take their team's next shot, and take that shot quicker and from a further

distance. Defenses are more likely to take a time out, make a substitution, assign a new defender to

that player, and defend that player closer. Put together, our results reinforce the suggestion that,

while the physiological mechanisms behind repeated shot success found in experimental settings do

exist in game situations, they are easily overwhelmed by other factors.

   Our results also allow us to explore the impacts a player's success has on their team and

teammates on following possessions. We find that following a player's made field goal, if a teammate

takes the team's next shot, they shoot further from the basket and are more likely to take a 3-point

shot. Results from a subset of seasons with defensive distance also suggest that defenses are further

away from the teammate when he shoots. Controlling for these behavioral changes, we find that

following the player's made shot their teammates are slightly more likely to make their following

shot. However, despite being more likely to make the shot due to the changes in the types of

                                                 25
shots they take, following a player's made shot the expected number of additional points from a

teammate's shot is statistically no different from zero. Conversely, following a made field goal the

expected number of points that come from the team's next shot decreases by 0.017 points, and

this decrease in points grows with increasing streaks of made field goals. The decreased expected

points is a byproduct of the player who made the shot being more likely to take the next shot

instead of a teammate, and being less likely to make that shot. Thus, overall, the offensive and

defensive responses to made field goals appear to lead to a decrease in the team's points. Moreover,

it appears that overconfidence by players after making a field goal is a large, if not predominant,

factor for this decrease in future offensive scoring.

   We believe the largest concern in our results is controlling for endogenous responses and the

omitted variable bias that may exist from insufficient controls. For example, our data lacks more

detailed information on the defensive player's hand positioning and angle to the shooter which is

likely to be of importance. While omitted variable bias is always a concern in applied microeco-

nomics, we take a number of steps to minimize potential omitted variable bias. First, while our

results show the importance of controls in both free throw and field goal settings, many of our

results are fairly stable when adding additional controls. For example, in Table V our results are

consistent once controlling for shooting player behaviors. Additional controls for individual shoot-

ing ability, shot controls, defensive player controls, and even defensive player fixed effects do not

markedly change our results. The one exception is the inclusion of lagged shot controls, which bet-

ter capture the difficulty of the previous shot. Regardless, the coefficients across Table V suggest

an extremely small effect of making a previous field goal on the probability a player makes his next

field goal. Second, when we introduce additional controls in the subset of years for which they

are available, these additional controls increase the magnitude of the negative relationship between

field goal shooting. Third, we adapt the methodology introduced in Oster (2019) to bound the

effects that omitted variables may play. Our results suggest that omitted variable bias is unlikely

to explain our results, and in fact omitted variable bias is likely to generate at most an extremely

small hot hand effect.

   Another concern that has been raised by previous research is measurement error in both the

dependent and independent variables. As previous research points out, making a shot is a noisy

indicator of changes in the underlying probability that a player makes a shot (e.g. Stone, 2012;

                                                  26
Arkes, 2013). We do not attempt to estimate changes in the underlying probability that players

make a shot. Instead, we focus on what is observable, and thus more relevant to spectators' beliefs

about the hot hand: whether a player makes a shot and the characteristics surrounding that shot.

   More broadly, it is unclear how analyses of the hot hand should control for shot difficulty or

examine the underlying probability of making a shot versus the observed outcome of a made or

missed shot. The original question posed by Gilovich et al. (1985) is whether the widespread belief

in the hot hand among players, coaches, announcers and fans is correct. Answering this question

necessitates a correct interpretation of what these beliefs are. It is unclear to what extent players,

coaches, announcers and fans "control" for external factors when evaluating the hot hand effect

in game situations and whether players, coaches, announcers and fans evaluate the probability of

making a shot versus the observed outcome of whether a shot is made. In this paper, we focus on

observable outcomes, as we believe this is the most relevant for examining perceptions regarding

the hot hand. We believe that our paper calls for more work connecting results from controlled

settings to the run of play and for connecting spectators' beliefs with shooting success. For example,

controlled experiments could be conducted which more closely mimic the run of play, varying the

time in between shooting attempts, varying the types of shots, or adding in defenders. While some

experiments have been conducted along these lines (e.g. Miller and Sanjurjo, 2018), we believe more

work is called for in this area to further examine the conditions under which the hot hand effect

emerges.

   An important question is where this leaves the original hypothesis in Gilovich et al. (1985).

Our results suggest that the original hypothesis posed by Gilovich et al. (1985) is largely correct

for field goals, but not for free throws. Our findings would align with the hypothesis of a hot hand

existing due to muscle memory of repeated physical movements. But this muscle memory appears

to dissipate quickly, as evidenced by the hot hand effect in free throws being driven by repeated

free throws in a set and by players who take more free throws in a game. Given the size of the hot

hand effect, a two percentage point increase in the probability of making the next free throw, it

is unclear whether casual fans can discern an effect of this magnitude. But we also find that the

size of the hot hand effect grows for players taking more free throws in a game, and it is plausible

that observers may be able to discern a 4.6 percentage point increase in the probability of making

the next free throw. However, we do not find a hot hand in the most important setting, the run

                                                 27
of play. In fact, we find that making a streak of field goals decreases the probability that a player

makes his next field goal. Thus, our results suggest that the widespread belief in the hot hand in

the run of play is incorrect, supporting the original hypothesis in Gilovich et al. (1985).




                                                 28
References
Aharoni, G. and O. H. Sarig (2012). Hot hands and equilibrium. Applied Economics 44(18),
 2309­2320.
Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991). Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte carlo evidence
  and an application to employment equations. The Review of Economic Studies 58(2), 277­297.
Arkes, J. (2010). Revisiting the hot hand theory with free throw data in a multivariate framework.
  Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports 6(1).
Arkes, J. (2013). Misses in "hot hand" research. Journal of Sports Economics 14(4), 401­410.
Attali, Y. (2013). Perceived hotness affects behavior of basketball players and coaches. Psychological
  Science 24(7), 1151­1156.
Bocskocsky, A., J. Ezekowitz, and C. Stein (2014). Heat check: New evidence on the hot hand in
  basketball. Working Paper, 1­30.
Brown, W. O. and R. D. Sauer (1993). Does the basketball market believe in the `hot hand'?
  comment. The American Economic Review 83(5), 1377­1386.
B¨
 uhren, C. and S. Krabel (2015). Individual performance after success and failure: A natural
  experiment. Working Paper, 1­24.
Chen, D. L., T. J. Moskowitz, and K. Shue (2016). Decision making under the gambler's fallacy:
  Evidence from asylum judges, loan officers, and baseball umpires. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131(3), 1181­1242.
Csapo, P., S. Avugos, M. Raab, and M. Bar-Eli (2015). The effect of perceived streakiness on the
  shot-taking behaviour of basketball players. European Journal of Sport Science 15(7), 647­654.
Csapo, P. and M. Raab (2014). "Hand down, man down." analysis of defensive adjustments in
  response to the hot hand in basketball using novel defense metrics. PloS One 9(12), e114184.
Dorsey-Palmateer, R. and G. Smith (2004). Bowlers' hot hands. The American Statistician 58(1),
 38­45.
Gilovich, T., R. Vallone, and A. Tversky (1985). The hot hand in basketball: On the misperception
  of random sequences. Cognitive Psychology 17(3), 295­314.
Green, B. and J. Zwiebel (2017). The hot-hand fallacy: Cognitive mistakes or equilibrium adjust-
  ments? Evidence from Major League Baseball. Management Science.
Klaassen, F. J. and J. R. Magnus (2001). Are points in tennis independent and identically dis-
  tributed? Evidence from a dynamic binary panel data model. Journal of the American Statistical
  Association 96(454), 500­509.
Miller, J. B. and A. Sanjurjo (2014). A cold shower for the hot hand fallacy. Working Paper.
Miller, J. B. and A. Sanjurjo (2015). Is it a fallacy to believe in the hot hand in the NBA three-point
 contest? Working Paper, 1­24.
Miller, J. B. and A. Sanjurjo (2018). Surprised by the gambler's and hot hand fallacies? A truth
 in the law of small numbers. Econometrica 86(6), 2019­2047.
Nerlove, M. (1967). Experimental evidence on the estimation of dynamic economic relations from
  a time series of cross-section. The Economic Studies Quarterly (Tokyo. 1950) 18(3), 42­74.



                                                  29
Nerlove, M. (1971). Further evidence on the estimation of dynamic economic relations from a time
  series of cross sections. Econometrica 39(2), 359.
Nickell, S. (1981). Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica, 1417­1426.
Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal of
  Business & Economic Statistics 37(2), 187­204.
Rao, J. M. (2009). Experts' perceptions of autocorrelation: The hot hand fallacy among professional
  basketball players. Working Paper.
Smith, G. (2003). Horseshoe pitchers' hot hands. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 10(3), 753­758.
Spector, L. C. and M. Mazzeo (1980). Probit analysis and economic education. The Journal of
  Economic Education 11(2), 37­44.
Stone, D. F. (2012). Measurement error and the hot hand. The American Statistician 66(1), 61­66.
Wardrop, R. L. (1995). Simpson's paradox and the hot hand in basketball.            The American
 Statistician 49(1), 24­28.
Wetzels, R., D. Tutschkow, C. Dolan, S. van der Sluis, G. Dutilh, and E.-J. Wagenmakers (2016).
 A bayesian test for the hot hand phenomenon. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 72, 200­209.
Yaari, G. and S. Eisenmann (2011). The hot (invisible?) hand: can time sequence patterns of
  success/failure in sports be modeled as repeated random independent trials? PloS One 6(10),
  e24532.




                                                30
5     Tables

                          Table I: Summary Statistics for Free Throw Sample

                                                           Made Prev. Free         Missed Prev.
                                        All Free Throws
                                                              Throws               Free Throws
           Variable                     Mean     Std.Dev   Mean      Std.Dev     Mean      Std.Dev

     Made Prev. Free Throw               0.756     0.429
     Free Throw Made (Y/N)               0.770     0.421     0.785     0.411      0.724      0.447
     Second FT                           0.582     0.493     0.567     0.496      0.631      0.482
     Third FT                            0.011     0.103     0.012     0.108      0.007      0.085
     Personal Foul FT                    0.203     0.402     0.206     0.404      0.193      0.395
     Shooting Foul FT                    0.734     0.442     0.730     0.444      0.748      0.434
     Other Foul FT                       0.040     0.195     0.039     0.194      0.041      0.199
     Sub b/t Free Throw                  0.176     0.381     0.172     0.378      0.187      0.390
     Timeout b/t Free Throw              0.003     0.053     0.003     0.053      0.003      0.053
     And One Free Throw                  0.000     0.002     0.000     0.002      0.000      0.003
     Time b/t Player FTs (Sec.)        237.581   455.118   245.352   459.558    213.473    440.191

     N                                 516,699             390,742              125,957
    Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-
    2006 through 2016-2017 regular seasons.




                                                   31
                          Table II: Summary Statistics for Field Goals Sample

                                          All Shots         Made Prev. FG        Missed Prev. FG
       Variable                        Mean      Std.Dev   Mean      Std.Dev     Mean       Std.Dev

 Previous Shot Made (Y/N)                0.463     0.499
 Shot Made (Y/N)                         0.457     0.498     0.453     0.498       0.460      0.498
 Shot Distance (Ft.)                    12.559    10.008    12.981     9.915      12.194     10.073
 Distance b/t Shots (Ft.)               15.917    10.804    14.990    10.747      16.717     10.789
 Time b/t Player Shots (Sec.)          218.782   286.925   208.014   272.410     228.074    298.574
 Player Took Prev. Shot (Y/N)            0.215     0.411     0.239     0.427       0.194      0.395
 Assist on Next Shot                     0.050     0.218     0.054     0.226       0.047      0.211
 Sub w/in Two Min                        0.499     0.500     0.512     0.500       0.487      0.500
 Timeout w/in Two Min                    0.219     0.413     0.249     0.433       0.193      0.394
 Play Length (Sec.)                     12.654     6.747    12.961     6.559      12.389      6.894

 N                                   2,074,501             960,979              1,113,522
Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
through 2016-2017 regular seasons.




                                                  32
          Table III: Effects of Making a Previous Free Throw on Probability of Making Next Free Throw


                                          (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)

      Made Prev. Free Throw           0.061***      0.055***     0.040***      0.041***     0.021***        0.021***          0.024***
                                       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.002)

      Dep. Var. Mean                    0.770         0.770        0.770         0.770        0.770           0.770            0.781
      Adjusted R-Squared                0.004         0.009        0.024         0.026        0.046           0.046            0.046
      N                                516,699       516,699      516,699       516,699      516,699         516,699          306,520
      Game Controls                                     X            X             X            X               X                X
      Player Controls                                                X             X            X               X                X
      Shot Controls                                                                X            X               X                X
      Leave-Out FT%                                                                             X               X                X
      Lag Controls                                                                                              X
      2nd & 3rd FTs Only                                                                                                         X
33




     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through
     2016-2017 regular seasons. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one for a made free throw and zero for a missed
     free throw. Standard errors, clustered at the player by year level, are in parentheses. Game controls include indicators
     for month, day of the week, team by season, and opponent by season, an indicator for the player being on the home team
     interacted with game attendance, the period interacted with the seconds remaining in that period, and the point gap before
     the current set of free throws interacted with the home team and with the period. Player controls include indicators for player
     position, a quadratic function of the player's age, a quadratic function of the player's height and weight, and an interaction
     between height and weight. Shot controls include indicators for the second and third free throws in a set, whether the free
     throw resulted from a personal, shooting or other foul (with flagrant foul as the omitted category), whether there was a
     substitution before the free throw, and whether there was a timeout before the free throw. Leave-Out FT% controls include
     the playerâs free throw percentage in the relevant season, excluding the current game, and a four week moving average of
     the playerâs free throw percentage, including two weeks on either side of the current game, again excluding the current
     game. Lagged controls include all time-varying controls for the previous free throw, excluding controls which are calculated
     based on the second lagged free throw. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,   
                                                                                                       : 5%, and   
                                                                                                                      : 1%.
                                                   Table IV: Offensive and Defensive Adjustments to Field Goals

                                                                           Offensive Adjustments                                  Defensive Adjustments
                                                Take Next          Time b/t                      Shot                                              Time Out
                                                                                  Shot                          Assist on        Sub w/in
                                                Field Goal         Field Goal                  Location                                            w/in Two
                                                                                 Distance                       Next Play        Two Mins.
                                                 Attempt           Attempts                    Difference                                            Mins.

      Previous Shot Made (Y/N)                  0.050***           -19.635***    1.549***       0.053***         0.009***         0.022***          0.051***
                                                 (0.001)             (0.553)      (0.021)        (0.016)          (0.000)          (0.001)           (0.001)

      Dep. Var. Mean                              0.213             218.782        12.559        15.917            0.050            0.499            0.219
      Adjusted R-Squared                          0.026              0.102         0.181         0.300             0.019            0.110            0.047
      N                                         2,074,501          2,074,501     2,074,501     2,074,501         2,074,501        2,074,501        2,074,501
     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The
     dependent variable is given by the column title. Standard errors, clustered at the player by year level, are in parentheses. All models control for the game
     characteristics and shot characteristics of the field goal attempt, as well as player by season fixed effects for the player who took the field goal attempt.
34




     Game controls include indicators for month, day of the week, team by season, and opponent by season, an indicator for the player being on the home team
     interacted with game attendance, the period interacted with the seconds remaining in that period, and the point gap before the current shot interacted
     with the home team and with the period. Shot controls include the number of points the opposing team scored on their last possession, the play length
     in seconds, shot distance (and its square), indicators for and the interaction between shot types and shot distance, an interaction between shot type and
     season, and indicators for and the interaction between the angle of the shot to the rim and whether it was on the left side of the court. Stars denote
     statistical significance levels:  : 10%,   
                                                   : 5%, and   
                                                                  : 1%.
         Table V: Effects of a Previous Field Goal on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt


                                               (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)

      Previous Shot Made (Y/N)             -0.006***     -0.008***      -0.011***        -0.001       -0.002**          -0.000
                                            (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)

      Dep. Var. Mean                         0.457          0.457         0.457          0.457         0.457            0.457
      Adjusted R-Squared                     0.000          0.003         0.006          0.079         0.080            0.080
      N                                    2,074,501      2,074,501     2,074,501      2,074,501     2,074,501        2,074,501
      Game Controls                                           X             X              X             X                X
      Player Controls                                                       X              X             X                X
      Shot Controls                                                                        X             X                X
      Leave-Out FG%                                                                                      X                X
      Lag Controls                                                                                                        X
35




     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
     through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one for a made field goal and
     zero for a missed field goal. Standard errors, clustered at the player by year level, are in parentheses. Game controls
     include indicators for month, day of the week, team by season, and opponent by season, an indicator for the player being
     on the home team interacted with game attendance, the period interacted with the seconds remaining in that period,
     and the point gap before the current shot interacted with the home team and with the period. Player controls include
     indicators for player position, a quadratic function of the player's age, a quadratic function of the player's height and
     weight, and an interaction between height and weight. Shot controls include the number of points the opposing team
     scored on their last possession, the play length in seconds, an indicator for if the shooting player also took his teamâs
     previous shot, the time between the player's shots, the distance between the player's previous shot and current shot,
     whether the player was fouled on his last shot, shot distance (and its square), indicators for and the interaction between
     shot types and shot distance, an interaction between shot type and season, and indicators for and the interaction between
     the angle of the shot to the rim and whether it was on the left side of the court. Leave-Out FG% controls include the
     playerâs field goal percentage in the relevant season, excluding the current game, and a four week moving average
     of the playerâs field goal percentage, including two weeks on either side of the current game, again excluding the
     current game. Lagged controls include all time-varying controls for the previous field goal, except for controls which are
     calculated using the second-lagged field goal. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,   
                                                                                                               : 5%, and   
                                                                                                                              : 1%.
        Table VI: Effects of a Previous Field Goal on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt
                                        Investigating Lagged Controls


                                               (1)              (2)              (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)

      Previous Shot Made (Y/N)              -0.002**         -0.002***       -0.002**     -0.001      -0.001      -0.000
                                             (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)

      Dep. Var. Mean                         0.457             0.457          0.457       0.457       0.457       0.457
      Adjusted R-Squared                     0.080             0.080          0.080       0.080       0.080       0.080
      N                                    2,074,501         2,074,501      2,074,501   2,074,501   2,074,501   2,074,501
      Lag Game Controls                                          X              X           X           X           X
      Lag Poss. Controls                                                        X           X           X           X
      Lag Shot Type                                                                         X           X           X
      Lag Shot Dist.                                                                                    X           X
      Lag Shot Dist Int.                                                                                            X
36




     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
     through 2016-2017 regular seasons. Columns (1) and (6) replicate Columns (5) and (6), respectively, from Table V.
     Column (2) adds in lagged game situation controls (period indicators fully interacted with the seconds remaining in the
     period and the point gap and its interactions with indicators for the home team and the period). Column (3) additionally
     adds lagged play controls, including the points scored by the opposing team on the last possession and the play length.
     Column (4) additionally adds lagged shot type by season indicators. Column (5) additionally adds lagged shot distance
     and shot distance squared, and Column (6) finally adds in the lagged shot type by shot distance interactions. Stars
     denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,   
                                                          : 5%, and   
                                                                         : 1%.
Table VII: Effects of Making Consecutive Free Throws on Probability of Making Next Free Throw


                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)

             Made Prev. FT (Y/N)                    0.021***      0.021***     0.037***       0.022
                                                     (0.001)       (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.015)
             Made Prev. Two FTs (Y/N)                             0.035***     0.048***     0.036***
                                                                   (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.013)
             Made Prev. Three FTs (Y/N)                                        0.053***     0.044***
                                                                                (0.007)      (0.012)
             Made Prev. Four FTs (Y/N)                                                      0.045***
                                                                                             (0.012)
             Dep. Var. Mean                           0.770        0.771         0.777        0.777
             Adjusted R-Squared                       0.046        0.047         0.048        0.049
             N                                       516,699      358,201       261,181      179,782

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one for a made free throw
and zero for a missed free throw. Standard errors, clustered at the player by year level, are in parentheses. The
independent variables of interest are indicators for whether or not a player made the lagged, twice lagged, third
lagged and fourth lagged free throw, as well as all the possible interactions between these indicators. We create
linear combinations of the relevant coefficients to calculate the effect of only making the previous free throw, only
the previous two free throws, only the previous three free throws and making all of the previous four free throws.
The controls included are the same as in Column (6) of Table III, with the addition of time-varying controls for the
relevant lagged free throws. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                         37
             Table VIII: Offensive and Defensive Adjustments to Consecutively Made Field Goals
                                                                 Offensive Adjustments                                    Defensive Adjustments
                                       Take Next        Time b/t                           Shot
                                                                                                         Assist on       Sub w/in 2       T.O. w/in
                                          FG               FG           Shot Dist        Location
                                                                                                         Next Play         Mins.           2 Mins.
                                        Attempt         Attempts                           Diff

 A. One Lag Shot (N= 2,074,501)
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)        0.050***                    -19.635***       1.549***        0.053***         0.009***        0.022***        0.051***
                             (0.001)                      (0.553)         (0.021)         (0.016)          (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.001)
 Dep. Var. Mean               0.213                       218.782         12.559          15.917            0.050           0.499           0.219
 Adjusted R-Squared           0.026                        0.102           0.181           0.300            0.019           0.110           0.047


 B. Two Lagged Shots (N= 1,811,757)
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)        0.050***                    -21.841***       1.522***        0.108***         0.010***        0.022***        0.047***
                             (0.001)                      (0.674)         (0.025)         (0.022)          (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.001)
 Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)   0.062***                    -29.490***       2.234***        0.316***         0.011***        0.031***        0.060***
                             (0.002)                      (0.815)         (0.032)         (0.025)          (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)
 Dep. Var. Mean               0.217                       214.552         12.589          15.910            0.050           0.520           0.230
 Adjusted R-Squared           0.027                        0.117           0.176           0.297            0.019           0.092           0.050


 C. Three Lagged Shots (N= 1,568,672)
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)        0.054***                    -21.861***       1.471***          0.029          0.010***        0.022***        0.045***
                             (0.002)                      (0.846)         (0.033)         (0.030)          (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)
 Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)   0.067***                    -30.516***       2.199***        0.292***         0.012***        0.030***        0.058***
                             (0.002)                      (0.963)         (0.039)         (0.033)          (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.001)
 Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N) 0.069***                    -32.395***       2.731***        0.503***         0.012***        0.033***        0.058***
                             (0.002)                      (1.065)         (0.045)         (0.036)          (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 Dep. Var. Mean               0.222                       204.771         12.637          15.935            0.050           0.530           0.236
 Adjusted R-Squared           0.028                        0.125           0.171           0.293            0.019           0.088           0.055


 D. Four Lagged Shots (N= 1,346,178)
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)        0.062***                    -22.519***       1.549***          0.036          0.009***        0.020***        0.047***
                             (0.002)                      (1.083)         (0.047)         (0.045)          (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)   0.074***                    -30.358***       2.200***        0.267***         0.012***        0.028***        0.056***
                             (0.002)                      (1.173)         (0.052)         (0.047)          (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N) 0.077***                    -33.453***       2.809***        0.488***         0.011***        0.033***        0.060***
                             (0.003)                      (1.258)         (0.059)         (0.051)          (0.001)         (0.003)         (0.002)
 Made Prev. Four FGs (Y/N)  0.073***                    -32.408***       3.196***        0.701***         0.013***        0.035***        0.055***
                             (0.003)                      (1.383)         (0.066)         (0.055)          (0.001)         (0.003)         (0.002)
 Dep. Var. Mean               0.227                       192.568         12.696          15.968            0.051           0.528           0.238
 Adjusted R-Squared           0.029                        0.124           0.167           0.289            0.018           0.093           0.061
 Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through 2016-2017 regular
seasons. The dependent variable is given by the column title. Standard errors, clustered at the player by year level, are in parentheses. The
independent variables of interest are indicators for whether or not a player made the lagged, twice lagged, third lagged and fourth lagged field goals,
as well as all the possible interactions between these indicators. We create linear combinations of the relevant coefficients to calculate the effect of
only making the previous field goal, only the previous two field goals, only the previous three field goals and making all of the previous four field
goals. The controls included are the same as in Table IV, with the addition of time-varying controls for the relevant lagged field goals. Stars denote
statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                                         38
Table IX: Effects of Consecutive Field Goals on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt


                                                        (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)

            Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                        -0.000        0.001          0.001          -0.000
                                                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.002)
            Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)                                -0.002         -0.002         -0.001
                                                                    (0.001)       (0.002)         (0.002)
            Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N)                                           -0.005***      -0.006***
                                                                                  (0.002)         (0.002)
            Made Prev. Four FGs (Y/N)                                                            -0.006**
                                                                                                  (0.003)
            Dep. Var. Mean                            0.457          0.456         0.456            0.455
            Adjusted R-Squared                        0.080          0.080         0.080            0.079
            N                                       2,074,501      1,811,757     1,568,672      1,346,178

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one for a made field goal and zero
for a missed field goal. Standard errors, clustered at the player by year level, are in parentheses. The independent
variables of interest are indicators for whether or not a player made the lagged, twice lagged, third lagged and fourth
lagged field goals, as well as all the possible interactions between these indicators. We create linear combinations
of the relevant coefficients to calculate the effect of only making the previous field goal, only the previous two field
goals, only the previous three field goals and making all of the previous four field goals. The controls included are
the same as in Column (6) of Table V, with the addition of time-varying controls for the relevant lagged field goals.
Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                          39
                                                               Table X: Offensive and Defensive Adjustments to Field Goals
                                                           2013-2014 and 2014-2015 Seasons with Additional Shot Characteristics

                                                                       Offensive Adjustments                                                                 Defensive Adjustments
                                           Take Next         Time b/t                              Shot                                                                              Time Out
                                                                                 Shot                             Assist on            Defender                New       Sub w/in
                                           Field Goal        Field Goal                          Location                                                                            w/in Two
                                                                                Distance                          Next Play            Distance              Defender    Two Mins.
                                            Attempt          Attempts                            Difference                                                                            Mins.

      Previous Shot Made (Y/N)               0.055***        -21.569***         1.356***           -0.052          0.010***            -0.076***             0.007***     0.021***   0.055***
                                              (0.004)          (1.547)           (0.056)          (0.038)           (0.001)             (0.010)               (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)

      Dep. Var. Mean                          0.211            222.418           12.742            15.857            0.051               4.141                0.729        0.506      0.235
      Adjusted R-Squared                      0.025             0.100            0.185             0.305             0.019               0.265                0.029        0.098      0.034
      N                                      353,926           353,926          353,926           353,926           353,926             353,926              353,926      353,926    353,926
     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com, http://www.nbasavant.com, and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 regular seasons. With a few
     exceptions, the specifications are the same as those in Table IV. First, we add two additional dependent variables regarding defender responses: whether the defense assigns a new defender
     and the distance between the defender and shooter. Second, given the limited number of seasons, we replace player by season and opponent by season fixed effects with player, season and
     opponent fixed effects, and shot type by season indicators with shot type indicators. Third, the models also include additional shot characteristics for the previous shot (the number of
     dribbles the player took and touch time prior to the shot) and opposing defender (defender distance from the shooting player in feet (and its square), and the height and weight difference
40




     between the shooting and defensive player and their interactions with defender distance). Fourth, we include the shot distance and its square as independent variables when the dependent
     variable is either the defender distance or assigning a new defender. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,   
                                                                                                                                      : 5%, and   
                                                                                                                                                     : 1%.
                     Table XI: Effects of a Previous Field Goal on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt
                                2013-2014 and 2014-2015 Seasons with Additional Shot Characteristics


                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)

      Previous Shot Made (Y/N)                 -0.009***       -0.011***      -0.015***      -0.015***     -0.004**    -0.004**    -0.004***     -0.003*
                                                (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)

      Dep. Var. Mean                            0.453            0.453          0.453          0.453        0.453       0.453        0.453        0.453
      Adjusted R-Squared                        0.000            0.002          0.007          0.008        0.096       0.097        0.098        0.098
      N                                        353,940          353,940        353,940        353,940      353,940     353,940      353,940      353,713
      Game Controls                                                X              X              X            X           X            X            X
      Player Controls                                                             X              X            X           X            X            X
      Opponent Controls                                                                          X            X           X           X            X
      Shot Controls                                                                                           X           X            X            X
      Leave-Out FG%                                                                                                       X            X            X
41




      Def. Player FE                                                                                                                   X            X
      Lag Controls                                                                                                                                  X
     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com, http://www.nbasavant.com, and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2013-
     2014 and 2014-2015 regular seasons. The specifications are the same as those in Table V with a few exceptions. First, given the limited number
     of seasons, we replace team by season and opponent by season fixed effects with team, season and opponent fixed effects, and shot type by season
     with shot type indicators. Second, we include additional controls as follows. Shot characteristics additionally include the number of dribbles
     the player took and touch time prior to the shot. Opponent controls include a quadratic function for the defensive player's age, indicators for
     the defensive player's position and for a new defender covering the shooting player, defender distance from the shooting player in feet (and its
     square), and the height and weight difference between the shooting and defensive player and their interactions with defender distance. Stars
                                                                                     
     denote statistical significance levels:      : 10%,      : 5%, and      : 1%.      When including defensive player fixed effects we do not include any
     time-invariant player characteristics for the defensive player (e.g. position).
Table XII: Effects of Consecutive Field Goals on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt
                                2013-2014 and 2014-2015 Seasons


                                                         (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)

                Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                    -0.003*     -0.002      -0.003      -0.004
                                                       (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.005)
                Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)                          -0.002       0.000       0.000
                                                                  (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.006)
                Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N)                                    -0.007*     -0.005
                                                                              (0.004)     (0.006)
                Made Prev. Four FGs (Y/N)                                                 -0.011*
                                                                                          (0.006)
                Dep. Var. Mean                         0.453       0.453       0.452        0.451
                Adjusted R-Squared                     0.098       0.099       0.098        0.097
                N                                     353,713     308,326     266,204     227,553

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com, http://www.nbasavant.com, and http://www.basketball-
reference.com for the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 regular seasons. The specifications are the same as those in Table IX
but include the additional controls described above in Table XI and the relevant lagged shot controls. Stars denote
statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                        42
      Table XIII: Changes in Offensive Performance in Response to Consecutively Made Field Goals
                                            Teammate's Performance if a Teammate Takes Next Shot
                                                                                      Prob Make                         Player's       Team's
                                                         Prob.
                                        Shot                          Prob Make        Shot (w/                        Points on      Points on
                                                        3-Point                                          Points
                                       Distance                          Shot            Shot                          His Next       Their Next
                                                         Shot
                                                                                      Distance)                          Shot           Shot

 A. One Lag Shot
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                   0.740***        0.015***        -0.002**        0.006***          0.000         -0.024***       -0.017***
                                        (0.017)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 Dep. Var. Mean                          12.521          0.239           0.458           0.458           1.002           1.001           1.001
 Adjusted R-Squared                      0.197           0.200           0.011           0.043           0.006           0.004           0.003
 N                                     1,494,117       1,494,497       1,494,497       1,494,117       1,494,497       2,074,501       1,899,132


 B. Two Lagged Shots
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                   0.787***        0.015***        -0.002**        0.006***          0.001         -0.021***       -0.015***
                                        (0.024)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)
 Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)              0.679***        0.016***          0.002         0.009***        0.009***        -0.036***       -0.015***
                                        (0.026)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)
 Dep. Var. Mean                          12.533          0.243           0.457           0.457           1.001           1.001           1.001
 Adjusted R-Squared                      0.199           0.201           0.011           0.044           0.006           0.004           0.003
 N                                     1,295,463       1,295,794       1,295,794       1,295,463       1,295,794       1,811,757       1,655,238


 C. Three Lagged Shots
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                   0.850***        0.017***        -0.005***         0.004*          -0.005        -0.022***       -0.023***
                                        (0.034)         (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.004)
 Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)              0.730***        0.018***          -0.000        0.007***          0.004         -0.036***       -0.021***
                                        (0.037)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.004)
 Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N)            0.677***        0.016***           0.002        0.009***          0.007         -0.048***       -0.023***
                                        (0.040)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.004)
 Dep. Var. Mean                          12.559          0.247            0.456           0.456          1.000           0.999           1.000
 Adjusted R-Squared                      0.200           0.201            0.011          0.044           0.006           0.004           0.003
 N                                     1,113,707       1,113,998       1,113,998       1,113,707       1,113,998       1,568,672       1,431,094


 D. Four Lagged Shots
 Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                   0.825***        0.017***         -0.006**          0.003          -0.006        -0.022***       -0.023***
                                        (0.050)         (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.005)
 Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)              0.740***        0.020***           0.002         0.009***         0.010         -0.034***       -0.018***
                                        (0.053)         (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.007)         (0.005)         (0.006)
 Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N)            0.615***        0.016***          0.005*         0.012***        0.016**        -0.051***       -0.016***
                                        (0.056)         (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.006)
 Made Prev. Four FGs (Y/N)             0.734***        0.021***          -0.000         0.007**          0.005         -0.055***       -0.029***
                                        (0.062)         (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.006)
 Dep. Var. Mean                          12.593          0.250            0.455           0.455          0.999           0.997           0.998
 Adjusted R-Squared                      0.201           0.201            0.012           0.044          0.006           0.004           0.003
 N                                      948,324         948,581         948,581          948,324        948,581        1,346,178       1,226,740
 Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through 2016-2017 regular
seasons. The dependent variable is given by the column title. Standard errors, clustered at the player by year level, are in parentheses. The
independent variables of interest are indicators for whether or not a player made the lagged, twice lagged, third lagged and fourth lagged field
goals, as well as all the possible interactions between these indicators. We create linear combinations of the relevant coefficients to calculate the
effect of only making the previous field goal, only the previous two field goals, only the previous three field goals and making all of the previous
four field goals. The controls included are similar to Table VIII. Columns (1) - (5) additionally include fixed effects for the teammate taking the
shot, Column (4) includes shot distance and its square, and Columns (6) and (7) do not include player fixed effects to avoid bias from a lagged
dependent variable. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                                        43
Appendices
A      Appendix Tables

                                  Table A1: Robustness Checks: Free Throws

                                                           All Free       All Free       Only 2nd
                                                           Throws        Throws w/       and 3rd
                                                          w/o Lagged      Lagged           Free
                                                           Controls       Controls        Throws

                    Full Sample                             0.021***      0.021***       0.024***
                                                             (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.002)
                                                             [0.770]       [0.770]        [0.781]
                                                           N=516,699     N=516,699      N=306,520

                    Home Team Only                          0.020***      0.020***       0.023***
                                                             (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)
                                                             [0.770]       [0.770]        [0.781]
                                                           N=265,815     N=265,815      N=156,955

                    Away Team Only                          0.019***      0.019***       0.024***
                                                             (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)
                                                             [0.770]       [0.770]        [0.781]
                                                           N=250,884     N=250,884      N=149,565

                    No Overtime Free Throws                 0.021***      0.021***       0.024***
                                                             (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.002)
                                                             [0.770]       [0.770]        [0.781]
                                                           N=509,944     N=509,944      N=303,088

                    No Last 2 Minutes of End of Game        0.021***      0.020***       0.024***
                                                             (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                             [0.769]       [0.769]        [0.779]
                                                           N=459,870     N=459,870      N=277,770

                    No Sub. Between Free Throws             0.020***      0.020***       0.024***
                                                             (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                             [0.768]       [0.768]        [0.783]
                                                           N=424,968     N=424,968      N=214,789

                    Shooting Fouls Only                     0.021***      0.021***       0.025***
                                                             (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                             [0.767]       [0.767]        [0.779]
                                                           N=379,271     N=379,271      N=230,590

                    Personal Fouls Only                     0.016***      0.016***      0.017***
                                                             (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)
                                                             [0.781]       [0.781]       [0.795]
                                                           N=104,856     N=104,856      N=62,530

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through 2016-
2017 regular seasons. The models here mimic Columns (5) through (7) of Table III, except as described in each row. Stars
denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                          44
                                                                                                   Table A2: Robustness Checks: Field Goals

                                                                                             Offensive Adjustments                                                                       Defensive Adjustments
                                                                                                                                    Change in Shot                                 Sub w/in Two          Time Out w/in            Prob. Make
                                                               Take Next Shot         Time b/t Shots          Shot Distance                               Assist Next Play
                                                                                                                                      Location                                         Mins.               Two Mins.               Next Shot

      Full Sample (N=2074501)                                      0.050***              -19.635***              1.549***               0.053***               0.009***               0.022***               0.051***                    -0.000
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.553)                (0.021)                (0.016)                (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.213]               [218.782]              [12.559]               [15.917]                [0.050]                [0.499]                [0.219]                   [0.457]

      Home Team Only (N=1037353)                                   0.049***              -18.455***              1.563***               0.073***               0.010***               0.022***               0.054***                    -0.000
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.690)                (0.025)                (0.021)                (0.001)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.213]               [218.403]              [12.417]               [15.817]                [0.051]                [0.502]                [0.221]                   [0.463]

      Away Team Only (N=1037148)                                   0.051***              -20.500***              1.557***                0.045**               0.008***               0.020***               0.047***                    -0.001
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.683)                (0.025)                 (0.021)               (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.214]               [219.161]              [12.700]                [16.017]               [0.049]                [0.495]                [0.217]                   [0.451]

      Shots w/in Same Half (N=1839690)                             0.052***               -9.583***              1.700***               0.074***               0.009***               0.022***               0.052***                    -0.001
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.421)                (0.022)                (0.017)                (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.236]               [163.723]              [12.483]               [15.853]                [0.050]                [0.495]                [0.220]                   [0.459]

      Shots w/in Same Quarter (N=1536755)                          0.054***               -1.201***              1.881***               0.110***               0.008***               0.023***               0.055***                  -0.002**
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.250)                (0.024)                (0.018)                (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.274]               [111.264]              [12.458]               [15.758]                [0.050]                [0.489]                [0.230]                   [0.460]
45




      No Overtime Shots (N=2056805)                                0.049***              -19.480***              1.553***               0.056***               0.009***               0.021***               0.051***                    -0.001
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.554)                (0.021)                (0.016)                (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.213]               [218.915]              [12.550]               [15.914]                [0.050]                [0.499]                [0.217]                   [0.457]

      No Shots w/in 5 Seconds (N=2034630)                          0.081***              -28.401***              1.295***               -0.205***              0.008***               0.022***               0.052***                  -0.002***
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.535)                (0.020)                 (0.015)               (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.199]               [223.015]              [12.721]                [16.104]               [0.051]                [0.499]                [0.219]                    [0.456]

      No Last 2 Minutes of 4th Qtr. (N=1970689)                    0.048***              -18.672***              1.558***               0.068***               0.009***               0.022***               0.052***                    -0.001
                                                                    (0.001)                (0.555)                (0.021)                (0.016)                (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.213]               [218.714]              [12.488]               [15.878]                [0.050]                [0.500]                [0.212]                   [0.459]

      No Shots over 2 Minutes (N=1098415)                          0.072***               5.247***               2.240***               0.193***               0.005***               0.021***               0.048***                  -0.004***
                                                                    (0.002)                (0.099)                (0.029)                (0.022)                (0.000)                (0.001)                (0.001)                   (0.001)
                                                                    [0.388]               [57.656]               [12.181]               [15.614]                [0.040]                [0.493]                [0.230]                    [0.463]

      Players > 90th Pct. FG% (N=144,339)                          -0.034***              11.407***              1.041***               0.403***               0.003***               0.019***               0.045***                    -0.000
                                                                    (0.004)                (2.060)                (0.060)                (0.035)                (0.001)                (0.003)                (0.002)                   (0.003)
                                                                     [0.199]              [248.616]               [5.388]                [7.781]                [0.028]                [0.490]                [0.221]                   [0.575]

      Players < 10th Pct. FG% (N= 18,551)                          0.062***              -51.018***              1.626***                  -0.045               0.008**                0.017**               0.047***                  -0.049***
                                                                    (0.008)                (6.768)                (0.156)                 (0.171)               (0.004)                (0.008)                (0.007)                   (0.009)
                                                                    [0.191]               [303.579]              [16.136]                [19.362]               [0.048]                [0.506]                [0.180]                    [0.316]
     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through 2016-2017 regular seasons. Columns (1) - (7) use the same specifications as Table IV, while Column (8) uses the
     specification from Column (6) of Table V. All controls are the same as in the relevant specifications in Table IV or Table V, except as indicated by the row description. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          : 5%, and   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :
     1%.
Table A3: Effects of Making Consecutive Free Throws on Probability of Making Next Free Throw
                       Not Controlling for Previous Shot Characteristics


                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)

             Made Prev. FT (Y/N)                   0.021***    0.022***     0.039***       0.024
                                                    (0.001)     (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.015)
             Made Prev. Two FTs (Y/N)                          0.037***     0.050***     0.040***
                                                                (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.013)
             Made Prev. Three FTs (Y/N)                                     0.056***     0.049***
                                                                             (0.007)      (0.012)
             Made Prev. Four FTs (Y/N)                                                   0.050***
                                                                                          (0.012)
             Dep. Var. Mean                         0.770        0.771        0.777        0.777
             Adjusted R-Squared                     0.046        0.047        0.048        0.049
             N                                     516,749      358,202      261,181      179,782

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The models here mimic those in Table VII, with the exception that they do not
control for lagged time-varying controls. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                       46
Table A4: Effects of Consecutive Field Goals on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt
                       Not Controlling for Previous Shot Characteristics


                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)

           Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                    -0.002**       0.000         -0.000       -0.001
                                                   (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)
           Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)                            -0.003***     -0.003**       -0.002
                                                                (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.002)
           Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N)                                       -0.007***     -0.008***
                                                                              (0.002)      (0.002)
           Made Prev. Four FGs (Y/N)                                                      -0.009***
                                                                                           (0.002)
           Dep. Var. Mean                          0.457         0.456        0.456          0.455
           Adjusted R-Squared                      0.080         0.080        0.080          0.079
           N                                     2,074,501     1,812,115    1,569,280     1,346,943

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The models here mimic those in Table IX, with the exception that they do not
control for lagged time-varying controls. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                       47
                     Table A5: Summary Statistics for Field Goals Sample
             2013-2014 and 2014-2015 Seasons with Additional Shot Characteristics

                                            All Shots             Made Prev. FG      Missed Prev. FG
       Variable                         Mean      Std.Dev        Mean      Std.Dev   Mean      Std.Dev

 Previous Shot Made (Y/N)                0.459       0.498
 Shot Made (Y/N)                         0.453       0.498         0.449     0.497     0.458     0.498
 Shot Distance (Ft.)                    12.742       9.932        13.130     9.854    12.413     9.986
 Defender Distance (Ft.)                 4.141       2.760         4.169     2.699     4.118     2.812
 Time b/t Player Shots (Sec.)          222.402     292.235       211.103   277.650   231.994   303.739
 Player Took Prev. Shot (Y/N)            0.213       0.409         0.240     0.427     0.190     0.392
 Assist on Next Shot                     0.051       0.220         0.055     0.228     0.047     0.213
 New Defender (Y/N                       0.729       0.445         0.737     0.440     0.722     0.448
 Sub w/in Two Min                        0.506       0.500         0.519     0.500     0.494     0.500
 Timeout w/in Two Min                    0.235       0.424         0.267     0.443     0.207     0.405
 Play Length (Sec.)                     12.558       6.673        12.839     6.493    12.320     6.813
 Num. Dribbles                           2.022       3.493         2.067     3.558     1.984     3.436
 Touch Time (Sec.)                       2.726       3.025         2.792     3.076     2.670     2.979

 N                                     353,948                   162,517             191,431
Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com, http://www.nbasavant.com, and http://www.basketball-
reference.com for the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 regular seasons.




                                                      48
                   Table A6: Changes in Offensive Performance in Response to Consecutively Made Field Goals
                                                          Teammate's Performance if a Teammate Takes Next Shot
                                                                                                                Prob Make                          Player's       Team's
                                                                                 Prob.
                                             Shot            Defender                          Prob Make         Shot (w/                         Points on      Points on
                                                                                3-Point                                                 Points
                                            Distance         Distance                             Shot            Shot &                          His Next       Their Next
                                                                                 Shot
                                                                                                                Def. Dist.)                         Shot           Shot

      Previous Shot Made (Y/N)              0.668***         0.333***          0.014***           0.001          0.006***                0.008    -0.032***      -0.014***
                                             (0.041)          (0.010)           (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)               (0.005)    (0.004)        (0.004)

      Dep. Var. Mean                          12.715           4.173            0.261             0.454               0.454              1.001     1.000            1.000
      Adjusted R-Squared                      0.204            0.317            0.197             0.011               0.031              0.006     0.004            0.002
      N                                      256,961          256,961          257,007           257,007             256,959            257,007   353,926          325,821
     Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com, http://www.nbasavant.com, and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 regular
     seasons. With a few exceptions, the specifications are the same as those in the first row of Table XIII. First, we add an additional dependent variable regarding defender
     responses: the distance between the defender and shooter if the team's next shot is taken by a teammate. Second, given the limited number of seasons, we replace player
49




     by season and teammate by season fixed effects with player, season and teammate fixed effects, and shot type by season indicators with shot type indicators. Third, the
     models also include additional shot characteristics for the previous shot (the number of dribbles the player took and touch time prior to the shot) and opposing defender
     (defender distance from the shooting player in feet (and its square), and the height and weight difference between the shooting and defensive player and their interactions
     with defender distance). Fourth, we include the shot distance and its square as independent variables when the dependent variable is defender distance, and additionally
     include defender distance and its square in Column (5). Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,   
                                                                                                                        : 5%, and   
                                                                                                                                       : 1%.
B      Results Using Player Fixed Effects

  Table B1: Effects of Making Previous Free Throw on Probability of Making Next Free Throw

                                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)

  Made Prev. Free Throw            0.061***      0.055***     0.040***      0.041***      0.008***      0.008***     0.016***
                                    (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)

  Dep. Var. Mean                     0.770        0.770         0.770         0.770         0.770        0.770         0.781
  Adjusted R-Squared                 0.004        0.009         0.024         0.026         0.054        0.054         0.056
  N                                 516,699      516,699       516,699       516,699       516,699      516,699       306,511
  Game Controls                                     X             X             X             X            X             X
  Player Controls                                                 X             X
  Shot Controls                                                                 X             X             X             X
  Player FE                                                                                   X             X             X
  Lag Controls                                                                                              X
  2nd & 3rd FTs Only                                                                                                      X

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through 2016-
2017 regular seasons. The models here mimic the models in Table III, except that we replace player characteristics and the
leave-out free throw percentages with player by season fixed effects. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%,
and  : 1%.




                                                               50
  Table B2: Effects of a Previous Field Goal on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt


                                            (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

  Previous Shot Made (Y/N)              -0.006***      -0.008***       -0.011***        -0.001       -0.036***      -0.038***
                                         (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)

  Dep. Var. Mean                          0.457          0.457           0.457          0.457          0.457          0.457
  Adjusted R-Squared                      0.000          0.003           0.006          0.079          0.113          0.113
  N                                     2,074,501      2,074,501       2,074,501      2,074,501      2,074,501      2,074,501
  Game Controls                                            X               X              X              X              X
  Player Controls                                                          X              X
  Shot Controls                                                                           X               X              X
  Player/Season FE                                                                                        X              X
  Lag Controls                                                                                                           X

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006 through 2016-
2017 regular seasons. The models here mimic the models in Table V, except that we replace player characteristics and the
leave-out field goal percentages with player by season fixed effects. Stars denote statistical significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%,
and  : 1%.




                                                               51
Table B3: Effects of Making Consecutive Free Throws on Probability of Making Next Free Throw


                                                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)

                Made Prev. FT (Y/N)                    0.008***      0.003      0.018**      -0.003
                                                        (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.007)     (0.015)
                Made Prev. Two FTs (Y/N)                            0.008**     0.016**     -0.005
                                                                    (0.003)     (0.007)     (0.013)
                Made Prev. Three FTs (Y/N)                                      0.016**     -0.005
                                                                                (0.007)     (0.013)
                Made Prev. Four FTs (Y/N)                                                   -0.009
                                                                                            (0.012)
                Dep. Var. Mean                           0.770       0.771       0.777        0.777
                Adjusted R-Squared                       0.054       0.054       0.055       0.057
                N                                       516,699     358,083     260,779     179,536

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The models here mimic the models in Table VII, except that we replace player
characteristics and the leave-out free throw percentages with player by season fixed effects. Stars denote statistical
significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                         52
Table B4: Effects of Consecutive Field Goals on Probability of Making Next Field Goal Attempt


                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)

            Made Prev. FG (Y/N)                    -0.038***      -0.041***     -0.046***     -0.051***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)
            Made Prev. Two FGs (Y/N)                              -0.082***     -0.091***     -0.099***
                                                                   (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.004)
            Made Prev. Three FGs (Y/N)                                          -0.135***     -0.150***
                                                                                 (0.006)       (0.006)
            Made Prev. Four FGs (Y/N)                                                         -0.193***
                                                                                               (0.008)
            Dep. Var. Mean                           0.457          0.456         0.456         0.455
            Adjusted R-Squared                       0.113          0.116         0.118         0.121
            N                                      2,074,501      1,811,757     1,568,672     1,346,178

Notes: Data from http://www.bigdataball.com and http://www.basketball-reference.com for the 2005-2006
through 2016-2017 regular seasons. The models here mimic the models in Table IX, except that we replace player
characteristics and the leave-out field goal percentages with player by season fixed effects. Stars denote statistical
significance levels:  : 10%,  : 5%, and  : 1%.




                                                         53
