                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE SURPRISING HYBRID PEDIGREE OF MEASURES OF DIVERSITY AND
                       ECONOMIC CONCENTRATION

                                       Paolo M. Adajar
                                       Ernst R. Berndt
                                        Rena M. Conti

                                      Working Paper 26512
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26512


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019




Mr. Adajar is an undergraduate mathematical economics major at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Mr. Berndt is Professor Emeritus at the MIT Sloan School of Management
and Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and Ms. Conti is
Associate Professor at the Boston University Questrom School of Business. We have benefited
from comments on an earlier draft by Richard Schmalensee, Dan Sichel, Tim Simcoe, Chad
Syverson, Michael Whinston and Alje van Dam, but we are responsible for any opinions and
views expressed here. This research has not been sponsored. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Paolo M. Adajar, Ernst R. Berndt, and Rena M. Conti. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Surprising Hybrid Pedigree of Measures of Diversity and Economic Concentration
Paolo M. Adajar, Ernst R. Berndt, and Rena M. Conti
NBER Working Paper No. 26512
November 2019
JEL No. B4,C43,D22,D4,I1,K21,L1,L4,L5

                                         ABSTRACT

Measures of economic concentration, such as the k-firm concentration index and the Hirschman-
Herfindahl Index (HHI) are commonly used to ascertain the competitiveness of a product market.
Within a Cournot model industry equilibrium, it is known a relationship exists between the HHI
and the gap between industry price and marginal cost, but the economic theory foundations and
intuition underlying the HHI formula are seemingly arbitrary. Here we document that there are
indeed powerful and intuitive theoretical foundations to the HHI, but those foundations emanate
from outside economics, namely, ecology, where the HHI is known as Simpson's Diversity
Index. We discuss the origins of the HHI and Simpson's Diversity Index, summarize other
measures of concentration, and link them to common measures of inequality. Based on a priori
reasoning, we conclude there is little on which to base a choice between the HHI and non-HHI
measures of market concentration. We empirically illustrate the implementation of the HHI and
other concentration indexes as the statin drug LipitorTM lost patent protection and faced generic
competition in 2012; we find very similar empirical trends and high correlations among them.
Our research provides support for the continued use of HHI as a measure of concentration,
provided one recognizes its link to market power is equivocal.

Paolo M. Adajar                                 Rena M. Conti
MIT Department of Economics                     Boston University
50 Memorial Drive                               Questrom School of Business
Cambridge, MA 02142                             Department of Markets, Public Policy and Law
United States                                   595 Commonwealth Ave
padajar@mit.edu                                 Boston, MA 02215
                                                rconti@bu.edu
Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-533
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu
 


                             Hybrid n. [L. hybrid, offspring of mixed parentage]. 1. the offspring produced by   
                             crossing two individuals of unlike genetic constitution; specif., the offspring of two  
                             animals or plants of different races, varieties, species, etc. 

                             Pedigree n. [ME. pedigru, p de gre < MFr/pie de grue, lit., crane's foot < L. pes, FOOT +  
                             grus, a crane: from the lines in the genealogical tree] 1. a list of ancestors; record of  
                             ancestry; family tree 

                                                                    Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language,  
                                                                    New York: The World Publishing Company, 1970 

                                                                  * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 


       I.             INTRODUCTION 

              Students of industrial organization have long believed that market structure, market behavior 

and various market performance outcomes are interrelated phenomena, albeit with causality 

relationships among them considerably more complex than the classical "structure, conduct and 

performance" paradigm.2  

              One strand in the industrial organization literature has focused on characterizing and then using 

measures of market structure to ascertain how noncompetitive is the industry, regardless of whether 

the extent of noncompetitiveness is exogenous or endogenous. Since under competition price (P) 

equals marginal cost (MC); one way of evaluating any actual product market's departure from 

competition is to observe the size of the gap between P and MC. Specifically, when firms (with or 

without market power) choose output levels to maximize profits, Lerner [1934] showed that an index of 

market power is simply                                         1/ , where   is the firm's (negative) ownprice elasticity of demand.3 

In practice, it is often difficult to measure MC directly and accurately. The empirical literature commonly 


                                                            
2
   For a brief overview of the structure, conduct and performance paradigm, see Jean Tirole, The Theory of 
Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1988, "Introduction: Why Should One Be Interested in 
Industrial Organization?", pp. 13. 
3
   Abba P. Lerner, "The Concept of Monopoly and the Measurement of Monopoly Power", Review of Economic 
Studies, June 1934, 1:157175. 

                                                                                                                                    2 
 
addresses this challenge by reverse engineering the Lerner Index using econometric methods to 

estimate  and thereby indirectly estimate gaps between P and MC.4  

              Are there other methods by which to quantify indirectly the gap between P and MC? At least 

since Stigler [1964], it is known that under certain assumptions involving Cournot behavior among 

oligopolists selling a homogeneous product at price (P), in industry equilibrium there is a positive 

association between industry variable profits (i.e., industrywide P ­ MC) and a measure of industry 

concentration known as the HerfindahlHirschman (HHI) concentration index.5 However, for firms and 

industries in which sunk or fixed costs are substantial and marginal costs are low (such as with many 

contemporary digital and R&D intensive products), competition may force P to be equal to average total 

costs, even as the gap between P and MC is large, thereby rendering HHI a problematic metric of market 

power.6  

              In spite of this uncertainty, there is a long tradition in economics of characterizing market 

structure by defining and constructing measures of industry or market concentration, and implicitly or 

explicitly relating them to indicators of market power such as profits. Syverson, for example, asserts "In 

the recent macroeconomic market power literature, the most frequently used measure of market power 

is concentration".7 The most common measures are kfirm concentration ratios (typically for  = 4, 8, 20 



                                                            
4
   For recent examples, see Susanto Basu, "Are PriceCost Markups Rising in the United States? A Discussion of the 
Evidence", Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2019, 33(3):322; Chad Syverson, "Macroeconomics and 
Market Power: Context, Implications and Open Questions", Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2019, 
33(3):2343, and Steven Berry, Martin Gaynor, and Fiona Scott Morton, "Do Increasing Markups Matter? Lessons 
from Empirical Industrial Organization", Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2019, 33(3):4468.. 
5
   The proof of this relationship linking industry profitability to the HHI is essentially anticipated in George J. Stigler, 
"A Theory of Oligopoly", Journal of Political Economy [1964], 72(1), 4461, specifically on page 55. For related 
proofs and discussions, see inter alia, Jean M. Tirole [1988], op. cit., pp. 221223; F. M. Scherer and David Ross, 
Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, Third Edition, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company, 
1990, pp.7073; and Dennis W. Carlton and Jeffrey M. Perloff, Modern Industrial Organization, Fourth Edition, 
Boston, MA: Pearson Addison Wesley, 2005, Appendix 8A, p. 283.  
6
   See, for example, John Sutton, Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertising and the Evolution 
of Concentration, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991; and Berry, Gaynor and Scott Morton [2019], op. cit., especially 
pp. 5456. 
7
   Syverson [2019], op. cit., p. 25. 

                                                                                                                           3 
 
or 50 firms), or the HHI. Notably, the theoretical foundations of these measures of market concentration 

and their linkages to market power are limited, leaving use of concentration measures potentially 

vulnerable to Koopman's [1947] pointed criticism of the "the empirical approach" in his classic treatise, 

"Measurement Without Theory"8 ­ a critique that confounds antitrust enforcement issues to this day.9 

              Our contribution to this literature is that while we acknowledge continued ambiguity between 

measures of market concentration and market power, we show in this paper that there are indeed 

powerful and intuitive theoretical foundations to the widely used HHI metric of concentration which 

emerge from outside economics. Thus, to the extent one wants to measure concentration, there are 

good reasons for economists and other practitioners to continue to utilize the HHI metric. 

              Specifically, we argue that the characterization of stochastic outcome distributions is a common 

operation in many disciplines and fields other than economics. We document that the pedigree of the 

common HHI in economics involves a measure of diversity known in ecology as Simpson's Diversity 

Index. Moreover, Simpson's Diversity Index is likely to be appealing to economists because of its elegant 

and straightforward underlying probability intuition, thereby lending qualified support to the use of HHI 

in economics.  We discuss the origins of the HHI and Simpson's Diversity index, summarize other 

measures of concentration and link them to common measures of inequality. We note the existing 

economic literature on concentration reveals a preference for indexes that incorporate aspects of both 

variability/inequality and absolute population size over such measures as the Gini index that only 

incorporates relative inequality. Based on a priori reasoning, we conclude there is little on which to base 

a choice between HHI and nonHHI measures of market concentration. 




                                                            
8
   Tjalling Koopmans, "Measurement Without Theory", The Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1947, 
29(3):161172. 
9
   The summer 2019 issue of the Journal of Economic Perspectives (Vol. 33, No. 3) devotes a number of articles to 
the themes of measuring markups over marginal cost with implications for enforcement of antitrust statutes.  

                                                                                                                     4 
 
              Finally, we empirically illustrate the implementation of the HHI and other concentration indexes 

in the context of a product whose manufacturer first experienced market exclusivity though patent 

protection and thus enjoyed a gap between P and MC, and then when that protection expired, 

encountered substantial competition, which likely reduced the markups and profits that new entrants 

could earn. In particular, we examine the statin prescription drug LipitorTM (generic name atorvastatin), 

America's largest selling branded prescription drug earlier in this decade.  We find very similar empirical 

trends and high correlations among them.  Together, these considerations offer support and 

encouragement for the continued use of the HHI metric in measuring economic concentration, provided 

that users recognize that market structure as measured by concentration is only one of the various 

factors affecting market performance outcomes, and that market behavior and strategic considerations 

also play important roles.  

       II.            A SHORT HISTORY OF ECONOMIC CONCENTRATION DESCRIPTIVE MEASUREMENTS 

              Economists and other analysts of industrial organization have long used descriptive measures to 

depict and quantify industry concentration. One of the earliest and simplest descriptive metrics is the k

firm Concentration Ratio (CRk), defined as  


                                                                     ,                                    (Eqn. 1) 


where in an firm market,   is the ratio of the   firm's revenues (typically, its value of shipments) 

relative to that of revenues in the entire Nfirm market, and   is the set of   largest ranked firms in that 

market,    .10 Instead of revenue shares, some analysts have utilized unit or quantity shares 

(particularly when firms' quantities are measured in common units), or shares of output capacity, value 

added or employment. Historically, common choices for   have been 4, 8, 20 and 50.11 Virtues of CRk 


                                                            
10
    Issues concerning market definition remain controversial, and although they are discussed briefly below, they 
are beyond the scope of this research. 
11
    See, for example, F.M. Scherer and David Ross [1990], op. cit., pp. 7173. 

                                                                                                                     5 
 
include its simplicity, its ability to highlight concentration by focusing on the largest k firms, and its 

computational feasibility even in the presence of incomplete data about each firm in the particular N

firm market. Drawbacks of the CRk metric include its sensitivity to the arbitrary choice of k, and its 

inability to provide any additional potentially useful information concerning the distinct contributions 

among all firms sized between 1 and   and between             1 and . Moreover, its value is invariant to 

whether  is, say, 10 or 10,000 as long as the share sum of the k largest firms is identical. 


        Arguably the most common descriptive economic concentration metric that combines elements 

of both firm numbers and firm variability among all  firms is the socalled HerfindahlHirschman Index 

("HHI"), defined as 



                                                              .                                        (Eqn. 2) 


Note that unlike the CRk metric, HHI explicitly incorporates information from each of the  firms in the 

market. HHI ranges from 0 to 1 with larger values signaling markets with increased concentration. When 

an industry contains only one firm (i.e., a pure monopolist), HHI attains its maximum value of 1. By 

squaring market shares, the HHI weights more (less) heavily the values for larger (smaller) firms. As a 

result, an attractive feature of the HHI is that when data on shares of very small firms are unavailable, it 

can still be reasonably informative. However, because of the HHI's disproportionate weighting of large 

firms, it is crucial that the largest firms' shares be measured accurately. Moreover, the lower weight 

assigned to smaller firms in the HHI implies that if small firms play a critical role in disciplining larger 

firms' behavior (as may occur in some market segments), that market disciplining role may not be 

captured by the HHI concentration metric.            




                                                                                                                6 
 
              Defining lower case   as the deviation of uppercase  from its arithmetic mean, one can 

rewrite HHI as12  


                                                                                        1
                                                                                          .                              (Eqn. 3) 
                                                                                        

Hence, given firms' variability (measured as the sum of squared deviations from the arithmetic mean), 

the value of HHI declines with increases in the number of firms , but increases with rising variability 

among any given number of firms .13 Consequently, the HHI captures two dimensions of concentration 

­ the variation between firms, and the absolute number of firms in an industry. According to Hirschman 

"...the use of the index is indicated when concentration is a function of both unequal distribution and 

fewness.14 Other measures of concentration, generally devised in connection with income distribution 

and the Lorenz curve, instead focus entirely on relative shares and inequality of distribution rather than 

on fewness and the possible disciplining of large by small firms (more on this in Section IV below where 

we discuss the Gini coefficient).  


              A particularly interesting counterfactual interpretation of (Eqn. 3) was introduced by Adelman 

[1969].15 Suppose all firms were equal in size with market share   so that all  in (Eqn. 3) were zero. In 

that perfect equality scenario,                                1/ in (Eqn. 3) ­ i.e., in that case HHI collapses to 1/, and it 

only captures the number of firms in an industry. For a given HHI, therefore, Adelman defined the 

"numbers equivalent"   in the market as the number of equally sized firms that would generate the 

same HHI, i.e.,  


                                                            
12
    Ibid, fn. 45, p. 73. 
13
    Rosenbluth [1955] has noted that the HHI can also be rewritten as        1 / where   is the coefficient of 
variation, i.e.   standard deviation/mean. See Gideon Rosenbluth, "Measures of Concentration", in Business 
Concentration and Price Policy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1955, fn. 16a, p. 62. 
14
    Albert O. Hirschman, "The Paternity of an Index", American Economic Review, 1964, 54(5): 761. Italics in original 
text. 
15
    Morris A. Adelman. "Comment on the `H' Concentration Measure as a NumbersEquivalent", Review of 
Economics and Statistics, 1969, 51(1):99101. 

                                                                                                                                  7 
 
                                                                  1
                                                                    .                                      (Eqn. 4) 
                                                                  

              The HHI has come to play a prominent role in public policy evaluations, particularly involving 

possible antitrust scrutiny of mergers and acquisitions.16 Because it squares market share, the HHI 

weights large firms more highly than smaller ones, thereby taking inequality into account. However, as 

noted by Scherer [1990, op. cit., fn. 46, p. 73], the choice of squared terms appears arbitrary, asserting, 

"There is no a priori reason why the weighting scheme need be quadratic, as with the HHI index."  


              Although the sum of squared shares formulation of the HHI may appear to be arbitrary, as noted 

in the Introduction, under certain assumptions it can be shown that in an oligopoly, the HHI is related to 

firms' pricecost margins. Specifically, assume an oligopoly consisting of  firms producing a 

homogeneous product having a common unit price  for all firms. If each firm   chooses its profit

maximizing output   assuming that all other firms                      will not change their choice of profit

maximizing output levels    what the economic literature terms a Cournot model then it can be 

shown that in equilibrium where no profitmaximizing firm faces incentives to change its output 

quantity, industrywide (variable) profits  can be written as  




                                                            
16
   In public policy applications, typically the   shares (0      1) shares are multiplied by 100 so that they are 
expressed in terms of percentage points (between 0 and 100), implying that the "augmented" HHI metric ranges 
between 0 and 10,000. Legend has it that this multiplicative transformation of the HHI occurred after Department 
of Justice antitrust officials expressed frustration when attempting to square fractions. According to the 1982 US 
Department of Justice horizontal merger guidelines (https://www.justice.gov/atr/herfindahlhirschmanindex), 
mergers in markets with premerger HHIs above 1800 and involving an HHI increase of greater than 50 will likely 
involve close scrutiny and possibly a merger challenge by the Department of Justice or the Federal Trade 
Commission. Note that with an HHI of 1800 or 1850, the numbersequivalent is between 5.4 and 5.6 equalsized 
firms. For further discussion, see Dennis W. Carlton and Jeffrey M. Perloff, [2005], op. cit., p. 645; and Michael 
Whinston, "Antitrust Policy Toward Horizontal Mergers", ch. 36 in Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter, eds., 
Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: North Holland Elsevier, 2007, 23692440. These 1982 
guidelines were updated in 2010, so that mergers that increased HHI by more than 200 points and resulted in a 
postmerger HHI of > 2500 would be "presumed to be likely to enhance market power". See 
https://www.justice.gov/atr/file/810276/download. Note that with an HHI of 2500, the numbersequivalent is 4.0.  

                                                                                                                   8 
 
                                                                                      
                                                                                         
                                                                                      


implying that 


                                                                           ,                                    (Eqn. 5) 


where   is the marginal cost for firm  ,   is the absolute value of the market price elasticity of demand, 

and in the derivation the  share terms in HHI are quantity shares, where    / and     .17 

Thus, under certain assumptions within a Cournot oligopoly framework, in equilibrium the HHI equals 

the product of the (variable) profit share in industry revenues times the absolute value of the market 

price elasticity of demand, thereby linking industry (variable) profitability shares directly and positively 

to the HHI.18 Intuitively, when the variable profit share increases, firms are able to extract more profits 

from their revenues, thereby manifesting greater market power.  


              As an historical aside, we note the HHI was apparently first introduced by Albert O. Hirschman 

[1945] to analyze the composition of the United States' balance in foreign trade accounts; his analysis 

actually examined the square root of HHI.19 When writing his Columbia University Ph.D. dissertation 

several years later and unaware of Hirschman's original contribution, Orris C. Herfindahl [1950] 

independently created the HHI, using it to analyze empirically the U.S. steel industry.20 Gideon 



                                                            
17
    As noted above, the proof of this relationship linking industry profitability to the HHI is essentially anticipated in 
George J. Stigler, "A Theory of Oligopoly", Journal of Political Economy [1964], 72(1), 4461, specifically on page 55. 
For related proofs and discussions, see inter alia, Jean M. Tirole [1988], op. cit., pp. 221223; F. M. Scherer and 
David Ross [1990], op. cit., pp.7073; and Dennis W. Carlton and Jeffrey M. Perloff [2005], op. cit. Appendix 8A, p. 
283. Also note that the derivation of Eqn. 5 assumes a common output price P for all firms, so that quantity shares 
are identical to revenue shares. 
18
    Note that variable profits depend on marginal rather than average costs, and that the HHIprofitability 
relationship is uninformative with respect to fixed and sunk costs. For discussion, see Sutton [1991], op. cit. 
19
    Albert O. Hirschman, National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1945, ch. 7 and pp. 157162. 
20
    Orris C. Herfindahl, Concentration in the Steel industry, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of 
Economics, Columbia University, 1950. 

                                                                                                                         9 
 
Rosenbluth [1955], a fellow Columbia economics Ph.D. student with Herfindahl, erroneously attributed 

the original HHI development to Herfindahl [1950].21 Both Rosenbluth [1961]22 and Hirschman [1964]23 

attempted repeatedly but unsuccessfully to rectify the historical record, and today the HHI is typically 

called the "HerfindahlHirschman Concentration Index" (in alphabetical rather than chronological 

order)24, although Adelman [1969] respectfully and neutrally designated it as the "H" concentration 

measure. In a bit of a pique, Hirschman has summarized the paternity of his "hybrid" inequality and 

fewness index as follows: "The net result is that my index is named after Gini who did not invent it at all 

or after Herfindahl who reinvented it. Well, it's a cruel world."25   


              Although under certain assumptions one can derive a relationship between industry profitability 

and the industry HHI as in Eqn. 5, the seemingly arbitrary functional form of the HHI where shares are 

squared and summed raises the issue of whether more intuitive microeconomic conceptual foundations 

can be identified that yield the HHI formulation.26 As we now document, this intuition comes from the 

usage of HHI outside economics and instead in ecology/biology. 




                                                            
21
    Gideon Rosenbluth, "Measures of Concentration", in Business Concentration and Price Policy, Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1955, 5799.  
22
    Gideon Rosenbluth, "Round Table Gesprach uber Messung der industriellen Konzentration". Die Konzentration in 
der Wirtschaft; Verhandlungen auf der Tagung des Vereins fur Socialpolitik, Gesellschaft fur Wirtschafts und 
Sozialwissenschaften, in Bad Kissingen. Berlin: Duncher & Humblot, 1960, 391395. 
23
    Albert O. Hirschman, "The Paternity of an Index", American Economic Review, 1964, 54(5).  
24
    HerfindahlHirschman (HHI) indexes for U.S. manufacturing industries based on U.S. Census of Manufacturers 
data for 1947, 1954, and 1957 were published in Ralph L. Nelson, Concentration in the Manufacturing Industries of 
the United States, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1963, pp. 1719 and have been published in regular U.S. 
Census Bureau publications since then. For Canada, early HHI calculations were published in Department of 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs, Concentration in the Manufacturing Industries of Canada, Ottawa: Information 
Canada, 1971, Table A1. 
25
    Hirschman [1964], op. cit., p. 761. 
26
    Adelman [1969], op. cit., p. 100, interpreted the HHI as the weighted average slope of the cumulative 
concentration curve ­ an alternative description having no behavioral foundations. Hall and Tideman [1967] have 
shown that the HHI is consistent with axioms they believe concentration metrics should possess. But since other 
indexes are also consistent with their axioms, they argue there is no best measure of concentration, and in any 
case they provide no behavioral foundations that generate a concentration index. See Marshall Hall and Nicolaus 
Tideman, "Measures of Concentration", Journal of the American Statistical Association, March 1967, 62(317):162
168.  

                                                                                                              10 
 
       III.      FROM BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY TO ECONOMIC CONCENTRATION: SIMPSON'S DIVERSITY 
                 INDEX  
                  
              There is a long tradition of measuring variety, diversity and fewness in biology. The two main 

characteristics typically considered when measuring fewness and diversity are richness and evenness. 

Richness is a measure of the number of different kinds of organisms or species present in a particular 

sample geographical habitat, i.e. fewness. However, diversity depends not only on richness, but also on 

evenness; evenness compares the similarity of the population size of each of the species present, i.e., 

equality in relative shares.  

              As a measure on its own, species richness is unaffected by the number of individuals of each 

species present. For example, one daisy has as much influence on the richness of a geographic sample as 

1000 buttercups.27 Evenness is a measure of the relative abundance of the different species making up 

the richness of the geographic sample habitat, the equality of relative shares. 

              For example, consider two sample geographic habitats each containing 1000 organisms but only 

three distinct species, say, daisies, dandelions, and buttercups. Sample habitat 1 consists of 300 daisies, 

335 dandelions, and 365 buttercups. Sample habitat 2 has 20 daisies, 49 dandelions, and 931 

buttercups. Both habitat samples have the same richness (3 species) and the same total number of 

organisms (1000). Sample habitat 1 has more evenness than sample habitat 2, because the total number 

of organisms in sample habitat 1 is quite evenly distributed between the three species, i.e., relative 

shares are roughly equal. In habitat 2, most of the organisms are buttercups, with only a few daisies and 

dandelions present. Sample habitat 2 is therefore considered to be less diverse than sample habitat 1. 

More generally, in ecology a habitat dominated by one or two species is considered to be less diverse 

(more concentrated) than one in which several different species have a similar abundance. 




                                                            
27
  The numerical example that follows is taken from "Simpson's Diversity Index", available online at 
http://www.countrysideinfo.co.uk/simpsons.htm, last accessed May 4, 2018. 

                                                                                                                11 
 
              In 1949, Edward H. Simpson, a Christ College, Cambridgeeducated mathematical statistician 

published a brief onepage note in Nature entitled "The Measurement of Diversity".28 Like the HHI, 

Simpson's proposed construct combined aspects of richness and evenness into a single metric. It was 

also appealing owing to its being elegant and straightforward in its underlying probability intuition. 

Today, the measure is known as Simpson's Diversity Index.  

              Remarkably, Simpson's Diversity Index is also analytically identical to the HHI index of economic 

concentration.29 Formally, let  be the number of distinct species in the habitat, and let   be the total 

number of organisms over all the  species in the particular habitat.  Here note, defining the number of 

species in a habitat in ecology raises issues analogous to defining product markets in economics.30 

Suppose a sample of  individuals is chosen at random from a population   of this kind, and we 

observe   organisms of each species  . What is the probability that two individual organisms chosen at 

random and independently from the population will be found to belong to the same species? From 

combinatorics, we know that the number of all pairs in the sample is 1/2                            1 , and the number of 

pairs drawn from the same species is                                  1 . Thus, it follows that the probability that two 

individual organisms chosen at random and independently from the population will be found to belong 

to the same species is  


                                                                            1
                                                                              .                                    (Eqn. 6) 
                                                                            1



                                                            
28
    Edward H. Simpson, "The Measurement of Diversity", Nature, Vol. 163, April 30, 1949, p. 688. Simpson later 
gained fame as a cryptanalyst of Alan Turing's Banburismus codebreaking process developed during World War II. 
29
    The subsequent ecology literature has expanded the decomposition of diversity into variety, balance and 
disparity components. See, for example, Mark O. Hill, "Diversity and Evenness: A Unifying Notation and Its 
Consequences", Ecology, March 1973, 54(2):427432, 
https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.23071934352; Lou Jost, "Entropy and Diversity", Oikos, May 
2006;, 113(2):36337j5, https://onlinelibrary..wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2006.00301299.14714.x; and Alje van 
Dam, "Diversity and its decomposition into variety, balance and disparity", Royal Society Open Science, July 2019, 
6(7), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsos.190452. 
30
    See, for example, Hill [1973], op. cit., Jost [2006], op. cit., and van Dam [2009], op. cit. 

                                                                                                                            12 
 
 

When p and P are large numbers,  


                                                                  
                                                                          .                             (Eqn. 7) 
                                                                  

              The probability foundations of Simpson's Diversity Index provide attractive intuition for the HHI. 

Paradoxically, however, while Simpson's Diversity Index increases within its range from 0 to 1, over the 

same range the economic concentration metric increases as it approaches 1. This is because the 

economic interpretation of  in (Eqn. 7), analogous to its probability foundation in ecology, is what is 

the probability of two products randomly and independently selected in a given product market being 

sold/produced by the same manufacturer? Ecology texts therefore define Simpson's Diversity Index as 

1      , and interpret it as "the probability that two individuals randomly selected from a sample will 

belong to different species."31  


              Regarding the seemingly arbitrary squared or quadratic share term in the HHI, based on the 

probability interpretation provided by Simpson's Diversity Index, we observe that it derives from the 

following thought experiment explained by Simpson: What is the probability of a pair of randomly and 

independently chosen individuals/products belonging to the same species/manufacturer? Presumably, if 

instead of the probability of a pair the thought experiment involved the probability of a triplet of 

randomly and independently chosen individuals/products belonging to the same species/manufacturer, 

the HHI/Simpson expression would involve a third order term.32  


       IV.            GENERALIZATIONS OF AND ALTERNATIVES TO THE HERFINDAHLHIRSCHMAN AND 

                      SIMPSON'S DIVERSITY INDICES 

                                                            
31
    "Simpson's Diversity Index", available online at http://www.countrysideinfo.co.uk/simpsons.htm, last accessed 
May 4, 2018. Others define the diversity measures as 1/, which has, however, a much different numerical range. 
32
    More complex thought experiments for HHI/Simpson diversity expressions involving ntuples are of course 
possible as well. 

                                                                                                               13 
 
              Numerous other measures of industry concentration have been proposed and implemented in 

the economics and related literatures. The HannahKay index (HK) is a generalized form of the HHI 

discussed above, and allows the analyst to weight the share components of the HHI to be more sensitive 

to firms with larger or smaller shares.33 HK is calculated in terms of a parameter  where               0 but     1. 

Specifically,  



                                                                                  .                       (Eqn. 8) 


When                  2, the HK takes on 1/  as a special case. As   0, HK tends toward , while as   , 

HK tends toward 1/  ­ the reciprocal of the largest firm's share. As  decreases, smaller firms are 

weighted more highly, and as  increases, larger firms are weighted more heavily. This allows the 

analyst to apply differential weights to firms of different sizes, which may be particularly relevant in 

markets where small firms are thought to discipline large firms. For HK, the numbersequivalent is 

simply the index, i.e.,                                         .  

              The HK index has additional links in economics and ecology through Shannon's Diversity Index,34 

and specifically through the concept of entropy.35 The concept of information entropy has its roots in 

physics. However, as a measure of concentration, entropy has its foundations in information theory, 

where it describes the frequency of characters in a data stream. 36 The underlying intuition is that if one 

observes a rarer character in a data stream, one is more surprised to observe it precisely because it is 

                                                            
33
    Leslie Hannah and J.A. Kay, Concentration in Modern Industry: Theory, Measurement, and the U.K. Experience, 
London, Macmillan, 1977. 
34
    For discussion, see the review by H. G. Washington, "Diversity, biotic and similarity indexes: A review with 
special relevance to aquatic ecosystems", Water Research 1984, 18(6):653694. 
35
    Henri Theil, Principles of Econometrics, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1971, pp. 639641, 644, 662. For an early 
application in economics, see Michael O. Finkelstein and Richard M. Friedberg, "The Application of an Entropy 
Theory of Concentration to the Clayton Act", Yale Law Journal, 1967, 76(2):677717. Also see P. E. Hart, "Entropy 
and Other Measures of Concentration", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (General), 1971, 134(1):73
85. 
36
    Wikipedia, "Entropy (information theory)", last edited April 2, 2019. Available online at 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy_(information_theory), last accessed May 4, 2019. 

                                                                                                                  14 
 
rare. "Information content" and "surprisal" are technical terms used throughout the information theory 

literature to measure rareness, which is quantified as ­ ln  , where   is the relative frequency of a 

character. Entropy is simply calculated as the weighted average of information contents across all 

observations, i.e.,  



                                                                            ln  .                                  (Eqn. 9) 


              Applied to economics, entropy measures how much information content about a market is 

gained by observing the firm that sells a random product in the marketplace.37 Interestingly, the entropy 

measure in Eqn. 9 can be derived by taking the limit of the HK index as  approaches 1, since 

lim                        .38 Therefore, entropy as a measure of concentration need not rely on foundations from 
    


information theory. Specifically, by setting                       1, entropy weights all species (or, in economics, firms 

within a product market) by their frequency, without favoring either common or rare species.39 Given 

this equivalence, entropy ranges from 0 to ln , and the numbersequivalent of entropy is                                  . 

       V.             AN EXTENSION: USING THE INDEXES TO DISCRIMINATE AMONG CONCENTRATION, 

                      DIVERSITY AND INEQUALITY                                        

              An implication of the above discussion is that the HHI concentration measure can describe a 

very large number of possibly different situations involving varying combinations of inequality and 

population size. This insight raises the issue of whether concentration, diversity, variability and 

inequality are fundamentally distinct concepts, or could they be related to each other within an 

integrated conceptual framework. We begin to address this issue by focusing on inequality and the Gini 




                                                            
37
    Stefan Baumgartner, "Measuring the Diversity of What? And For What Purpose? A Conceptual Comparison of 
Ecological and Economic Biodiversity Indexes", 2006. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=894782 or 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.894782. 
38
    Mark O. Hill [1973], op. cit.  
39
    Lou Jost [2006], op. cit. 

                                                                                                                          15 
 
coefficient40, which in turn derives from the Lorenz curve41 that graphically portrays the distribution of 

income, output or wealth. As we shall see, this metric focuses only on relative shares, not absolute 

levels, nor on fewness or population size.                                    

              A. Inequality Measurement Using Lorenz Curves and Gini Coefficients   

              Consider a twodimensional graph known as the Lorenz curve, displayed in Figure 1 below.42 On 

the horizontal axis is the cumulative portion of the total population (of firms, or households), from zero 

percent at the origin to 1 (100 percent) at the furthest point to the right. For each firm or household, 

there is some nonnegative measure of output, income or wealth, and with firms ordered from left to 

right in order of increasing wealth. The vertical axis represents the corresponding cumulative portion of 

total output, income or wealth. Thus, the Lorenz curve plots cumulative portion of total output, income 

or wealth against the percentage of total output, income or wealth achieved by the bottom x percent of 

the population; neither axis reflects absolute amounts.  

              If the distribution of output, income or wealth were perfectly equal, everyone would have the 

same amount of output, income or wealth. In such a case the bottom b percent of the population would 

always have b percent of the cumulative output, income or wealth, and the Lorenz curve would be a 45

degree diagonal straight line on which                          , called a "line of perfect equality".  

              Now consider a perfectly unequal distribution in which one person or firm had all the output, 

income or wealth, and everyone else had none. In that case, the Lorenz curve would consist of a straight 




                                                            
40
    Corrado Gini, "Variability and Mutability" (Italian: "Variabilita e mutabilita"), Contributo allo Studio delle 
Distribuzioni e delle Relazioni Statistiche. C. Cuppini, Bologna, 1912.  
41
    Max O. Lorenz, "Method of measuring the concentration of wealth", Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, June1905, 9(70):209219. 
42
    The left panel in Figure 1 is similar to that in Wikipedia, "Gini Coefficient", available online at 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gini_coefficient, page 2 of 11, last accessed March 1, 2019. Also see Wikipedia, 
"Lorenz curve", available online at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorenz_curve#Explanation, last accessed May 3, 
2019. 

                                                                                                                 16 
 
line at             0% for all                  100%, and when             100% it would suddenly exhibit a right angle perfectly 

vertical straight line to                         100%. Call this the "line of perfect inequality".  


                                                                                    Figure 1: 

                                                                                    Gini Coefficient = Area between Line of 
                                                                                    Perfect Equality and Lorenz Curve divided by 
                                                                                    area of the entire triangle, which equals the 
                                                                                    area between Line of Equality and the Line of 
                                                                                    Perfect Inequality. The area of the entire 
                                                                                    triangle is           0.5. Thus the Gini 
                                                                                    Coefficient = /               2       1 ­ 2 .  



                                                                            

              As seen in Figure 1, the Gini coefficient is the ratio of the area between the line of perfect 

equality and the observed Lorenz curve (area ) to the area between the line of perfect equality and the 

line of perfect inequality (areas                               ), i.e. Gini = /       .43 The greater the Gini coefficient, the 

more unequal is the distribution of output, income, or wealth. Since both the horizontal and vertical 

axes scale from zero to one, the area of the triangle                                         0.5 (base times height) = 0.5 (1 times 

1) = 0.5, implying that the Gini coefficient is also equal to 2 and to  1 ­ 2 .  

              There are many studies estimating income inequality across the globe. For example, the Gini 

coefficient income distribution averages for the total population in OECD countries in 20082009 have 

been estimated to range between 0.34 and 0.53 on a pretax basis, and between 0.25 and 0.48 on a 

disposable income basis (posttaxes and transfers), implying that taxes and transfers can mitigate 




                                                            
43
   The left panel in Figure 1 is similar to that in Wikipedia, "Gini Coefficient", available online at 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gini_coefficient, page 2 of 11, last accessed March 1, 2019. Also see Wikipedia, 
"Lorenz curve", available online at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorenz_curve#Explanation, last accessed May 3, 
2019. 

                                                                                                                                    17 
 
inequality. For the U.S., the pretax and disposable income distribution Gini coefficients in 20082009 

were estimated at 0.49 and 0.38.44 

              Although economists have long used Lorenz curves and Gini coefficients to measure inequality 

of income, wealth or consumption, and in consumer finance to measure, say, the actual y percent of 

delinquencies that are attributable to the x percent of people with the worst risk scores, the LorenzGini 

concepts are also useful in very different contexts whenever one seeks to study inequality in a 

distribution. Examples include inequality in health related quality of life, measuring the inequality of 

universities, the selectivity of protein kinase inhibitors against a panel of kinases, evaluating the fairness 

achieved by Internet routers in scheduling packet transmissions from different flows of traffic, 

describing inequality among the size of individuals in ecology, and in studies of biodiversity where the 

cumulative proportion of species is plotted against the cumulative share of organisms.45 One could even 

imagine using Lorenz curve and Gini coefficient analogs to describe the inequality of firms in a market, 

plotting firms' cumulative market share of outputs or revenues on a vertical axis and the cumulative 

percentile of firms, ordered from largest to smallest, on the horizontal axis.  

              However, it is worth noting that the Lorenz curve and the Gini coefficient as measures of 

concentration suffer from the defect they do not depend on the number of firms. The Gini coefficient of 

the Lorenz curve would not distinguish between a single firm industry and one with a thousand equal 

sized firms.46 If one believes that the absolute numbers of firms in an industry affect concentration ­ 

since that number reveals in part the nature of entry and exit conditions, with many firms suggesting 

easy entry, and few firms that entry is blockaded ­ then the Gini coefficient's neglect of fewness or 




                                                            
44
    Wikipedia, "Gini Coefficient", available online at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gini_coefficient, page 4 of 11, last 
accessed March 1, 2019.  
45
    For discussion and references, see Wikipedia, "Gini Coefficient", available online at 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gini_coefficient, page 8 of 11, last accessed March 1, 2019.  
46
    Hall and Tideman [1967], p. 164. 

                                                                                                                      18 
 
population size may make it less attractive as a measure of economic concentration.47 The next index we 

consider does not have this drawback.  

              B. LINKING CONCENTRATION MEASURES TO GINI COEFFICIENTS: ROSENBLUTH AND HALL

                      TIDEMAN  

              An alternative concentration measure that incorporates both number of firms and inequality 

was developed initially by Rosenbluth [1960] as a graphical extension to concentration curves, but was 

subsequently developed axiomatically by Hall and Tideman [1967].48 The Rosenbluth/HallTideman 

(RHT) index depends on the ordinal rank of a firm, and therefore on the absolute number of firms in a 

market. It is computed as  


                                                                       1
                                                                                                      (Eqn. 10) 
                                                                   2       1

where   is the ordinal ranking of the   firm, and where the   largest firm must be the   term in the 

summation. Note that the RHT index weights each firm by its rank, thus taking explicit account of the 

absolute number of firms. The RHT index ranges between 0 and 1, being close to 0 for an industry with 

an infinite number of equally sized firms, and reaching 1 in the case of a monopoly. Like the HHI, the 

RHT measure equals 1/ for an industry with  equally sized firms, and the numbers equivalent of the 

index equals 1/.49  

              Although not immediately obvious, the RHT metric is closely related to the Gini coefficient. 

Rosenbluth [1960] motivated the RHT index using a figure analogous to the Lorenz curve, but where the 

horizontal axis is the absolute number of firms, rather than firm percentile, ordered from largest to 


                                                            
47
    Ibid., p. 165. 
48
    Gideon Rosenbluth, "Round Table Gesprach uber Messung der industriellen Konzentration". Die Konzentration in 
der Wirtschaft; Verhandlungen auf der Tagung des Vereins fur Socialpolitik, Gesellschaft fur Wirtschafts und 
Sozialwissenschaften, in Bad Kissingen. Berlin: Duncher & Humblot, 1960, 391395; Marshall Hall and Nicolaus 
Tideman, "Measures of Concentration", Journal of the American Statistical Association 1967, 62(317):162168. 
49
    Jacob A. Bikker and Katharina Haaf, "Measures of Competition and Concentration in the Banking Industry: a 
Review of the Literature", Economics & Financial Modelling, Summer 2002, 145. See especially p. 10. 

                                                                                                              19 
 
smallest, rather than largest to smallest (see Figure 2 below). Following Rosenbluth [1960], define the 

area above the empirical concentration curve in Figure 2 as area K, and the area above the 45degree 

line but underneath the empirical concentration curve as area J. Note that since the horizontal axis in 

Figure 2 is the number of firms  (rather than the percentile) and firms are ordered from largest to 

smallest, Figure 2 is a horizontal scaling of Figure 1 after vertical and horizontal reflections. Thus, if we 

charted a Lorenz curve using data for the same market, we would have that             /. Rosenbluth 

[1960] then defined the RHT index of Eqn. 9 as the reciprocal of twice the area above the cumulative 

concentration curve, so that in Figure 2,            1/2, a geometric interpretation that is equivalent to 

the computation defined in Eqn. 10.  If we computed the Gini coefficient for this market, we would find 

 

                                                    Figure 2 




                                                                                 

that         2   1 ­ 2  as in Figure 1. Then, if we substitute in         / into          1 ­ 2  and 

rearrange, we obtain  1 ­           2 , so that  


                                       1       1
                                                 , where              Gini Index.                    (Eqn. 11) 
                                      2       1 

        Eqn. 11 makes clear the dependence of the RHT index on the number of firms  and the 

inequality in firm size  . Note that for a given value of relative inequality between firms  , RHT 


                                                                                                             20 
 
decreases with increases in , i.e., /                                             1/  1              0. Alternatively, for a given 

number of firms , the RHT concentration index increases as the Gini index of inequality increases, i.e., 

/                          1/  1                               0. 

              Although the intuition underlying Eqns. 10 and 11 may be less than obvious, if for example sales 

revenues are an appropriate measure of firm size in a given market, then   could be interpreted as a 

sample estimate of the probability that a firm of rank   will obtain a random dollar of sales, and in that 

case                is the expected value of that rank.  

              Hall and Tideman [1967] demonstrate that both the HHI and the RHT indexes satisfy six axioms 

they argue should be satisfied by measures of economic concentration, and while there may be many 

other measures that also satisfy their six axioms, the Gini coefficient does not. They report that if one 

rank orders the various CRk (for                                      for each industry), HHI and RHT concentration measures using 

the 1958 U.S. data for 446 Standard Industrial Classification fourdigit industries, the rank correlations 

between any pair are above 0.9, suggesting "that with respect to ordinal qualities there is scarcely any 

difference between the three measures", although in some cases the absolute ordinal ranking differed 

substantially: in 23 of the 446 industries the difference in rankings between RHT and HHI or RHT and CR 

was greater than 90.50  

              Regarding choice among the CR, HHI and RHT indexes, Hall and Tideman note first that with all 

three indexes, there is more than one distribution of firms that can generate a given value of the index, 

i.e., a particular value of the economic concentration index is not associated with a unique distribution 

of firms. Moreover, since their notion of concentration includes reference both to inequality and the 

number of firms in the industry, "under some situations the tradeoff between numbers and inequality 

would be such as to allow industries with different size distributions to be viewed as equally 




                                                            
50
      Hall and Tideman 1967, op. cit., p. 166. 

                                                                                                                                      21 
 
concentrated."51 Although they prefer the HHI and RHT measures to CR and Gini coefficients on a priori 

grounds since the former satisfy their six axioms while the latter do not, they do not recommend a 

choice between HHI and RHT. Rather, they view this as similar to the choice between various price index 

formulae, since  

                             "...the root of the problem...is the selection of an appropriate set of weights with which  
                             to combine the [shares]. The weighting problem here is similar to the weighting   
                             problems with any index number and as with index numbers there are no a priori  
                             reasons free of crucial assumptions which will allow us to say that a particular weighting  
                             scheme is best.  The properties set forth above [i.e., the six axioms] cannot uniquely  
                             determine the best measure of concentration but they do serve to delineate measures  
                             that are undesirable for theoretical reasons."52, 53  
 
              Hart [1971] compares the use of informationtheory based entropy (and redundancy ­ another 

metric based on observed entropy) as a measure of industry concentration to classical measures of 

statistical dispersion (e.g., arithmetic means, variances, variances of logarithms, geometric means) and 

what he calls ad hoc measures of concentration such as the concentration ratios or cumulative 

concentration curve.54 He concludes:  

                             "...when the number of firms is large enough to use statistical distribution theory, the  
                             classical statistical measures are superior to the entropy or the redundancy. When the  
                             number of firms is small, the entropy is superior to the redundancy, but both are  
                             inferior to the traditional measures of concentration derived from the cumulative  
                             concentration curve. Consequently, there is little point in using the information theory  
                             measures to measure business concentration."55 
 




                                                            
51
    Ibid. 
52
    Hall and Tideman [1967], op. cit., p. 164. Words in square brackets added. 
53
    We note in passing that since the HallTideman [1967] article was published, developments in index number 
theory involving the interpretation of index numbers as exact Taylor series' approximations to underlying distinct 
utility, indirect utility, cost and production functional forms imply that while the families of index number formulae 
satisfying certain approximation properties may be unique to specific functional forms, choice among alternative 
functional forms is typically not feasible based only on economic theory. On this, see, for example, W. Erwin 
Diewert, "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers", Journal of Econometrics 1976, 4:115145. 
54
    P. E. Hart, "Entropy and Other Measures of Concentration", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 
(General), 1971, 134(1):7385. 
55
    Ibid., p. 73. 

                                                                                                                     22 
 
              In summary, the existing economic literature favors use of the HHI and RHT metrics as measures 

of economic concentration. Hence, in the empirical analysis that follows, we limit our attention to these 

two concentration measures. 


              VI.            AN EMPIRICAL ILLUSTRATION INVOLVING THE PRESCRIPTION DRUG LIPITORTM  


              What happens to concentration measures as monopoly power gives way to competition and 

unfettered entry in a product market with high fixed/sunk costs but low marginal costs? How similar 

empirically are the various measures of concentration? Do they exhibit expected step patterns as 

sequential extensive entry occurs? Are there examples of product markets where concentration exceeds 

DOJ/FTC announced thresholds inviting scrutiny? We now illustrate these selected empirical 

relationships among various measures of industry concentration.  

              We choose to focus on a product market in which an event or series of events occurs that we 

expect materially affects market structure and measures of concentration. Prescription pharmaceutical 

markets are good candidates, since loss of exclusivity (LOE) through patent expiration or other market 

exclusivity is known to result in the brand's rapid loss of market share to offpatent generic entrants, 

although the speed and extent of generic entry may be affected by statutory or regulatory restrictions.56 

Since research has shown that the extent of generic entry depends in large part on the preLOE market 

size of the branded drug losing exclusivity,57 it is desirable that the product we choose be a 

"blockbuster" drug having large sales revenues while patentprotected.  




                                                            
56
    Murray L. Aitken, Ernst R. Berndt, Barry Bosworth, Iain M. Cockburn, Richard G. Frank, Michael Kleinrock and 
Bradley T. Shapiro, "The Regulation of Prescription Drug Competition and Market Responses: Patterns in Prices and 
Sales Following Loss of Exclusivity," ch. 8 in Ana Aizcorbe, Colin Baker, Ernst R. Berndt and David M. Cutler, editors, 
Measuring and Modeling Health Care Costs, University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic 
Research, 2018, pp. 243271. 
57
    For a survey, see Fiona Scott Morton and Margaret Kyle, "Markets for Pharmaceutical Products", ch. 12 in Mark 
V. Pauly, Thomas G. McGuire and Pedro P. Barros, editors, Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 2, Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, 2012, pp. 763823, but especially Section 5.1, "Generic Entry", pp. 792795.  

                                                                                                                    23 
 
              The product market on which we focus is that for brand name LipitorTM (chemical name 

atorvastatin calcium), a 3hydroxy3methylglutarilcoenzymeA (HMGCoA) reductase inhibitor 

antihyperlipidemic agent commonly known as a statin, approved by the U.S. regulator (the U.S. Food 

and Drug Administration or FDA) as an adjunct to diet to reduce elevated total cholesterol, low density 

lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides and to increase high density lipoprotein cholesterol. Four strengths 

(10, 20, 40 and 80mg) of the oncedaily dosed LipitorTM tablet were approved for marketing by the FDA 

on December 17, 1996. LipitorTM rapidly became the U.S.'s and the world's largest selling drug. Since 

being launched in 1997, LipitorTM earned more than $100 billion for its manufacturer, Pfizer, and by 

2011 nine million people in the U.S. were taking the LipitorTM medicine.58 Lipitor competed in a crowded 

field with a number of other statins, such as lovastatin (original brand name MevacorTM, approved 

3/28/91, but discontinued, replaced by AltoprevTM, approved 6/26/02), pravastatin (PravacholTM, 

approved 10/31/91), simvastatin (ZocorTM, 12/23/91), fluvastatin (original LescolTM brand discontinued, 

replaced by Lescol XLTM, 10/6/00), rosuvastatin (CrestorTM, 8/12/03), and pitavastatin (LivaloTM, 8/3/09). 

LipitorTM was also a component in a combination lipidlowering and hypertension product branded as 

CaduetTM. LipitorTM and its competitors all marketed onceaday dosage tablets, although with different 

mixes of dosage strengths. 

              In the analysis of atorvastatin calcium below, we ignore combination products in which 

atorvastatin calcium is a component ingredient. Although we recognize that in antitrust matters market 

definition can be a very contentious issue,59 for our present purpose of merely illustrating empirically 



                                                            
58
    Veronique Dupont, "Pfizer's blockbuster drug Lipitor goes generic", MedicalXpress, November 30, 2011. 
Available online at https://medicalxpress.com/news/201111pfizerblockbusterdruglipitor.html, last accessed 5 
August 2019. 
59
    There is a large literature addressing issues of market definition issues in horizontal mergers and acquisitions. 
See, for example, F. Michael Scherer and David Ross [1990], op. cit., pp. 174190, and Dennis W. Carlton and 
Jeffrey M. Perloff [2005], op. cit., pp. 642648. As noted above, issues of market definition in economics are 
somewhat analogous to defining distinct species in ecology; see the Hill [1973], Jost [2006] and van Dam [2019] 
references cited earlier. 

                                                                                                                    24 
 
alternative concentration measures and their time trend breaks, here we simply assume that the various 

strengths of oral branded and generic atorvastatin calcium tablets constitute the same product market 

in the U.S.  

              The market dynamics involving LipitorTM and its generic atorvastatin calcium competitors 

suggest that measures of concentration are likely to vary considerably in a step function pattern after 

LipitorTM lost patent protection on November 30, 2011. With much generic entry anticipated following 

LOE, we expect that concentration measures will reflect considerable competition and greatly reduced 

concentration. Patents on all LipitorTM formulations and strengths were successfully challenged in U.S. 

courts by Ranbaxy, who consequently was awarded 180day exclusivity on its Abbreviated New Drug 

Application (ANDA) effective November 30, 2011. However, serious data integrity issues emerged with 

Ranbaxy's ANDA, creating uncertainty whether the FDA would permit Ranbaxy to launch on November 

30, 2011.60 Although Ranbaxy's 180day exclusivity was scheduled to expire on May 28, 2012, any delay 

in the launch of Ranbaxy due to its data integrity issues with the FDA would likely also delay the timing 

of the 180day exclusivity and the unfettered post180day exclusivity entry by numerous other ANDA 

applicants. These uncertainties may have affected the extent and timing of subsequent generic entrants.  

              However, in an effort to mitigate market share losses to Ranbaxy during the 180day exclusivity 

period, Pfizer contracted with Watson (later acquired by Actavis) to market an authorized generic 

version of all dosage strengths of atorvastatin calcium for five years beginning November 30, 2011.61 

During the 180day exclusivity period, therefore, there were three competitors on the U.S. market (a 

triopoly  Pfizer's LipitorTM brand, its authorized generic through WatsonActavis, and Ranbaxy's 




                                                            
60
    For one account, see Katherine Eban, Bottle of Lies: The Inside Story of the Generic Drug Boom, HarperCollins 
Publishers, New York, 2019, especially chapters 6, 22 and 23. 
61
    "Watson Launches Generic LIPITOR®: Largest generic product launch in US history", Allergan Investor News 
Search, 11.30.2011. Available online at https://www.allergan.com/news/thomsonreuters/watsonlaunches
genericlipitorraspx, last accessed 10 August 2019. 

                                                                                                                     25 
 
generic). On May 28, 2012 when 180day exclusivity expired, three additional ANDA holders entered at 

all four dosage strengths (Apotex, Mylan and Sandoz).62  

              Given Lipitor's very large preLOE market size, industry observers noted it was somewhat 

surprising that the number of generic entrants at the time of unfettered generic entry following 

expiration of 180day exclusivity was relatively small ­ only five as of late 2012. According to a Federal 

Trade Commission document, each of the known generic entrants as of May 2012, as well as branded 

Pfizer's LipitorTM, was known to have substantial manufacturing capacity, so conceivably Pfizer and the 

generics could flood the atorvastatin calcium market and greatly reduce generic prices, making potential 

entry by other generics less attractive. Moreover, Pfizer's highly publicized aggressive protection of its 

brand franchise (through rebating and widespread couponing that reduced considerably the customer 

copayment typically required for branded drugs, as well as its continued extensive directtoconsumer 

marketing campaign) may have reduced the perceived payoff to entry by generic manufacturers, 

thereby constraining entry.63 Recall also that these considerations involving Pfizer were in addition to 

the uncertainties created by Ranbaxy's data integrity dispute with the FDA, possibly jeopardizing 

Ranbaxy's 180day exclusivity launch. 

              Pfizer also benefited from certain fortuitous events affecting its competitors. On November 9, 

2012, Ranbaxy informed its customers of a voluntary recall of certain lots of the company's 10, 20 and 

40 mg dosage strengths of atorvastatin calcium tablets, due to possible contamination with very small 

glass particles. On November 29, 2012, the FDA notified the public of Ranbaxy's voluntary recall.64 

                                                            
62
    For further discussion, see Murray L. Aitken, Ernst R. Berndt, Barry Bosworth, Iain M. Cockburn, Richard G. Frank, 
Michael Kleinrock and Bradley T. Shapiro [2018], op. cit.  
63
    On the market's perception of the reputation of Pfizer and its generic subsidiary Greenstone, see Federal Trade 
Commission [2011], Authorized Generic Drugs: ShortTerm Effects and LongTerm Impact, August, especially p. 82.. 
Available online at http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2011/08/genericdrugs.shtm.  
64
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration, "Questions and Answers on the Ranbaxy Atorvastatin Recall", November 29, 
2012. Available online at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafetyandavailability/questionsandanswersranbaxy
atorvastatinrecall, last accessed 6 August 2019. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, "FDA Statement on the 
Ranbaxy Atorvastatin Recall", November 30, 2012. Available online at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety
andavailability/fdastatementranbaxyatorvastatinrecall, last accessed 6 August 2019. 

                                                                                                                   26 
 
Ranbaxy resumed production of atorvastatin calcium intended for sale in the U.S. market in February 

2013, but in March 2014 it issued another recall, this time for a dosage mixup in which 20mg tablets 

were found in sealed bottles marked for 10 mg tablets. This recall followed by one month the FDA 

prohibiting Ranbaxy from shipping to the U.S. any pharmaceutical ingredient made at its Toansa plan in 

northern India after an inspection there revealed poor manufacturing practices.65  As of 2014, the 

Ranbaxyowned Ohm Laboratories Inc. in New Jersey was the company's only permitted manufacturer 

of drugs for U.S. sale.66 Because of these various market developments we expect that, following Pfizer's 

LOE, realized market shares were affected, as were the time patterns of concentration measures. In 

particular, while we expect HHI/RHT to fall sharply after LOE, the speed with which they fall may be 

mitigated by the various uncertainties during the 180day exclusivity period, and that in turn may have 

delayed subsequent entry. 

              Here we begin by describing time trends in market revenue shares, move on to various 

concentration metrics based on revenue shares, and then compare concentration metric results using 

alternatively revenue and quantity shares. Given our earlier discussion that documented a preference in 

the economic literature for the HHI and RHT metrics, we limit our empirical analysis to those two 

measures, although for each of them we define market shares in both volumes and in revenues 

(volumes * price). 

                             A.  DATA SOURCES 

              We analyze U.S. unit volume and revenue quarterly data for the various atorvastatin brand and 

generic oral tablet formulations (10, 20, 40 and 80 mg strengths) and construct volume and revenue

based shares utilizing data from the IQVIA (formerly IMS Health and QuintilesIMS) National Sales 


                                                            
65
    Zeba Siddiqui and Kanika Sikka, "Ranbaxy recalls some batches of generic Lipitor in latest quality blow", Reuters 
Health News, March 7, 2014. Available online at https://www.reuters.com/article/usranbaxylablipitorusa
recall/ranbaxyrecallssomebatchesofgenericlipitorinlatestqualityblowidUSBREA2703..., last accessed 6 
August 2019. 
66
    Ibid. 

                                                                                                                    27 
 
PerspectiveTM (NSP) database, 2004Q42016Q3. NSP data derive from a projected audit of purchases 

from manufacturers or wholesalers to pharmacies, clinics, hospitals and other distribution outlets, 

covering 100 percent of the national unit volume in all major classes of trade and distribution channels.  

              As a measure of sales volume, NSP reports "standard units" measuring the number of smallest 

dosage form single items (such as tablets in bottles) contained in a unit or shipping package purchased 

by pharmacies or other distribution outlets. Because the recommended dosage for each of the 10, 20, 

40 and 80 mg strengths is once daily, the standard unit volumes can be considered also to measure the 

number of daily doses.  

              The "dollar sales revenues" reported by NSP are the total amounts paid for purchases of 

atorvastatin calcium standard units from a specific manufacturer or wholesaler by quarter. The invoice

based dollar metrics reflect the amounts paid by retail pharmacies, hospitals and clinics, whether 

purchased directly from a manufacturer or indirectly via a wholesaler or chain warehouse. Invoice line 

item discounts are included, but prompt payment bottomline invoice and 340B discounts are excluded. 

Drug rebates paid by the manufacturer to an insurer or an intermediary are not reflected in these 

invoiced revenues; such data are generally not publicly available. To the extent sales from wholesalers 

include wholesaler margins and exclude offinvoice rebates paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit 

managers, third party payers, pharmacies and insurers, the NSP data overstate net revenues received by 

manufacturers.67  

                             B.  REVENUE AND QUANTITY SHARES AND HHI AND RHT CONCENTRATIONS 

              Quarterly revenue shares for the various atorvastatin calcium manufacturers over the 2004Q4 ­ 

2016Q3 time period are shown in Figure 3, portraying market shares during four eras: (i) the period of 

Pfizer LipitorTM exclusivity from 2004Q4 until its LOE on November 30, 2011 (2004Q4 ­ 2011Q4); (ii) the 


                                                            
67
  Further discussion of these data is found in Rena M. Conti and Ernst R. Berndt, "Four Facts Concerning 
Competition in U.S. Generic Prescription Drug Markets", August 2019. International Journal of the Economics of 
Business, 2019. DOI: 10.1080/13571516.2019.1654324.  

                                                                                                                  28 
 
180day exclusivity period between November 30, 2011 and May 28, 2012 (2011Q4201Q2), during 

which time brand LipitorTM, generic Ranbaxy and authorized generic Watson/Actavis competed; (iii) a 

transition period from the end of 180day exclusivity on May 28, 2012 through the end of 2012 during 

which unfettered generic entry and some exit occurred (2012Q2 ­ 2012Q4); and (iv) the post2012 era 

in which market shares among the atorvastatin calcium marketers stabilized, as did the identity of the 

market leaders (after 2012Q4). 

                                            Figure 3: Atorvastatin Calcium Revenue Shares by Manufacturer 




                                                                                                                       
        Please note: Pfizer's atorvastatin calcium product was marketed under the brand name LipitorTM.  
        TheFollowing  Pfizer's
             remaining          LipitorTM  listed
                        manufacturers      loss of  exclusivity
                                                   are           on November
                                                       selling generic         30, 2011,
                                                                       atorvastatin        both
                                                                                     calcium     Ranbaxy's
                                                                                                           generic and 
                                                                                              products.

              Watson/Actavis' authorized generic each gained market share rapidly during their triopoly 180

day exclusivity ending in 2012Q2.68 However, they then each quickly saw their market shares erode as 

Ranbaxy experienced manufacturing problems in 2012Q4 and encountered post180day exclusivity 

entry by Apotex, Mylan and Dr Reddy's Laboratories that took market share from Pfizer. Pfizer's 


                                                            
68
  Recall that during the 180day exclusivity period between November 2011 and May 2012, the three atorvastatin 
competitors on the U.S. comprising the triopoly were Pfizer's branded Lipitor, Ranbaxy ­ the successful patent 
challenger, and Watson ­ the authorized generic. 

                                                                                                                   29 
 
LipitorTM brand share loss was largely offset, however, by the 2013Q1 entry of Greenstone, Pfizer's 

wholly owned generic subsidiary.69 At the end of 2013 ­ eight quarters after initial generic entry ­ 

Pfizer's LipitorTM revenue market share was 35% (much greater than its 2% volume share, reflecting 

Lipitor's relatively high price), Mylan captured 23% of market revenues (20% of volume), Apotex 16% of 

revenues and 27% of volume, Pfizer's Greenstone (12% of revenues and 27% of volume), and Dr. 

Reddy's Laboratories (8% of revenues and 14% of volume), so together the largest five marketers 

garnered 94% of atorvastatin US market revenues (90% of volume), up from 81% of revenues in 2012Q4, 

but down from 92% of 2012Q4 volumes. Watson/Actavis, the authorized generic, had only a 0.02% 

market share in 2013Q4, falling sharply from a high share of 21% in 2012Q1. Notably, with its LipitorTM 

brand and Greenstone generic subsidiary, Pfizer's combined brand/generic franchise maintained a 47% 

market revenue (29% volume) share after eight quarters following LOE. Meanwhile, Ranbaxy's initial 

successful generic entry was also very shortlived; by 2013Q4 Ranbaxy's revenue share was but 2.2% 

(volume share 6.1%), dramatically less than its peak revenue share of 38% (41% volume share) in 

2012Q2 when it enjoyed 180day exclusivity. Although Sandoz was one of the first three generic 

entrants after 180day exclusivity expired, Sandoz was not ever able to penetrate the atorvastatin 

calcium U.S. market ­ its peak revenue share never exceeded 1.6% and at the end of 2013 it had only a 

0.5% market revenue (1.8% volume) share. 

              From the end of 2013 through the end of our study sample ­ 2016Q3 ­ additional generic entry 

occurred as did some exit; altogether, 17 distinct entities marketed atorvastatin calcium between 

2011Q4 and 2016Q3 (including a repackager70), although by 2016Q3 only 12 had positive sales, with five 




                                                            
69
    "Greenstone LLC--your partner for generic medications", undated. Available online at 
https://www.greenstonellc.com/aboutus, last accessed August 10, 2019. 
70
    In the U.S. prescription pharmaceutical market, a repackager is not a manufacturer but instead simply 
repackages and markets a product (perhaps into bottles having different numbers of tablets) made by an FDA
approved manufacturer, often under contract.  

                                                                                                             30 
 
others having exited, either temporarily or permanently.71 The five largest manufacturers at the end of 

2013 were still the five largest in 2016Q3, able to keep most of their market share, together garnering 

98% of atorvastatin calcium U.S. market revenues and volume: Pfizer LipitorTM ­ 30% revenues, 0.6% 

volume, Apotex 24% revenues, 39% volume, Mylan 20% revenues, 30% volume, Greenstone 13% 

revenues, 16% volme, and Dr. Reddy's Laboratories 11% revenues, 14% volume. The only change in the 

ranking identity of the five largest revenue suppliers between end 2013 and 2016Q3 involved switching 

between second and third place by Mylan and Apotex. Notably, the extent of inequality/variability in 

revenue market shares among the five largest marketers at the end of 2013 (ranging from 8% to 35%) 

gradually fell over time, so that by the end of 2016 the inequality/variability in market revenue shares 

among the five largest marketers declined, ranging from 11% to 30%. These postLOE revenue share 

movements among the atorvastatin calcium manufacturers resulted in step function declines in market 

concentration, as measured by the HHI and RHT revenue metrics, displayed in Figure 4. Although the 

Pfizer atorvastatin calcium franchise included both the brand and its wholly owned subsidiary, 

Greenstone, here we initially treat Pfizer's brand LipitorTM and its Greenstone generic subsidiary as 

distinct manufacturers (but we modify this later). Prior to November 30, 2011, LipitorTM market share 

was 100%, so the uniform 1.000 HHI and RHT concentration values before 2011Q4 are not displayed in 

Figure 4.  

              There are two important takeaways from Figure 4. First, as expected, a rapid decline in the HHI 

and RHT concentration measures occurs in the four quarters between LOE in 2011Q4 and the end of 

2012 during which time the triopoly's 180day exclusivity expired (from 0.614 to 0.256 for HHI, and 

0.626 to 0.252 for RHT), but after that both concentration metrics exhibit relative stability. Second, the 

HHIRevenue and RHTRevenue concentration measures are remarkably similar, with the RHT value                        



                                                            
71
  In addition, there may have been potential entrants with approved Abbreviated New Drug Applications who 
chose not to enter for commercial or other reasons.  

                                                                                                             31 
 
 
                                                         Figure 4 




                                                                                                             

typically being very slightly greater or almost equal to the HHI value. In 2016, for example, the mean 

quarterly RHT revenue metric was 0.235, while that for HHI was 0.215. The simple Pearson correlation 

between HHIRevenues and RHTRevenues over the 2011Q4  2016Q3 time period is 0.996.  

        While Figure 4 displays RHT and HHI metrics based on revenue shares, in Figure 5 we report RHT 

and HHI metrics based on quantity shares. Like HHIRevenues and RHTRevenues in Figure 4, in Figure 5 

we observe that HHIQuantity and RHTQuantity concentration measures fall sharply as expected in the 

four quarters after LOE in 2011Q4 to the end of 2012 (from 0.555 to 0.192 for HHIQuantity, and from 

0.575 to 0.211 for RHTQuantity). Levels and trends in the RHT and HHI quantity metrics are very similar, 

with the simple Pearson correlation between them over the 2011Q42016Q3 time period being 0.997. 

Moreover, when comparing Figures 4 and 5, we observe that levels and trends in RHT measures based 

on revenue shares are very similar to those based on quantity shares up through the end of 2013. 

However, after that the quantitybased HHI and RHT metrics increase and remain above their respective 

revenuebased HHI and RHTs. The intuition underlying this difference in measured concentration 


                                                                                                          32 
 
depending on whether it is based on revenues or on quantities is as follows. As Pfizer's LipitorTM brand 

price relative to that of generics increases and as generics' volume market shares increase, the gap 

between Pfizer's and the generics' revenue and volume shares increases, resulting in the numerous 

generics' volume shares being weighted more heavily in the HHIquantity metric, increasing it overall. 72 

At the end of the sample period in 2016Q3, the quantitybased HHI and RHT values are 0.280 and 0.301, 

while the revenuebased numbers are considerably smaller at 0.215 and 0.237. The simple Pearson 

correlation over the entire 2011Q42016Q3 time period between RHTRevenues and RHTQuantities is  

 
                                                               Figure 5 




                                                                                                                          


                                                            
72
   During the 180day triopoly period (2011Q42012Q2), the mean (standard deviation) of Pfizer's LipitorTM brand 
price was $4.54 (0.10), while that for the Actavis authorized generic entrant was $2.94, and that of the Paragraph 
IV filer Ranbaxy was $2.80 (0.42). Following the 180day exclusivity, Pfizer's brand LipitorTM price increased further 
to $5.47 (0.84), while prices for the various generic products (including the nonPfizer triopolists Actavis and 
Ranbaxy) all were much lower than the branded LipitorTM, converging over the 2012Q22016Q3 interval to a mean 
of $0.32 (less than 6% of the LipitorTM brand price), and a standard deviation of 0.40. Notably, even though they 
were components of the 2011Q4201Q2 triopoly, the authorized generic Actavis and Paragraph IV filer Ranbaxy 
competed aggressively with other generics after the triopoly expired; prices of Actavis and Ranbaxy between 
2012Q2 and 2016Q3 had a mean of $0.30 and a standard deviation of 0.49. Note that even if each of the dosage 
strengths of generic atorvastatin were priced identically across manufacturers, differences in average price could 
emerge because of variations across manufacturers in the mix of dosage strengths. 

                                                                                                                   33 
 
Similar patterns hold for HHI measures based on revenue shares and quantity shares (the Pearson 

simple correlation between HHI Revenues and HHI Quantities is 0.908). While RHT quantity measures 

are typically greater than HHI quantity metrics, as was the case for their revenuebased counterparts, 

there does not seem to be a consistent inequality between the RHT revenue and RHT quantity values 

(while pre2014Q1 RHT revenue > RHT quantity, thereafter the inequality is reversed), nor is there a 

consistent inequality between the HHI revenue and the HHI quantity metrics (although a similar 

inequality pattern holds pre and post2014Q1). Finally, the trends in concentration as measured by HHI 

 Revenues and RHTQuantities are also very similar  the Pearson simple correlation is 0.899, while that 

between RHT Revenues and HHI quantities is 0.924. Thus in the empirical analysis reported below, we 

focus only on HHI revenues. 


              It is worth noting that the high correlations between the various RHT and HHI concentration 

measures based on either revenue or quantity shares could reflect the fact that the various atorvastatin 

calcium manufacturers' products are each dosed once daily, all are rated to be bioequivalent to each 

other by the FDA, and the FDA's bioequivalence certification could mitigate price differentials across 

manufacturers.73 It is worth emphasizing, however, what we observe in the U.S. atorvastatin calcium 

market may not be generalizable to other pharmaceutical, and especially nonpharmaceutical, markets.  


                      C.  ACCOUNTING FOR THE EFFECTS OF MANUFACTURER'S SUBSIDIARIES WHEN 

                             MEASURING HHI CONCENTRATION  

              In the HHI and RHT concentration measure calculations reported above, we treated each of the 

firms marketing atorvastatin calcium as independent, implicitly assuming they were vigorous 

competitors. If the various manufacturers coordinate their pricing and marketing actions, however, 

treating them as independent would understate their combined market power and ability to affect 


                                                            
73
      https://www.fda.gov/media/89135/download.   

                                                                                                             34 
 
prices and quantities sold. To the extent one believes that the ability of a firm to control pricing, 

marketing, and product quality is affected by whether its span of control encompasses wholly owned 

subsidiaries or other consolidated entities, 74 one may believe it informative and necessary that the 

industry's concentration measures take into account mergers and acquisitions, and aggregate the 

contributions from all the firms' subsidiaries. Moreover, whether the branded firm has control over 

pricing by its authorized generic during the 180day exclusivity has not been studied extensively.75 Thus, 

it is instructive to examine the sensitivity of the HHI concentration measures to whether one treats 

subsidiaries as independent of vs. being combined with the parent company.  

              Suppose one inquired, how competitive was the atorvastatin calcium market at the end of our 

study period in 2016Q3? Using the HHI Revenue concentration measure and treating Pfizer and its 

wholly owned subsidiary Greenstone as independent suppliers, we obtain a concentration measure of 

0.21498, and when employing the FTCDOJ convention of multiplying the 01 range by 10,000, we 

observe an HHI of 2149.8. This number is modestly under the DOJ's 2500 postmerger threshold for 

scrutinizing any merger that might enhance market power, and suggests the atorvastatin calcium 

market was quite competitive. The numbersequivalent of this HHI Revenue metric is 4.6516.  

              However, if one recognizes that Greenstone who markets generic atorvastatin calcium is a 

wholly owned subsidiary of brand manufacturer Pfizer, and that it is the Upjohn Division of Pfizer that 

markets brand LipitorTM, then to assess competitiveness one might want to combine the shares of 

Greenstone's generic atorvastatin calcium with the shares of PfizerUpjohn's brand LipitorTM division. If 

one does that, the combined HHI Revenue metric in 2016Q3 increases by 0.07746 to 0.29244, which, 


                                                            
74
    In particular, until 2014Q1 market shares based on quantities are quite similar to market shares based on 
revenues. After 2014Q1, however, the high price of brand LipitorTM (about $6.00) relative to generics' average 
price (of about $0.30) increases the gap between HHI revenue and HHI quantity metrics.  
75
    In the initial quarters ActavisWatson was the authorized generic, it captured about a 20% market revenue 
share. But this fell to 11% in 2012Q3, 5% in 2013Q1, and never exceeded 1% thereafter. Thus, in terms of market 
revenue share, the impact of the authorized generic was primarily manifested during the 180day exclusivity that 
ended in 2012Q2, and sharply declined thereafter.  

                                                                                                              35 
 
when multiplied by 10,000, becomes 2924.4, well above the DOJ's 2500 threshold, and possibly calling 

into question just how competitive was the U.S. atorvastatin calcium market in late 2016.76 With Pfizer's 

LipitorTM and Greenstone's generic atorvastatin calcium combined, the numbersequivalent of this HHI 

Revenue metric falls to 3.4195. 

              This is not the only consolidation involving Pfizer. On July 29, 2019, Pfizer announced that its 

Upjohn Division that manages brand LipitorTM not only was being combined with its wholly owned 

Greenstone subsidiary that marketed generic atorvastatin calcium, but that it was also acquiring and 

merging with Mylan pharmaceuticals ­ another major marketer of generic atorvastatin calcium in the 

U.S.77 Pfizer contemplated the announced deal would close in mid2020, but the merger needs to 

survive scrutiny by U.S. antitrust authorities such as the Department of Justice (DOJ) or the Federal 

Trade Commission (FTC) before it can be consummated.78 The Pfizer announcement raises the issue: 

Had this PfizerGreenstoneMylan consolidation occurred earlier at the end of our 2004Q42016Q3 

study period instead of being announced in July 2019, what would have been the consequences for 

atorvastatin calcium concentration measures? Would the likely increased HHI concentration warrant 

U.S. antitrust authority scrutiny of the proposed merger? 




                                                            
76
    For the HHI metric, if one combines the shares of Firm j and Firm k into the share of a single aggregated (Firm j + 
Firm k), thereby incorporating the combined firm into the HHI calculation, the HHI with the combined firm will 
increase by 2*(Sj + Sk). In 2016Q3, the revenue shares of Greenstone and Pfizer's brand LipitorTM were 0.1308 and 
0.2960, respectively. We ignore the market share of the authorized generic Actavis/Watson, since after 2014Q4 its 
market revenue share never even reached 0.01%. 
77
    CBS News, "Pfizer to merge offpatent drug unit with Mylan, creating new drug giant", July 29, 2019. Available 
online at https://www.cbsnews.com/news/pfizermylanmergerpfizertomergeoffpatentdrgunitwithmylan
creatingnewdrug giant/, last accessed 10 August 2019. Also see Frank Vinluan, "Upjohn & Mylan to Merge, 
Freeing Pfizer to Focus on Biopharma R&D", Xconomy, July 29, 2019. Available online at 
https://xconomy.com/newyork/2019/07/29/upjohnmylantomergefreeingpfizertofocusonbiopharmard/, 
last accessed 10 August 2019; and Upjohn, "Our Products: Portfolio of Brands", undated. Available online at 
https://www.pfizer.com/products/upjohn/portfolio, last accessed 10 August 2019. 
78
    Subsequent to the July 29, 2019 announcement of the UpjohnMylan consolidation, in November 2019 Pfizer 
and Mylan announced that it would rename its combined UpjohnMylan division firm Viatris. See Patricia Sabatini, 
"Viatris picked as new name for a merged Mylan/Upjohn", Pittsburgh PostGazette, November 12, 2019. Available 
online at https://www.postgazette.com/business/healthcarebusiness/2019/11/12/ViatrisMylanUpjohn...  

                                                                                                                     36 
 
              Recall that in 2016Q3, Mylan's revenue market share at 0.1992 was second largest to Pfizer's 

0.2960. If one first combined Pfizer's LipitorTM brand share of 0.2960 with Greenstone's generic 

atorvastatin calcium share of 0.1308, and then added the 0.1992 market share of the proposed Mylan 

acquisition, one would obtain a combined Pfizer atorvastatin calcium revenue market share of 0.6260 in 

2016Q3. Based on Eqn. 3 and footnote 82, the change in the HHI Revenue concentration from the two

division (PfizerUpjohn and Greenstone) to the threedivision firm (PfizerUpjohn, Greenstone and 

Mylan) in 2016Q3 would be from 0.29241 to 0.46248, which when multiplied by 10000 is a 1700.4 

change in the HHIRevenue metric from 2924.1 to 4624.5. This increase in the HHI Revenues as a result 

of the Mylan acquisition implies a decrease in the numbersequivalent metric from 3.4195 to 2.1622. 

Under the 2010 revised DOJ horizontal merger guidelines, mergers that increased HHI by more than 200 

points and resulted in a postmerger HHI of >2500 would be "presumed to be likely to enhance market 

power" and invite close scrutiny from U.S. antitrust authorities.79 Therefore, the very substantial 

increase in the HHI to its postmerger high level above 4500 suggests the proposed merger might in fact 

receive close scrutiny. However, as Carl Shapiro, former Chief Economist at the Antitrust Division of the 

DOJ has recently noted, quoting from a District of Columbia 1990 District Court decision, "[e]vidence of 

market concentration simply provides a convenient starting point for a broader inquiry into future 

competitiveness"80, any scrutiny of this proposed merger is likely to involve many considerations other 

than merely levels or changes in HHI.  

              Nonetheless, these calculations demonstrate the sensitivity of the HHI/RHT concentration 

measures to assumptions concerning the market power potentially exercised by Pfizer's atorvastatin 

calcium franchise, and highlight their equivocal implications. Whether the proposed PfizerMylan 



                                                            
79
    See https://www.justice.gov/atr/file/810276/download for further discussion on the DOJ's horizontal merger 
guidelines and their implementation. 
80
    Carl Shapiro, "Protecting Competition in the American Economy: Merger Control, Tech Titans, Labor Markets", 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2019, 33(3):6993. 

                                                                                                               37 
 
merger would significantly harm or possibly enhance competition in the U.S. market for atorvastatin 

calcium, whether the merger should be approved or challenged by antitrust authorities, and/or whether 

divestment of a portion of Pfizer's Greenstone subsidiary should be a requirement for the merger to 

proceed, are issues beyond the scope of this research.81 In addition, the U.S. atorvastatin calcium market 

in 2019 or 2020 may differ greatly from that in 2016Q3. As implied by the above 2019 quote from Carl 

Shapiro, when contemplating whether to challenge mergers and acquisitions, contemporary U.S. 

antitrust analyses consider issues beyond the historic "structure, conduct and performance" paradigm 

that focused particularly on market concentration measures such as the HHI. Among other issues, 

antitrust authorities now also take into account buyers' market power, barriers to entry and exit, pricing 

actions following previous mergers and likely ones should the proposed merger occur, nonprice 

competition, implications for R&D, global trade matters, and cost implications from scale and scope 

economies facilitated by the merger. Consideration of HHI is but one component of a thorough antitrust 

competition analysis.82   

              VII.           SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS 

              The characterization of industry structure and industry concentration has long been a task facing 

empirical economic researchers, for it is widely believed that market structure, market behavior and 

various market performance outcomes are important interrelated phenomena. Although a number of 


                                                            
81
    There is a recent precedent for the FTC requiring divestment in order for a proposed merger to be 
consummated. See "FTC Requires Teva to Divest Over 75 Generic Drugs to Settle Competition Concerns Related to 
its Acquisition of Allergan's Generic Business: Settlement Preserves Competition and Marks Largest Divestiture 
Order in a Pharmaceutical Merger Case", Federal Trade Commission, Press Release, July 27, 2016. Available online 
at https://www.ftc/gov/newsevents/pressrelease/2016/07/ftcrequirestevadivestover75g..., last accessed 24 
August 2019. 
82
    Although they acknowledge the multiplicity of factors that are taken into account when evaluating competitive 
effects of mergers and acquisitions on potential consumer harm, Volker Nocke and Michael D. Whinston [2019] 
have recently concluded , "...we see it as likely that for evaluating unilateral effects the form of current 
concentration schemes should be modified to focus more on the change in the Herfindahl index and less on its 
postmerger level, probable that safe harbors are allowing mergers to proceed that lead to consumer harm, and 
possible that current concentration schemes are more generally too lenient." Volker Nocke and Michael D. 
Whinston, "Concentration Screens for Horizontal Mergers" (First draft), unpublished manuscript, MIT Sloan School 
of Management, September 6, 2019.  

                                                                                                               38 
 
alternative measures of market concentration are commonly used, such as the kfirm concentration 

measure and the HerfindahlHirschman index (HHI), their foundations in economic theory and statistics 

are limited and have not been developed extensively, leaving their unqualified use as measures of 

market power potentially vulnerable to the criticism of "measurement without theory".  

        Notably, the characterization of stochastic size distributions is not unique to economics, but is a 

common practice in many other disciplines and fields of study. In this paper, we have traced the 

pedigree of the muchused HerfindahlHirschman (HHI) economic concentration index to the Simpson 

Index of diversity originally developed in ecology, where an identical calculation to the HHI is interpreted 

as the probability of two organisms randomly selected from a sample habitat belonging to the same 

species (analogous in economics to the probability a pair of randomly and independently selected 

products are being marketed by the same manufacturer). This probabilistic foundation of the HHI to 

some extent shields it from the allegation that the sum of squared shares calculation is arbitrary and 

unscientific, even as its links to market power and antitrust competition analysis remain ambiguous. 

        We have also considered alternative proposed measures of concentrations, some of them 

mathematical generalizations of the HHI, others such as entropy originating from information theory in 

engineering and physics, another set that is developed axiomatically, and still others incorporating 

related concepts such as inequality and absolute population size. We have considered computational 

and interpretability aspects of the various concentration measures, and noted the extent to which they 

incorporate considerations not only of relative inequality such as the Gini coefficient and Lorenz curve, 

but also of absolute population size. Other things equal, markets with a large number of competitors 

suggest barriers to entry are limited, and therefore such markets could plausibly be expected to be 

competitive, other things equal. Therefore, to economists concentration metrics incorporating both 

variability/relative inequality and absolute population size considerations are preferable, for if one 

believes that economic performance outcomes depend not only on relative sizes but also on the 


                                                                                                          39 
 
absolute number of competitors in a market, then one prefers a concentration measure that 

incorporates both features.  

        The existing economic literature comparing the various concentration metrics on a priori 

statistical and axiomatic criteria appears to view the HHI and the closely related Rosenbluth/Hall

Tideman (RHT) metrics most favorably. Choice between these two measures on a priori grounds is 

indeterminate, since the choice involves selection of weights and is therefore similar to choice among 

alternative index number formula in economic index number theory.  

        Finally, we have illustrated empirically the HHI and RHT measures based on revenue shares and 

on quantity shares, using data from the U.S. market for LipitorTM  a largeselling branded statin drug 

and its generic atorvastatin calcium equivalents, 2004Q4 to 2016Q3, whose market status changed from 

patentprotected monopolist to one of facing many competitors in the generic commodity market. The 

very large size of the branded LipitorTM market would suggest likely considerable generic entry postLOE, 

and indeed in the five years between LipitorTM LOE in 2011 and the 2016Q3 end of our sample a total of 

17 distinct entities marketed atorvastatin calcium. Therefore, there is reason to expect dramatic 

declines in the concentration indexes following LOE to levels consistent with competition. We observe 

that HHI measures based on revenue shares and on quantity shares show similar sharp declines 

following LipitorTM's LOE, although towards the end of our sample concentration metrics based on 

quantity shares are greater than those based on revenue shares reflecting the fact that at that time the 

price of the branded drug was more than sixteen times the average price of various generic drugs. Over 

the entire 2011Q4 ­ 2016Q3 postLOE time period, the quantity and revenueshare based HHIs are 

highly correlated, as are RHT measures based on revenue shares and on quantity shares. Moreover, 

levels and trends of HHI measures are highly correlated with corresponding RHT metrics.  

        However, we have also demonstrated the limited and equivocal role played by concentration 

measures in evaluating the extent of competition by documenting the dramatic numerical sensitivity of 


                                                                                                          40 
 
the HHI revenue metrics to how one defines the identity and market shares of competitors when 

mergers and acquisitions occur. Specifically, HHI measures rise substantially above U.S. antitrust 

authority scrutiny threshold levels when Pfizer's wholly owned Greenstone generic subsidiary is 

combined with Pfizer's branded LipitorTM division, and especially when in addition Pfizer's proposed 

acquisition of generic manufacturer Mylan is included as part of the Pfizer atorvastatin calcium 

franchise.  

         Finally, based on a priori reasoning, there is little on which to base a choice between the HHI 

and RHT measures (both meet requirements satisfying axiomatic conditions, while the HHI has an 

attractive probabilistic foundation). Moreover, we find very similar empirical trends and high 

correlations among them. Together, these considerations offer support and encouragement for the 

continued use of the HHI metric in measuring economic concentration, provided that users recognize 

that market structure as measured by concentration is only one of the various factors affecting market 

performance outcomes, and that market behavior and strategic considerations also play important 

roles.     

 




                                                                                                            41 
 
