Labor in the Boardroom
Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer, and Jörg Heining
NBER Working Paper No. 26519
November 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. G3,K31,J0,J3,J53,J54,M12,M5

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate the wage effects of shared governance, or codetermination, in the form of a mandate
of one third of corporate board seats going to worker representatives. We study a reformin
Germany that abruptly abolished this mandate for stock corporations incorporated after August
1994, while it locked the mandate for the slightly older cohorts. Our research design compares
firm cohorts incorporated before the reform and after; in a robustness check we additionally draw
on the analogous difference in unaffected firm types (LLCs). We find no effects of board-level
codetermination on wages and the wage structure, even in firms with particularly flexible wages.
The degree of rent sharing and the labor share are also unaffected. We reject that disinvestment
could have offset wage effects through the canonical hold-up channel, as shared governance, if
anything, increases capital formation.


Simon Jäger                                     Jörg Heining
Department of Economics                         Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
MIT                                             Joerg.Heining@iab.de
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sjaeger@mit.edu

Benjamin Schoefer
Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
schoefer@berkeley.edu
                                 Labor in the Boardroom

               Simon Jäger                         Benjamin Schoefer                          Jörg Heining
              MIT and NBER                           UC Berkeley                                   IAB


                                                   August 25, 2020



                                                            Abstract
        We estimate the wage effects of shared governance, or codetermination, in the form of
        a mandate of one third of corporate board seats going to worker representatives. We
        study a reform in Germany that abruptly abolished this mandate for stock corporations
        incorporated after August 1994, while it locked the mandate for the slightly older co-
        horts. Our research design compares firm cohorts incorporated before the reform and
        after; in a robustness check we additionally draw on the analogous difference in unaf-
        fected firm types (LLCs). We find no effects of board-level codetermination on wages
        and the wage structure, even in firms with particularly flexible wages. The degree of
        rent sharing and the labor share are also unaffected. We reject that disinvestment could
        have offset wage effects through the canonical hold-up channel, as shared governance,
        if anything, increases capital formation.




      sjaeger@mit.edu, schoefer@berkeley.edu, joerg.heining@iab.de. We thank the editor Lawrence Katz, and four anonymous review-
ers. We thank Daron Acemoglu, John Addison, Josh Angrist, David Autor, David Card, Jonathan Cohn, Robert Gibbons, Lawrence
Katz, Patrick Kline, Bentley MacLeod, Jim Poterba, Fabiano Schivardi, Antoinette Schoar, Andrei Shleifer, Sebastian Siegloch, David
Sraer, Jean Tirole, Margarita Tsoutsoura, and John Van Reenen for useful discussions, as well as audiences at the AEA/LERA Meetings,
CEPR/LSE Annual Labour Symposium, Columbia University, Columbia Micro Macro Labor Conference, CRC Berlin Workshop on the
Future of Labor, CREST, CSEF Conference on Finance, Labor, and Inequality, EIEF, INSEAD, IZA, LSE, MIT Organizational Econ Lunch,
NBER Corporate Finance Meeting, NBER Summer Institute Labor Studies, SOLE-EALE Meeting, Stanford Labor Seminar, Stanford
SIEPR Workshop, Stockholm University, UC Berkeley, UCLA, UC Santa Cruz , UMass Amherst, UBC, U Mannheim, and U Montreal.
For sharing their legal expertise, we thank Andreas Engert, Thomas Hoffmann, Marcus Lutter, Sebastian Sick, and Holger Spamann.
Karl Aspelund, Nikhil Basavappa, Jonathan Cohen, Dominik Jurek, René Livas, Nelson Mesker, Enrique Perez, Martina Uccioli, and
Dalton Zhang provided outstanding research assistance. We thank the MIT Sloan Good Companies, Good Jobs Initiative, the UC
Berkeley Institute for Research on Labor and Employment, and the Washington Center for Equitable Growth for financial support.
By focusing on wage outcomes in the administrative IAB data, this paper differs from a previous version that studied a broader set
of financial outcomes in a larger and longer, multi-source Bureau van Dk sample of firms rather than the IAB sample of firms (see
Footnote 31).
1     Introduction
A fundamental question of industrial relations concerns how the institutional form of
organization of labor affects wage setting. With shared governance, or codetermination,
workers participate in the decision-making of their employer, for example through rep-
resentation on company boards. By contrast, in more adversarial labor relations systems
such as in the United States, workers are largely barred from participation in corporate
decision-making. Against the backdrop of rising wage inequality and decline in the labor
share, several observers and policy-makers have called for an introduction or expansion
of worker board representation as a way to boost worker bargaining power. Whether
minority board representation actually boosts worker bargaining power remains an open
question. Even if it does, it may lead to agency problems, stifle investment, and thus
ultimately lower wages (Jensen and Meckling, 1979). An ideal experiment to study the
consequences of shared governance for wages would randomly assign the institution to
some firms but prohibit it in others.
    We provide quasi-experimental evidence on the effects of this form of shared gov-
ernance by studying a 1994 reform in Germany that sharply abolished worker-elected
directors in certain firms, and permanently preserved the mandate in others. Before
the law change, all stock corporations (Aktiengesellschaften and Kommanditgesellschaften auf
Aktien) had to apportion at least one third of their supervisory board seats to worker rep-
resentatives. These worker board representatives are primarily non-managerial workers,
proposed and directly elected by the non-managerial workforce. In two-tier board settings
such as Germany's, the supervisory board appoints, monitors, dismisses, and sets the com-
pensation for the executive board. It is also directly involved in important decisions, such
as large investments or outsourcing. Anecdotally, many decisions in the supervisory board
are taken unanimously, with consensus between shareholder and worker representatives
(Gold, 2011; Steger, 2011). In the German industrial relations system, board representa-
tion coexists with two other institutions of worker representation. First, unions represent
workers in collective bargaining negotiations, determining wage floors and hours, usually
at the sector-region level. Second, works councils provide shop-floor representation and a
    Several legislative proposals in the United States Senate would mandate German-style board codeter-
mination. For example, the Reward Work Act and the Accountable Capitalism Act would mandate 1/3 or 40%,
respectively, of directors of larger corporations to be elected by the workforce. In the United Kingdom, the
government-commissioned Bullock Report called for worker representation on corporate boards (Report of
the Committee of Inquiry on Industrial Democracy, 1977). More recently, the Labour Party proposed to
mandate one-third codetermination in firms with more than 250 employees (Reuters, 09/23/2018). In an
MIT Report on the "Work of the Future", Autor, Mindell, and Reynolds (2019) identify "restoring the role
of workers as stakeholders, alongside owners and stockholders, in corporate decision-making" as critical to
shaping the future of work. In his analysis of capital and ideology, Piketty (2020) argues for an expansion of
codetermination rights.



                                                      1
separate form of codetermination, e.g., regarding working conditions or layoff decisions.
In many cases, board representatives also serve on works councils. Our paper includes a
test for interactions of board representation with these two institutions.
    The 1994 reform abruptly abolished worker-elected directors in new stock corporations
(unless firm size crossed a high threshold of 500 employees). Importantly, the cohort-based
reform locked in shared governance in the incumbent firm cohorts incorporated before the
reform. The sharp law change permits us to identify the effect of shared governance by
comparing stock corporations incorporated just before and after the August 1994 cutoff.
We implement this design by combining firm-, establishment-, and worker-level data:
(i) administrative matched employee-establishment data covering the universe of social
security records merged with (ii) financial and production data for public and private firms
based on Bureau van Dk (BvD) data, (iii) a comprehensive data set of incorporations and
exits, (iv) data on board composition for listed firms and (v) an establishment survey.
    Our main specifications compare stock corporations incorporated in a two-year win-
dow around the reform. To assess the validity of the design, we (i) rule out manipulation of
incorporation dates, (ii) rule out composition shifts at entry, (iii) argue that the grandfather-
ing is binding (and note the Federal Constitutional Court has upheld the grandfathering
ruling against shareholder law suits), (iv) rule out selective attrition in the form of firm
exit, (v) estimate a series of robustness specifications varying the bandwidth between six
months and five years, (vi) estimate the effects of placebo reforms. (vii) In additional
specifications, we net out a broad class of cohort or age effects with a second difference
among peer cohorts among unaffected corporation types (Gesellschaften mit beschränkter
Haftung (GmbH), which we will refer to as limited liability companies (LLCs)).
    Our main finding is that firms that are assigned shared governance do not pay mea-
surably higher wages than their peers without the mandate. We estimate small positive
effects on composition-adjusted wage policies at the firm (Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis,
1999), with point estimates between 0.4% and 2.3%, and confidence intervals ruling out
pay premia effects above 4% in simple difference specifications. We find similar point es-
timates but wider confidence intervals in RD specifications. We do not find effects on the
wage structure inside the firm and measures of within-firm pay inequality. We also find
no evidence for increases in the labor share: if anything, we find (insignificant) decreases
of the labor share by about 0.03 (SE 0.03, control mean: 0.73).
    We provide three additional analyses to understand the absence of wage effects. First,
we reject the possibility that wages did not increase on net because the bargaining power
increase was offset by a tantamount decrease in the size of the firm's pie to be shared, by,
     German GmbHs are broadly comparable to private limited companies in the United Kingdom or LLCs
in the United States. They differ from US LLCs in that they are formally corporations and in that their shares
cannot be traded on a stock exchange.

                                                      2
much like a distortionary profit tax, depressing capital formation following the influential
hold-up view (Jensen and Meckling, 1979; Grout, 1984). In the data, we find that firms
with shared governance produce, if anything, higher output, with an extra value added
per worker (labor productivity) of 2 to 8%. Specifically rejecting the hold-up mechanism,
shared governance leads to larger fixed capital stocks and higher capital-labor ratios.
Hence, the estimates reject the disinvestment predicted by the hold-up and agency cost
views. We also find no evidence for reductions in revenue or employment.
    Second, we directly estimate and compare rent-sharing elasticities in firms with and
without this form of shared governance. We document similar elasticities of wages to
firm-level value added per worker, of about 0.07 in our sample. This finding indicates that
worker representation does not appear to raise worker bargaining power over wages.
    Third, we conduct a series of institutional and theory-driven heterogeneity analyses,
sorting firms into industries. First, we investigate the possibility that shop-floor works
councils, which exist in many German firms, may duplicate (or amplify) some functions of
board-level representation in our research design. We do not find substantial heterogeneity
along this dimension either; if anything, we find larger wage effects in industries where
works councils are more prevalent. Our research design does speak to the potential
independent wage effects of plant-level works councils. Second, even in high-rent firms
(high labor productivity, high firm AKM effects, or low turnover), shared governance does
not lead to wage increases. Third, even for industries with low coverage of collective
bargaining agreements and large revealed wage dispersion, wage effects remain absent.
The lack of heterogeneity in wage effects also suggests that our findings may extend beyond
institutional settings similar to Germany.
    A priori, one-third board representation could have affected wages through various
concrete channels in addition to raising worker bargaining power (Jensen and Meckling,
1979; Grout, 1984). For example, worker representatives could have pushed for the se-
lection of labor-friendly managers (Bertrand and Schoar, 2003) or changed pay equity
norms (Western and Rosenfeld, 2011). They could have affected firms' decision to accede
to or opt out of collective bargaining agreements (CBA), decisions in which supervisory
boards can be involved (see Schnabel and Wagner, 1996, for a survey on CBA coverage
and worker representation). The full information rights of the board members could have
improved workers' and works councils' wage negotiation outcomes (Addison, Teixeira,
and Zwick, 2010), for example as even worker board representatives who also serve on the
    Our evidence against hold-up effects is consistent with (Machin and Wadhwani, 1991; Addison et al.,
2007; Card, Devicienti, and Maida, 2014), even though some studies document negative investment effects
of unionization (e.g., Connolly, Hirsch, and Hirschey, 1986; Hirsch, 2004). In the context of codetermination
via works councils, Addison et al. (2007) finds no association with lower investment. Rapp et al. (2019) find
positive effects of board representation based on a propensity score matching strategy among listed firms.



                                                     3
works council report an information advantage by virtue of their board membership (see
interviews with German representatives in Gold, Kluge, and Conchon, 2010). By facili-
tating cooperation, by institutionalizing communication, or through repeated interactions
between labor and capital, shared governance could have helped overcome hold-up and
raise productivity and, in turn, wages through rent sharing (Malcomson, 1983; Crawford,
1988; Freeman and Medoff, 1985; Freeman and Lazear, 1995). In practice, most supervisory
board decisions are unanimous (Gold, 2011; Steger, 2011), leaving room for real author-
ity even absent formal majority rights (Aghion and Tirole, 1997). We discuss potential
institutional explanations for the empirical absence of wage effects in the conclusion.
    Consistent with the absence of wage increases and of negative effects on firm perfor-
mance, we find no evidence for higher or lower profitability, in contrast to some evidence
for negative profit effects of firm-level unionization in adversarial settings (see, e.g., Lee
and Mas, 2012). We caveat that our data do not contain dividend payouts, as most of
the stock corporations are not publicly traded. Similarly, firm owners do not appear to
strategically avoid the institution by delaying incorporating or shifting corporate form,
all consistent with owners reporting that one-third representation does not substantially
affect incorporation choices (Albach et al., 1988).
    Our quasi-experimental research design complements studies comparing firms with
and without codetermination using size cutoffs on non-wage outcomes. Gorton and
Schmid (2004), Kim, Maug, and Schneider (2018) and Redeker (2019) study large, pub-
licly traded corporations at the 2,000 employee threshold, which delineates one-third and
quasi-parity employee representation (in the latter group, shareholder representatives still
break ties). Compared to these studies, our variation has no worker-elected directors in
the control group. Our cohort-based variation also circumvents endogenous contempo-
raneous employment as an assignment variable, which is transitory exactly around the
threshold. Instead, our variation draws on persistent regimes, sharply assigned by incor-
poration date. By contrast, Svejnar (1981) analyzes the effect of the introduction of parity
codetermination in 1951 in the iron, steel and mining sector compared to unaffected indus-
tries, finding a 6% wage effect on sector-level average wages on the basis of industry wage
tabulations; FitzRoy and Kraft (1993) study the effect of the 1976 introduction of quasi-
parity representation and find small effects on labor costs per employee. Our study of
board-level representation (see Scholz and Vitols, 2019, for a review) complements studies
of plant-level works councils (e.g., Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner, 2001; Addison, 2009).
    In Section 2, we describe the institutional context and the reform. Section 3 presents our
data sets. Section 4 assesses the validity of the design by measuring avoidance, exit, and
    This mechanism may be especially relevant when CBA opening clauses allow for local wage negotiation
(Brändle, Heinbach, and Maier, 2011; Dustmann et al., 2014), or among firms not part of a CBA so that works
councils are directly involved in wage setting (§87, Betriebsverfassungsgesetz).

                                                    4
entry effects. Our main findings on wage setting are reported in Section 5. Heterogeneity
analyses guided by a bargaining model are presented in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.


2     Institutional Context and the 1994 Reform
We describe shared corporate governance in Germany, and the 1994 abolition of board-level
representation in most new stock corporations. We also review wage setting institutions.


2.1   Shared Corporate Governance in Germany
Corporate Governance in Germany Like many other European countries, Germany has
a two-tier board system, an executive and a supervisory board, illustrated in Figure 1.
The executive board is the managing body and responsible for day-to-day business. The
supervisory board ­ composed of representatives for shareholders and, in many cases,
workers ­ is responsible for the selection, monitoring, auditing, compensation structuring,
and dismissal of the executive board (§§ 84, 87 and 111 AktG). The German Corporate
Governance Code advises that the supervisory board be involved in all decisions of funda-
mental importance to the company, e.g., strategic planning and larger financial decisions.
For instance, corporate charters frequently prescribe thresholds above which investments
need to be directly approved by the supervisory board. The supervisory board is also often
involved in large decisions that are directly relevant to wage setting, such as whether the
company joins an employer association or not (and thereby accedes to collective bargaining
agreements). Anecdotally, votes on the supervisory board are often unanimous even with
worker representatives (Gold, 2011; Steger, 2011).

Shared Governance: Works Councils Two institutions allow for worker representation
in employers' decision-making: shop-floor codetermination through works councils and
board-level codetermination on the supervisory board. Works councils (for recent studies,
see Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner, 2001; Addison, 2009) are a shop-floor representation
institution and have extensive consultation, information, and codetermination rights in
areas such as work hours, occupational safety, and organizational or staffing changes, and
can directly negotiate with the employer, including over salaries. This institution goes
back to the early 1900s. The role of works councils is regulated in the Establishments
Constitution Act (BetrVG). In establishments with more than five employees, workers
have the right to organize in a works council; multi-establishment firms that have plant-
level works councils additionally coordinate via a firm-level variant. In Section 6.5, we
will investigate whether codetermination through board representation interacts with the


                                            5
prevalence of works councils; yet, our design cannot provide estimates of the independent
effect of works councils on wages.

Shared Governance: Board Representation The variation we study concerns mandates
for firm-level codetermination on the supervisory board, an institution introduced in the
early years of the Federal Republic of Germany (see Scholz and Vitols, 2019, for another
review). Importantly for our study, the codetermination mandates differ by legal form
and incorporation date (and also employee count). The board seats allocated to worker
representatives range from zero to full parity.
    In 1951, the first landmark act mandated supervisory board parity in the mining, coal,
and steel sectors for firms with more than 1,000 employees.
    In 1952, the second landmark act introduced the one-third mandate for corporations.
This mandate exempted state-owned firms and firms with fewer than 500 (today: 501)
employees unless they are stock corporations not 100% owned by one family.
    In the 1960s, the union movement began pushing for further expansion of worker repre-
sentation, and the social-liberal coalition passed the 1976 codetermination law (MitbestG),
which mandated quasi-parity in non-mining/steel sectors for firms with more than 2,000
employees: workers elect 50% of the seats (quasi-parity), but the chairperson, who is
generally a shareholder representative, can break ties.
    Worker board representatives are elected by the firm's non-managerial workforce in
general, secret, equal and usually direct elections, organized through the works council.
Worker board representatives typically also serve on the works council. Once elected, the
worker representatives are co-equal directors with the shareholder representatives. All
(or, for larger firms, the majority) of the worker representatives on the supervisory board
must be employees of the firm. For larger firms with larger boards, the union can nominate
additional external candidates (§ 7 MitbestG, § 4 DrittelbG). Though not required by law,
a large share of worker-elected directors are union members (Addison, 2009). Unions
and associated organizations also offer training programs for worker representatives on
supervisory boards.
    As a result of these laws, in firms with 501 to 2,000 employees, workers elect one third of
the seats no matter the legal form. We will find that fewer than 10% of firms cross the 500
threshold in our analysis sample. All other firms cannot have worker board representatives
below this 500 threshold.
    The historical context was favorable for shared governance because, while industry leaders had collab-
orated with the National Socialist regime, the workers' movement was less tainted. Shared governance was
also viewed as an acceptable compromise to many firm owners in light of nationalization episodes in the
United Kingdom (McGaughey, 2017).
    In firms with more than 2,000 employees, the managerial workforce also participates in the elections and
sends at least one representative (§ 15 MitbestG).


                                                     6
    Starting 1952, there was a single exception to the exemption from board representation
even for the vast majority of firms below 501 employees: stock corporations were mandated
to have one-third representation no matter their size, even though, we show, the vast
majority of stock corporations are below this threshold. We exploit the sudden abolition
of this mandate for newly incorporated stock corporations described below. Hence, the
variation we study is between mandates for zero or one-third worker-elected directors
among stock corporations. Figure 1 illustrates corporate governance with one-third (Panel
(a)) or no worker participation (Panel (b)).


2.2    1994 Abolition of Shared Governance in New Stock Corporations
Since 1952, stock corporations had been required to have at least one-third worker repre-
sentation on the supervisory board regardless of size. A 1994 reform of the Stock Corporation
Act (Aktiengesetz) and the Works Constitution Act (Betriebsverfassungsgesetz) abruptly abol-
ished this requirement for newly incorporated stock corporations while preserving it in
existing ones. The law was a result of a last-minute political compromise and did not affect
LLCs or other features of shared governance. The goal pursued by abolishing codetermi-
nation in stock corporations was to harmonize the rules for stock corporations with those
of LLCs. Figure 2 Panel (a) illustrates the reform-induced changes in the mandate as a
function of a firm's incorporation date. These differences in the mandate by incorporation
date continue to the present.

Abolition in Stock Corporations Founded after August 10th, 1994 The reform abolished
the one-third mandate only for new stock corporations: those incorporated on or after
August 10, 1994. As a consequence of the reform, new stock corporations smaller than 501
employees cannot have any worker-elected board members, as the corporate law leaves no
room for choice (see, e.g., Raiser, Veil, and Jacobs, 2015, § 1 Rn. 26, § 23 (5), and § 96
AktG). Figure 1 Panel (b) illustrates corporate governance in these corporations without
the mandate. Upon having 501 employees, both cohorts face the same one-third mandate.
    See BGBl. I 1994 p. 1961. Today, the grandfathering rule with the 1994 cutoff is part of the One-
Third Participation Act (Drittelbeteiligungsgesetz), which in 2004 subsumed the relevant parts of the Works
Constitution Act.
    In principle, LLCs could add additional worker representatives exceeding the fractions mandated by
law, although anecdotal evidence suggests that this is not common. In any case, rules for LLCs were not
changed by the 1994 reform.
    For the vast majority of firms, the 500 employment cutoff is not binding. Among stock corporations in-
corporated after the reform, fewer than 7% of firms reach the 500 employee threshold using IAB employment
data (and fewer than 1% among the LLCs).




                                                    7
Political Compromise: Grandfathering of Codetermination in Existing Firm Cohorts
Importantly, the law locked in the one-third worker representation mandate in already
founded stock corporations. This cohort-specific grandfathering rule arose as a last-
minute political compromise in late May 1994, between the conservative-liberal governing
coalition, between Christian Democrats (CDU/CSU) and Free Democrats (FDP), and the
center-left opposition Social Democrats (SPD), who held a majority in the upper chamber
(Bundesrat). The conservative-liberal government had proposed to abolish shared gover-
nance in all stock corporations (up to 500 employees), including existing ones, to harmonize
rules between stock corporations and LLCs and to deregulate and simplify the corporate
and codetermination law. By contrast, the opposition had been in favor of maintaining
shared governance for all stock corporations ­ new and old. A key rationale for the cohort-
based compromise was that existing companies were believed to have already learned to
operate under the mandate. Upon reaching the political compromise, the law was then
promptly passed in both chambers in the subsequent weeks, and mandated a cutoff date
of August 10, 1994, the day after the law's promulgation.

Rigidity of the Cohort-Based Lock-In Notably, grandfathered stock corporations incor-
porated just before August 10, 1994 cannot simply escape the shared governance mandate
by re-incorporating. Specifically, a change of legal form and temporally connected re-
incorporation of an old stock corporation as an ostensibly new stock corporation does not
invalidate the mandate for board representation of workers. The 1994 grandfathering
rule has been challenged in legal cases brought by shareholders of older corporations on the
grounds that the arbitrary nature of the cutoff date violates the constitutional principle of
equality. However, the courts have upheld the clause, including the Federal Constitutional
Court as recently as 2014 (BVerfG, 09.01.2014, Az. 1 BvR 2344/11).

Secondary and Non-Grandfathered Elements of the Reform In addition to shared gov-
ernance, the 1994 law changed several other rules in the Stock Corporation Act (e.g., use of
     The initially proposed bill and compromise committee recommendation are reported in Drucksache
12/6721 and 12/7848 (Deutscher Bundestag, 1994), the minutes of plenary proceedings in Plenarprotokoll
12/233 and 12/237 (Stenographischer Bericht, Deutscher Bundestag, 1994).
     See, for example, Raiser, Veil, and Jacobs (2015) § 1 Rn. 5. Re-incorporations as corporations according
to European law (SE) also entail a grandfathering rule such that employee representation is preserved, even
if the corporation adopts a unitary board structure (§ 21 (6) SEBG). In theory, re-incorporation as LLCs
could undo the grandfathering rule (although LLCs can also opt to keep workers on the board). During
our sample period, re-incorporation as an LLC requires at least 75% of shareholder votes (§ 240 (1) UmwG),
although additional requirements apply in certain cases (§ 242 UmwG). We did not identify cases where
stock corporations switched corporate form to an LLC to evade the grandfathering rule. Likewise, the legal
practitioners we consulted deemed this scenario unlikely due to, among other reasons, switching costs. On
aggregate, such evasion behavior would show up as increased exits, which we do not detect in our survival
analysis in Figure 3 Panel (d) described in Section 4.


                                                     8
profits, general shareholder meetings), all of which applied regardless of the incorporation date
and hence had no grandfathering ­ such that they would affect both cohort groups and hence
be netted out in our difference between stock old and young stock corporations. Crucially,
only the shared governance setup was grandfathered in for existing corporations. More-
over, the additional features of the 1994 reform were considered secondary to the abolition
of shared governance by commentators. In principle, such non-grandfathered features
could still have effects in our research design if they affected the quantity or composition
of post-1994 entrants. In Section 4, we will directly assess these potential confounders, and
empirically find that the reform had no detectable effects on these margins. From that per-
spective, the broader motivation surrounding the reform to spur entrepreneurship among
stock corporations is not borne out in the data (and in any case, our research design would
net out any common effects on both older and younger stock corporations).


2.3    Wage Setting in Germany
The German labor market features considerable scope for firm-level wage setting, such
that in principle shared governance could affect the wage setting of the treated firms com-
pared to control firms. Sectoral bargaining, usually at the sector-state level, where unions
negotiate wage floors, hours and working conditions with employer associations, leaves
substantial scope for firm-specific deviations. Most importantly, covered employers can
always deviate upwards (Günstigkeitsprinzip, § 4 (3) TVG). Moreover, collective bargaining
coverage has decreased substantially while the prevalence of opening clauses, allowing
individual firms and workers to negotiate wages lower than those in the CBA, has risen
(Brändle, Heinbach, and Maier, 2011; Dustmann et al., 2014). Hence, worker representa-
tives on the works council (who are typically also board directors in case a firm is subject
to board codetermination) are directly involved in wage negotiations among firms that
are not part of a collective bargaining agreement (§87, Betriebsverfassungsgesetz) and in
firms taking advantage of a CBA opening clause. Consistent with considerable scope for
firm-level wage setting, there is large between-firm dispersion in wage premia even within
industries (Card, Heining, and Kline, 2013). Similarly, idiosyncratic shocks to localities or
firms, e.g., corporate tax changes or labor supply shocks, affect wages (Fuest, Peichl, and
Siegloch, 2018; Jäger and Heining, 2019). In the introduction, we have reviewed concrete
channels through which board representation can affect firm-level wages.
    In our rent sharing analysis, we estimate the effect of firm-specific productivity on
firm-level wages in the German context controlling for industry effects. We further analyze
    For example, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a newspaper of record in Germany, considered the
changes irrelevant except for the codetermination reform ("Nicht nur weiße Salbe", Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung, May 27, 1994, p. 13).


                                                   9
potential interdepencies between board-level codetermination and the two other forms of
worker involvement in wage setting, through collective bargaining agreements and works
councils.


3    Data and Sample Construction
Matched Firm-Establishment-Worker Data: Orbis-ADIAB Our main dataset is admin-
istrative employer-employee data from IAB merged with Bureau van Dk Orbis (BvD)
firm-level data (Antoni et al., 2018).
    The matched employer-employee data are based on social security records and cover
the universe of jobs subject to social security contributions from 1975 to 2014. In the
matched employer-employee data, we keep full-time workers aged 20-60. The data consist
of day-specific spells. We drop spells with less than 1 EUR per day. In each calendar year,
we keep one spell per worker, specifically the one with the highest total annual earnings.
Our IAB employment measure refers to these worker-firm matches. Our wage concept is
the daily wage (total earnings divided by number of days of the spell) of these full-time
workers, which we deflate using the 2015 CPI.
    The BvD data are balance sheets and income statements based on official company
registers, company reports, and information from credit rating agencies. The Orbis-ADIAB
version covers 2006 through 2014. The BvD data contains the information about legal form
and incorporation of the firm. We deflate all BvD nominal variables with the 2015 CPI.
    The matching of IAB and BvD data was conducted via establishment-level record
linkage from 2006 to 2014. The match rate for stock corporations is the highest among all
legal forms at 70.34% (Antoni et al., 2018).

Analysis Sample Our sample consists of stock corporations (and, as an additional control
group for a difference-in-differences analysis, LLCs) incorporated from 1989 through 1999
­ five years around the August 1994 reform cutoff. Our main specification will apply a
bandwidth of two years around the reform, and we will explore robustness to the full set
of bandwidths within the five-year window, as well as donut hole specifications. For our
wage analyses, we draw on data starting the calendar year after a firm's incorporation. We
detail the two assignment variables of our design, legal form and incorporation date, as
well as further sample restrictions below.
     By focusing on wage outcomes in the administrative IAB data, this paper differs from a previous version
that studied a broader set of financial outcomes in a larger and longer, multi-source Bureau van Dk sample
of firms rather than the IAB sample of firms. Footnote 31 summarizes the robustness of the main results.




                                                    10
Incorporation Date We use the exact date of incorporation merged on with an additional
data delivery from BvD. We also draw on additional BvD waves to assign each firm the
earliest date reported across all BvD waves.
    The standard BvD incorporation date is the establishment date of its corporate charter
(Feststellung der Satzung). The date relevant to the 1994 reform cutoff, however, is the entry
into the Commercial Register (Handelsregister), which in the 1990s occurred sometimes
up to a few months afterward. We merge on this information from the BvD Dafne data
set; for the unmatched firms, we keep the original incorporation date. In the 1990s, the
register entry was delayed by around two to four months after the charter date, so we
replace it if the gap is at most one year, to ensure sharpness of our local design at the
policy threshold. In our empirical design, we address any remaining mismeasurement
concerns with robustness checks in the form of donut hole specifications and varying the
bandwidths around the reform date.

Legal Form We keep stock corporations (Aktiengesellschaften and Kommanditgesellschaften
auf Aktien) and LLCs (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung), using the BvD legal form
variable.

Further Sample Restrictions We implement additional sample restrictions. First, we ex-
clude firms in industries exempt from codetermination. We additionally drop a handful
of specific firms based on a firm-by-firm review of stock corporations and a string-search
     We draw on the Amadeus/Orbis June 2020 version of the Wharton Research Data Services (which is
a panel data set going back multiple years for each firm). Since the IAB version of the BvD data covers
2006-2014, we additionally obtain historical BvD waves by drawing on the Orbis Historical product and
from the LMU-ifo Economics & Business Data Center (EBDC).
     Even in the case of divergence in the merged sample, the register date is always later than the charter
BvD date, suggesting that larger deviations are due to re-incorporations. Importantly, as described in Section
2.2, old stock corporations cannot escape the mandate by re-incorporating as a new stock corporation after
1994, so such cases leave out assignment of firms into treatment and control groups intact. Hence, for any
firms for which we cannot merge on the register date, the BvD date remains the relevant binding date and
we correctly classify these firms.
     We thank Thomas Hoffmann for an email correspondence regarding the typical delay between charter
and Commercial Register entry among Vor-AGs and Vor-GmbHs in the 1990s.
     The Orbis-IAB data set reports only one legal form per firm. For firms for which we have legal form
information pre-2006 (the year the ORBIS-IAB data starts) in our external historical BvD data described in
Footnote 14, we use the earliest reported legal form.
     We use the BvD industry code and assign the firm its modal primary industry code in the case of panel
variation, and replace missing primary industry information with secondary industry codes. We drop firms
without any industry information. Legally, § 1 (2) DrittelbG exempts enterprises that predominantly pursue
political, coalitional (labor or employer representation), religious, charitable, educational, scientific or artistic
goals as well as media organizations. We drop firms with the following NACE codes: utilities (35-39), rail
transport (490-492), media (5813, 60), education and scientific activities (72, 85, excluding driving and flying
schools (8553)), and public administration (84, 99), charities (87, 88), membership organizations (94) and
household activities (97, 98).



                                                         11
algorithm of both stock corporations and LLCs.          Second, we drop firms with head-
quarters in East Germany to drop entrants following of the reunification in 1990 to avoid
potentially unrepresentative selection due to, e.g., privatizations of formerly state-owned
firms. Third, we drop firm-years with fewer than 10 full-time employees in the IAB data.

Intent-To-Treat Interpretation Our reduced form design will yield intent-to-treat esti-
mates as by its nature it must not condition on time-varying endogenous firm charac-
teristics that affect codetermination rules. First, we do not condition on employment, in
particular not restricting the sample to firms with fewer than 501 employees. This share
is low even among stock corporations (incorporated after the reform, i.e. a control mean),
fewer than 7% of firms reach the 500 (IAB) employee threshold (and fewer than 1% among
the LLCs). This small share of firms that cross the threshold are simply always-takers (in
the sense of having board-level codetermination regardless of the incoporation date). We
do not find evidence for changes in the probability of crossing the 501 employee thresh-
old. Second, and relatedly, we do not condition on membership in a corporate group as
individual firms may be part of a corporate group that is subject to codetermination. Only
10.7% of our stock corporation control group are part of such a corporate group and we
find no evidence that older stock corporations are more likely to be part of a corporate
group sufficiently large (2001 and larger) to automatically trigger codetermination for all
group members. Finally, we do not condition on whether firms are fully owned by one
family. Legally, fully family-owned stock corporations smaller than 500 employees are
exempt from codetermination. We do not apply this test because in a previous version of
the paper we estimated (constructing family ownership on the basis of owners' last names
in the BvD ownership data) that only 10% of our control stock corporations fulfill the strict
criteria: in contrast to the usual definitions of family firms (at 50% of direct ownership
by a family), the codetermination law requires 100% of direct and indirect family owner-
ship. Since ownership structure and specifically concentration of large shareholders is a
potentially time-varying outcome itself, we do not apply this test. Overall, our results thus
have an intent-to-treat, reduced-form interpretation with a group of never-takers (fully
family-owned firms) as well as always-takers (firms that grow above 500 employees or are
part of a large corporate group with codetermination).
    We generate this drop list in an external BvD data set described in Footnote 14 and then merge it on the
ORBIS-ADIAB data set in an anonymized process. Namely, we drop a small number of firms we identify
as associated with Deutsche Telekom, Deutsche Bahn, and Deutsche Post, which were privatized in the
mid-1990s, public savings and cooperative banks, holdings, and strings associated with nonprofits ("e.V."
and "gemeinn"), as well as subsidiaries of older firms (Lufthansa, Merck, Thyssen, Fielman, Daimler), media
companies (using string search), and utilities-related string searches. In a previous version of the paper, we
further dropped state-owned firms based on BvD ownership data outside of the ORBIS-IAB data set. Since
this test only dropped one stock corporation (after having restricted the sample as described above) and
since the ownership information is imperfect, we do not impose this additional restriction.

                                                     12
Winsorization We winsorize all continuous variables at the 1% level separately by calen-
dar year. Before winsorizing, we set BvD variables to missing if spuriously negative (e.g.,
fixed assets and value added, but not, e.g., profits).

Entrants & Exits: Mannheim Enterprise Panel (MUP) We use firm panel data from the
Mannheim Enterprise Panel (provided by ZEW, Mannheim, see Bersch et al., 2014) to com-
prehensively study incorporations and exits from 1991 onward (provided by Creditreform
e.V., Germany's largest credit rating agency, based on official registers). We apply the same
industry tests as before. Since core outcome variables are not reported in the early years
in which we do not have Bureau van Dk coverage, we do not use the MUP data to study
outcomes. Data access is only permitted in the research data center, and we cannot merge
this data with our ORBIS-ADIAB data set. These data also do not contain financial or labor
market information for the period not covered by our main data sets.

Worker Supervisory Board Representation: Hoppenstedt Aktienführer While our
sample of BvD firms does come with some board membership information), it does not dif-
ferentiate between worker and shareholder representatives. To provide one intervention
check that the reform shifts board composition, we draw on the Hoppenstedt Aktienführer
covering all listed German firms and covering 1979 to 2015.

IAB Establishment Panel To assess effect heterogeneity by the prevalence of works
council as well as the extent to which collective bargaining agreements bind in an industry,
we draw on the IAB Establishment Panel (Fischer et al., 2008). The IAB Establishment Panel
is an annual survey of 16,000 establishments from all sectors and size categories. We use the
waves starting 2008 for industry classifications consistent with the BvD panel, weighting
establishments by employment. IAB data protection rules prohibit us from merging this
survey with our ORBIS-ADIAB data set.

Summary Statistics Since all variables are potential outcome variables (as treatment is
assigned at the date of incorporation), we report control means in each regression column
(separately for stock corporations and LLCs incorporated after the reform).
    The historical Hoppenstedt Aktienführer data have been digitized through a project by the German
Research Foundation (DFG) and were retrieved from https://digi.bib.uni-mannheim.de/aktienfuehrer/.




                                                13
4    No Effects on Avoidance and Firm Exit
We test for threats to identification, and answer the substantive questions whether firm
owners evade shared governance by retiming incorporations or switching corporate form,
and whether the institution affects firm exits.

Strategic Delay of Incorporation: McCrary Test Firms might delay incorporation date
around the reform cutoff date. Our first check is a visual inspection of the incorporation
frequency of stock corporations around the reform cutoff (Figure 3, Panel (a)). This
analysis uses our Orbis-ADIAB analysis sample. The figure reveals no evidence of a spike
in incorporations after August 10, 1994, nor of a missing mass of incorporations leading
up to the reform. In the same figure, we formally implement a McCrary (2008) test of
continuity of the density against the alternative of a jump in the density function at the
reform cutoff date, for which we find no evidence (0.439, SE 0.628).
    Several institutional features render these two types of substitution unlikely a priori, as
discussed in Section 2. The grandfathering was an unexpected political compromise, with
no clear advance indication that strategic delay of incorporation would relax the firm's
mandate. In addition, the legislative process was finalized within weeks of reaching the
compromise and mandated the day after the law's promulgation as a cutoff date.

Composition of New Firms by Legal Form Relatedly, more firms may substitute into
the legal form of stock corporation after the reform rather than an LLC. Figure 3 Panel
(b) plots the percentage of stock corporations against time of incorporation in a sample of
both LLCs and stock corporations. The probability of incorporating as a stock corporation
did not change discontinuously around the reform cutoff date.
    In addition, we test less locally whether the reform affected substitution in terms of
legal form in our sample window. To this end, we regress an indicator for incorporation
as a stock corporation on a post-reform indicator, a time trend, and the interaction of the
two. We find a small, secular trend towards incorporating as a stock corporation, but we
do not detect a level shift or trend change between the pre- and post-reform period (see
Figure 3b and Appendix Table A.1). This finding implies that the reform overall, which in
part aimed to encourage entrepreneurship in stock corporations, did not appear to have
spurred a higher quantity of entrants into this legal form.
     Appendix Figure A.1 conducts this test in the Mannheim Enterprise Panel, which contains comprehen-
sive data on entrants (rather than survivors in the Orbis-ADIAB data) from 1991 onward.
     This finding is also consistent with a survey sampling stock corporations founded between 1994 and 1996
(Schawilye, Gaugler, and Keese, 1999). The reported top reasons for incorporating as a stock corporation
rather than an LLC are: (1) image and public relations concerns (high prestige of stock corporations), (2)
raising capital, (3) corporate organization, (4) generational change and transfer of ownership.


                                                    14
Selection Test: Industry Composition Our design cannot test for selection by studying
observables of firms because these are outcome variables potentially affected by the reform.
Instead, we study one perhaps less mutable outcome determined at entry and hence
indicative of selection, namely industry composition. We consider a firm's industry (17
industry NACE Level-1 codes) as binary outcome variables. We study simple difference
effects between stock corporations incorporated in a two-year window before and after the
1994 reform. We also study the double difference, comparing the difference in industry
composition between stock corporations incorporated before and after the reform to that
for LLCs (which were not affected by the reform and are a second control group), as well as
a regression discontinuity approach; we formally describe these regression specifications
below in Section 5. We report results based on the Orbis-ADIAB data for each industry
in Figure 3 Panel (c), with detailed regression results in Appendix Table A.2. The reform
did not statistically significantly affect the industry composition of firms; the coefficients
are jointly insignificant in an F -test (p 0.384, p 0.396 and p 0.828, respectively, for
the three approaches). This test also rules out spurious composition effects from, e.g.,
business cycles or trends around the reform cutoff.

Attrition: Effects on Firm Survival To rule out selective attrition ­ and as an outcome
variable in its own right ­ we estimate effects on firm exit. Here, we draw on the compre-
hensive information on all firm incorporations in Germany from 1991 onward (from the
Mannheim Enterprise Panel, while our BvD data consist of survivors' panels from future
years). Figure 3 Panel (d) plots the survival probability of stock corporations by incor-
poration date, grouped within a two-year window before the reform ("Old") and after
("Young"). Across groups, around 50% of firms exist at age 20. Survival rates are very
similar albeit slightly lower among the younger stock corporation cohorts, if anything, sug-
gesting that shared governance raises firms' resilience. However, first, we find that these
slight differences completely disappear after age five, as illustrated in Appendix Figure
A.2 Panel (a). That is, conditional on firms surviving to year five, survival functions are
identical. Second, even in the early years, the survival is not differentially lower or higher
for old and young stock corporations when compared to the same cohort difference within
LLCs, a placebo group, which was not exposed to the 1994 reform (which only changed
     We also study composition effects in the universe of entrants, using the Mannheim Enterprise Panel
(MUP, see Appendix Figure A.1 Panel (b)). Here, we find no statistically significant effects for 15 of the
17 industries. The two exceptions are a small reduction in communications and a small increase in fi-
nance/insurance firms, and the F -test indicates significant effects (p < 0.01). These mild composition effects
in the comprehensive MUP population may not show up in our Orbis-ADIAB analysis sample because of the
additional sample restrictions we apply in the latter (at least ten employees, West German location, active in
some year from 2006 onward, dropping industries not subject to codetermination). Alternatively, exits may
have ironed out initial composition differences in our Orbis-ADIAB time, which starts in 2006.



                                                      15
codetermination rules for stock corporation cohorts). We also plot these lines in Panel (d).
As a complement, we report the corresponding difference-in-differences estimates on the
exit probability (one minus survival probability) by firm age in Appendix Figure A.2 Panel
(b). The confidence interval confidently includes zero even 20 years out (similarly for cu-
mulative probability of exiting by bankruptcy, the only subcategory of exit the MUP data
separate out). In any case, our analysis will always separately present simple differences
between cohorts of stock corporations as well as the difference-in-differences with LLCs,
and our results will be robust to either specification. In sum, we do not find evidence for
differential attrition from shared governance. This result is also of substantive interest,
revealing that shared governance does not appear to affect firm survival.

Validation Test: Realized Shifts in Worker Representation A potential explanation for
the absence of avoidance behavior could be that the reform had no bite and, in fact, did
not shift the presence of workers on corporate boards. We now verify that the reform did
shift worker representation by incorporation date. Figure 2 Panel (b) shows the empirical
share of workers on the supervisory board by incorporation date and firm size. We draw
on data from the Hoppenstedt Aktienführer, which lists supervisory board members and
incorporation year for the subset of listed stock corporations. We restrict the sample to
stock corporations founded between 1989 and 1999 for which board composition data
is reported.     The left (navy-colored) and right (red) bar pairs represent corporations
incorporated during or before 1994, and, respectively, during or after 1995. For firms
smaller than 500 employees (in dark shades, for which the reform changed the rules), there
is a stark difference: workers hold 29% of the seats in stock corporations incorporated in
or before 1994. In sharp contrast, workers comprise only around 3% of the seats in stock
corporations founded after 1994. The non-zero worker share is likely due to a small
amount of measurement error as the employment concepts for codetermination and in
the Hoppenstedt data might differ slightly. The lighter shades report analogous outcomes
for very large firms, for whom the mandate did not change and for whom the data show
no difference in worker representation ­ both around one third ­ confirming that the
comparison is not driven by shifts in reporting or data quality after 1994.

Employer Attitudes Towards Board-Level Representation We close with a discussion of
existing work on employers' and managers' views towards board-level codetermination.
A body of work from the varieties of capitalism literature has argued that employers have
embraced codetermination as a competitive advantage through its facilitation of coop-
    Specifically, we only consider firm-year observations with data on the role (chair person, worker repre-
sentative, etc.) of individual supervisory board members is reported for at least one third of the supervisory
board. We rely on data from the 1990s due to a structural break in reporting in 2000.


                                                     16
eration (Hall and Soskice, 2001; Thelen, 1991). Historically, the original introduction of
board-level representation in the Weimar Republic was heavily opposed by parts of the
workers' movement and the parties of the far left (Winkler, 1998); later, the Social Democrats
and the largest unions unsuccessfully opposed the introduction of one-third codetermina-
tion in post-war Germany, the institution we study, as they viewed the institution as too
favorable to the capital side (McGaughey, 2017). Regarding the more recent past, a meta-
study of survey evidence and media statements has documented considerable support for
board-level codetermination among individual managers and firms along with more neg-
ative views from employer associations (Paster, 2012). In a survey of firms incorporated
before the 1994 reform and thus directly related to our sample, Albach et al. (1988) find
that codetermination in the supervisory board is generally not seen as an impediment to
incorporation as a stock corporation. Rather, the surveyed firms generally accept shared
governance, in particular because of the information and specific knowledge about the
firm that worker representatives bring to the board room, and oppose the abolition of
shared governance.


5     Effects on Wages, Wage Policies, and Wage Structure
We introduce our research design studying the wage effects of shared governance with
a detailed analysis of raw wages. We then report results on wages adjusted for worker
demographics, on firms' pay premia net of worker selection, and on the wage structure
inside the firm.


5.1    Raw Worker-Level Wages
Cohort Graphs by Calendar Time Figure 4 Panel (a) nonparametrically plots raw worker-
level log wages separately for treated and control firm cohorts against calendar time. The
figure first averages worker-level wages at the firm-year level, and then at the group-year
level. The comparison is between stock corporations incorporated in a two-year window
before the reform and hence with a shared governance mandate ("Old Stock Corporations,"
plotted in navy circles with a solid line) and those in a two-year window after ("Young,"
plotted in red hollow circles with a dashed line). For most of the years, the two lines lie on
top of each other, indicating no discernible wage differences. Before 1999 a small positive
difference is visible. Around 2009, the older stock corporations see a larger real wage
    Paster (2012) argues that employer associations may have an incentive to strategically overstate the
concerns of their dissatisfied members. For the context of works councils, Müller and Stegmaier (2020) pro-
vide evidence that employer associations may resist expansions of codetermination even though employee
participation may entail, on average, positive effects on productivity or profits.


                                                    17
increase of about 5 log points and thereafter continue to evolve in parallel. This simple
plot of raw data is direct nonparametric evidence that shared governance does not appear
to substantially raise wages.
    The Orbis-ADIAB data set has the fullest coverage between 2006 and 2014, i.e. the
years during which the linkage between the BvD firms and the IAB matched employer-
employee data was performed year-by-year. The matched employee-establishment (IAB)
component of the merged Orbis-ADIAB data set goes back earlier than the BvD Orbis
outcomes, permitting us to study the firms already between their incorporation time and
2006, namely for those establishments subsequently present during the linkage period as
described in Section 3. As a result, coverage declines for the earlier years with perhaps
some positive selection of surviving establishments, which likely explains why the figure
suggests stagnant real wages before 2006. In the figure and throughout our analysis below,
we simply keep those early years. First, any such selection does not appear cohort-specific
as we confirm with a placebo group below. Second, we did not find differential attrition
based on comprehensive data from incorporation onward in Section 4. Third, we will
show robustness of wage results to restricting the sample to 2006 and 2014 (the coverage
years for BvD outcomes such as value added or fixed assets) in Section 6.

Additional Control Group: LLCs Secular trends in wages by incorporation date but
unrelated to shared governance could mask a treatment effect. We rule out this concern
by netting out incorporation time effects with a control group of unaffected legal forms
(LLCs), plotted in Panel (a) in navy and hollow red triangles. While LLC wages are lower
overall, there is no visually detectable difference in the level and evolution of log wages
comparing older and younger LLCs.

Cohort Graphs by Date of Incorporation Figure 4 Panel (b) plots averages of firm-
level log wages across all calendar years, but organized in more granular, quarter-of-
incorporation cohorts and in a wider sample range of five rather than two years around
the reform date. Stock corporations exhibit no clear shift in the wage level on either side
of the policy discontinuity, neither locally nor for farther-away observations. The graph
also reveals no differential trends, suggesting that a bandwidth choice is unlikely to affect
an estimate of the wage effect, as we confirm below. The graph also includes a local linear
regression line with a two-year bandwidth and a uniform kernel separately on either side
of the policy discontinuity; we discuss the regression discontinuity results below.
    We again include LLCs as a control group. Their bins are less dispersed due to the
    Section 4 showed that the reform did not shift the frequency of incorporations across legal forms, both
on average and across different industries.



                                                    18
substantially larger sample size. LLCs do not exhibit a trend or trend break around the
policy discontinuity either.

Regression Evidence We now formally estimate treatment effect of shared governance.
We start with a simple difference regression among stock corporations:

                            Yf t    +  Diff · 1(IncDate f < 0) + X f t  +         f t,                        (1)

where Y f t denotes the outcome for firm f in year t (as we stack the firm panel data) and
IncDate f denotes its incorporation date relative to August 10, 1994. We report results for
 ^ Diff in Table 1, Panel A, Column (1) including year fixed effects and industry-year fixed
effects as control variables X f t . The year or industry-year fixed effects also ensure that
only observations from years in which we observe both slightly older and younger stock
corporations will be used for identification of the treatment effect.
     Our main specification uses a two-year window around the reform. Here we find
point estimates ranging between 0.025 (SE 0.039) and -0.012 (SE 0.041). The confidence
intervals include zero and allow us to reject effects on mean wages larger than 0.10 or lower
than -0.09. The stability of the estimates across specifications with industry-specific and
common year fixed effects is consistent with the fact that the reform did not shift industry
composition, as we have documented in Section 4.
     Figure 4 Panel (c) plots ^ Diff for bandwidths ranging from 6 to 60 months, with industry-
year effects. The point estimates are centered around zero for bandwidths above 12 months
(and slightly larger at shorter bandwidths where confidence intervals widen); we cannot
reject zero effects in any of these bandwidths.
     Mirroring Figure 4 Panels (a) and (b), we now formalize the use of LLCs as an untreated
control group in a difference-in-differences specification to net out incorporation time,
cohort, or age effects, which may otherwise confound our estimate of the treatment effect:

Yf t     + DiD · 1(IncDate f < 0) · StockC f +  · 1(IncDate f < 0) +  · StockC f + X f t  +                      f t,

                                                                                                              (2)

    Of course, LLCs and stock corporations differ along a number of dimensions (including codetermination
rules, see control means in our regression tables as well as the level differences depicted in Figure 4 Panels (a)
and (b)). The identification assumption for the difference-in-differences design is not that stock corporations
and LLCs do not differ in levels, but that trends are parallel, i.e. the within-legal-form difference between
slightly older versus younger firms would stay constant, were it not for the 1994 reform changing the
codetermination mandate in young stock corporations (but leaving these rules unchanged for the three other
groups). While we cannot test this assumption in our analysis sample (because of the reform), Appendix
Table A.4 does so with placebo reforms, counterfactually assuming the 1994 reform had taken place in 1996
or 1997 instead. The robustness to varying bandwidths also supports this assumption.




                                                       19
where  captures incorporation time effects unrelated to shared governance and  captures
differences between stock corporations and LLCs.
    We report estimates of  ^ DiD in Table 1, Panel B, Column (1) for the two-year bandwidth.
Figure 4 Panel (d) plots estimates for bandwidths from 6 to 60 months. Consistent with
the visual evidence in Figure 4 Panels (a) and (b), the point estimates (and standard errors)
of the simple difference specifications are robust to including this second control group,
at 0.017 (SE 0.039) and 0.003 (SE 0.037).
    As a third approach to gauge wage effects, we implement a regression discontinuity
specification, which mirrors the difference specification in Equation (1) and additionally
controls for linear trends in incorporation time:

Yf t    + RD · 1(IncDate f < 0) +  · IncDate f + - · IncDate f · 1(IncDate f < 0) + X f t  +     f t,

                                                                                           (3)

where we use day-specific incorporation date as the running variable IncDate f . We report
results for ^ RD in a two-year window of incorporations around the reform date in Table
1, Panel C, Column (1). Figure 4 Panel (b) reports a local linear specifications with a
two-year bandwidth, plotting log wages against incorporation dates; Panel (e) reports the
robustness of estimates to varying bandwidths. Finally, Panel (f) reports the results of
donut hole specifications where we leave out observations in a radius, indicated on the
x-axis, around the reform date and extend the observations we include further away to
keep a two-year window.
    We find larger point estimates of 0.080 (SE 0.082) and 0.062 (SE 0.091) among stock
corporations in the two-year window. The standard errors more than double in the RD
specification so that the statistical power is lower. For example, the confidence interval for
the specification with industry-year effects ranges from -0.114 to 0.234.

Median Wages and Censoring To gauge the role of outliers in affecting effects on the
typical worker, Column (2) of Table 1 reports effects on median rather than mean log
wages. Effects remain similar, e.g., -0.013 (SE 0.043) with industry-year effects in Panel A.
In Column (3), we investigate effects on the share of censored observations at the firm, i.e.
workers with earnings above the social security maximum. The control mean is 0.130. We
find essentially zero effects on this outcome, between -0.004 (SE 0.020) and 0.014 (SE 0.019).


5.2    Composition Adjustment
Raw worker-level wage effects could capture or mask changes in worker composition. In
Column (4) we therefore also report effects on log wages residualized by basic Mincerian

                                             20
controls, namely a cubic polynomial in age specific to three education groups (no training,
vocational training, and university-level education). We find that the positive point esti-
mates from raw wages drop to zero, suggesting that the wage effects captured composition
effects. Moreover, precision increases. For example, in our specifications with year effects,
we find estimates for  ^ Diff of -0.004 (SE 0.028), for ^ DiD of -0.010 (SE 0.028), and for ^ RD
of 0.012 (SE 0.059). Importantly, the larger point estimates in the RD specifications not
controlling for Mincerian controls shrink close to zero when controlling for demographics.


5.3    Wage Policies: AKM Firm Effects
To further understand the effect on firms' pay policies net of worker selection, we analyze
firm pay premia in specifications with worker and firm effects as in Abowd, Kramarz, and
Margolis (1999), thereby controlling for all permanent worker characteristics. We estimate
the fixed effects in the full Orbis-ADIAB data set before applying our sample restrictions.
We estimate firm level fixed effects in a rolling window of five years. We label each five-
year window based on its midpoint, so that 1997 denotes the five-year window from 1995
to 1999. In our analysis sample, we assign firms their AKM effects starting three years
after their incorporation i.e. when the first full five-year window is available.
    We report results visually in Figure 5. We find that pay premia evolve similarly over
time among older and younger stock corporations, and similarly for LLCs (Panel (a)). Since
the levels of the AKM specifications are not comparable across years, we here normalize the
AKM pay premia among older stock corporations to correspond to the average log wage
in this firm group within each year (i.e. these AKM effects track the corresponding line in
Figure 4 Panel (a)) and adjust the premia in the other groups accordingly. The regression
discontinuity plot in Panel (b) reveals quantitatively small and statistically insignificant
differences at the discontinuity among stock corporations. For all bandwidth plots, we
find small, stable, and precisely estimated effects on pay premia centered around zero.
    The regression results in Column (5) of Table 1 mirror the visual analysis in Figure 5.
At a two-year bandwidth, we find point estimates between 0.004 (SE 0.016) and 0.023 (SE
0.031), ruling out firm pay premia effects above 0.084 in our most conservative specification.
    We have also assessed whether worker selection as proxied by average AKM worker
fixed effects is affected by shared governance and report results in Column (6) of Table
1. We find no evidence for economically significant worker selection effects with tight
confidence intervals including zero in all specifications.
    To estimate AKM effects in the full sample, we follow Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) and drop marginal
jobs, part-time employment, and wage observations below the 5th percentile and control for window-specific
cubic polynomials in potential experience by education group.
    We have also assessed direct measures of worker skill in Appendix Table A.10 and can rule out large



                                                    21
5.4    Wage Structure
We also analyze effects on the firm-level wage structure, as pay compression may mask
wage effects (e.g., Saez, Schoefer, and Seim, 2019), and worker representation has been
hypothesized to compress wages and reduce inequality inside the firm (e.g., Freeman and
Medoff, 1985, p. 82-85), perhaps also through informal norms, as in the case of unions
(see, e.g., Western and Rosenfeld, 2011). We report the effects on deciles of wages at
the firm level for the two-year bandwidth and with industry-year effects in Figure 6 and
Appendix Table A.3. In the simple difference and difference-in-differences specifications,
we find similar point estimates close to zero across the deciles ranging between -0.026
(SE 0.061) and 0.024 (SE 0.063). For the RD estimates, the confidence intervals again
expand, with larger point estimates for the bottom two wage deciles. (The levels of the
point estimates appear positive, but recall that these estimated dropped to zero with basic
composition adjustment, so our interest here is on detecting potential heterogeneity rather
than interpreting the average level.) Overall, we do not detect that shared governance
leads to a compression of the pay structure.


5.5    Labor Share
We analyze whether shared governance affects the firm-level labor share, which we cal-
culate as the wage bill share of value added, here drawing on the BvD component of the
Orbis-ADIAB data for both variables. We report results in Column (7) of Table 1 and
find a small negative effect of around -0.03 in most specifications relative to a control mean
of 0.757. With standard errors of about the same magnitude, we can rule out labor share
increases of more than 0.03 in the difference and the difference-in-differences designs.
Standard errors double in the RD design with point estimates of 0.025 and -0.029. Over-
all, our results indicate no substantial increases in the labor share and, if anything, point
towards a larger share of compensation going to capital. We will investigate the effects on
capital formation, scale, rent sharing, and profitability in the next section.


6     What Explains the Absence of Wage Effects?
In this section, we further investigate the absence of wage effects and potential explana-
tions. Drawing on a simple bargaining model, we first illustrate two potentially offsetting
mechanisms through which shared governance may affect wages. On the one hand, it may
shifts across skill groups.
    Since value added is not filled for all firms, we replicate the IAB wage results for the set of firms with
nonmissing value added (per worker) measure in Appendix Table A.6, and find very similar results.



                                                     22
increase worker bargaining power, thus increasing wages. On the other hand, the posi-
tive wage effect may be offset through hold up through which higher worker bargaining
power deters capitalists' investment and thus lowers the capital stock and wages. We then
empirically shed light on both of these mechanisms. We find, if anything, that board-level
codetermination raises capital formation. Next, we show that shared governance has no
effects on rent sharing. We conclude with an analysis of effect heterogeneity. We find
that board-level codetermination does not raise wages even when collective bargaining
coverage or the prevalence of works councils is low, or when surplus is high.


6.1   Conceptual Framework
To guide our subsequent analysis and to build intuition, we present a simple model of
firm-level wage setting. Even though the institution is distinct from firm-level unions as it
is, e.g., more cooperative, a natural starting point is to view shared governance as boosting
worker bargaining power, which we do in the context of a canonical union bargaining
model (Brown and Ashenfelter, 1986; Abowd and Lemieux, 1993). N is the total size of
the labor entity bargaining with the firm at hand. b denotes some reduced-form flow
value for those not employed in the firm (unemployment insurance or wages at a reference
competitive wage). L is the employment level, which we here set to be fixed at L L    ¯ . Here,
we take output Y F (L , K ) as given, which is zero at disagreement (with zero labor). We
later relax this assumption in Section 6.2.

Wage Bargaining Wages w are determined by Nash bargaining, with workers holding
bargaining power  :

                      w    arg max{  log S W (w ) + (1 - ) log S F (w )} ,                  (4)
                                 w


where S W     L (w - b ) is the workforce's surplus: the inside value of the relationship
Lw + (N - L )b minus the outside option, which is N b .
    Firm surplus is S F Y - w L¯ - c K at the bargaining stage, where the firm's outside option
is repurposing or reselling capital at price c . Total surplus is S S W + S F Y - bL - c K .
The Nash bargaining solution allocates surplus shares such that SW  S or S F (1 -  )S ,
and therefore the Nash wage w  is outside option b plus share  of surplus:

                                           Y - bL - c K
                                 w     ·                + b.                                (5)
                                                L




                                              23
Wage Effects of Shared Governance The bargaining setup suggests three channels
through which shared governance can affect wages:

                                  Y - bL - c K             Y
        dw         d          ·                +·      d              + (1 -  ) · db -  · d (c K ),       (6)
                                       L                   L
               Rent Sharing                                             Implausible: Outside Options
                                                    Size of the Pie


where dx x SG - x No SG denotes the difference in variable x between firms with and with-
out shared governance; Equation (6) takes a total derivative and a linear approximation,
thereby assuming that the effects are small (consistent with our findings at least for wages).
    In the next two sections, we turn to the right hand side and decompose potential wage
effects and lack thereof. We study effects on the size of the surplus pie, and specifically
the capital disinvestment channel of hold-up models, in Section 6.2. In Section 6.3, we
analyze effects on d  proxied for by rent-sharing estimates. We evaluate compensating
differentials or outside option shifts in Section 6.4. Finally, we also ask whether wage
flexibility at the firm level may mask wage effects, in a heterogeneity analysis in Section
6.5. We discuss broader views on the institution in the conclusion.

                                                                                                   Y -bL -c K
6.2   Do Smaller Pies and Hold-Up Effects Mask Wage Effects? d                                         L

One potential mechanism that could explain the absence of wages is that shared governance
may reduce the size of the pie, i.e. the surplus to be shared between workers and firms.
This could work through a variety of mechanisms. Most prominently, the canonical
hold-up view provides a theoretical underpinning predicting this outcome through a
disinvestment channel. In that model, anticipating that labor will grab a larger share of
the fruits from their investments, capitalists reduce investment in these models. Several
authors have argued that unions and other forms of worker representation can be thought
of as rent-extracting institutions (see, e.g., Grout, 1984; Lindbeck and Snower, 1989), and
that shared governance is one of such institutions (Jensen and Meckling, 1979).
    Alternative models of shared governance also have predictions for firm performance
and hence wages in bargaining models, or more broadly any model in which firm size
of productivity affects wages, such as wage posting models. An alternative bargaining
model permits workers to jointly bargain over investment and wages. In Appendix Section
C, we show that such a model can predict positive investment effects and break the hold-
up prediction even in a closely related bargaining model, building on (Manning, 1987).
Efficient bargaining too may predict positive rather than negative scale and investment
effects (Crawford, 1988). Corporate governance may be affected and differential selection or
accountability of managers may lead to changes in firm scale or productivity. Alternatively,

                                                24
shared governance may affect productivity directly through information sharing, fostering
worker voice, and facilitating training in specific skills (e.g., Freeman, 1980).

Firm Performance: Output and Productivity The surplus measure corresponding to our
worker-level wage outcomes is per-worker surplus, so we start with value added divided
by BvD-based employment (labor productivity).
    We again start by plotting raw data of this outcome, in Figure 7 Panel (a), tracking
cohorts of corporations over time, sorting firms into treatment and control groups along the
two-year bandwidth around the reform date. Unlike the wage outcomes, this graph starts
in 2006 as it builds on the BvD component of the Orbis-ADIAB data set. Labor productivity
of stock corporations incorporated before 1994 and hence with shared governance (blue
line with solid circles) is above their control group's level in all years, except for two slight
dips in the early years. As a placebo comparison, the figure also plots the corresponding
cohort graphs for LLCs, where old and young LLCs' labor productivity essentially lies on
top of each other throughout (at a lower level).
    In Table 2 Column (1), we report the corresponding regression estimates for the treat-
ment effect of board-level codetermination. The table follows the structure of Table 1 for
the wage outcomes. The simple difference with year fixed effects reveals positive effects of
2.2% to 7.5%, for the simple difference between old and young stock corporations as well
as with LLCs as a second control group, and with year and year-industry fixed effects. The
standard errors are 11-12%, so the wide confidence intervals include zero.
    Since the sample drops when we study value added per worker compared to the
IAB-based wage outcomes in Table 1, we show that these wage results are robust to
restricting the sample to the firm-year observations with non-missing value added per
worker information, in Appendix Table A.6. Additionally, we report effects of placebo
reforms in 1996 and 1997 on value added per worker (and on all other outcomes shown in
Table 2) in Appendix Table A.4. Appendix Figure A.3 shows the corresponding RD plots,
with RD regression results in Appendix Table A.7 Column (1) (and similarly for the other
BvD outcomes of Table 2 discussed below). Here, confidence intervals double, such that
the large negative point estimates also accommodate positive effects of around 25%.
    In Column (2), we also study log value added (i.e. not divided by employment), to
measure the total size of the pie and because firm scale is a marker of productivity in many
models (e.g., Lucas, 1978). For this much more dispersed outcome, confidence intervals
    A previous version of this paper focused on the financial BvD outcomes, and therefore drew on a larger
and longer multi-source BvD sample described in Footnote 14. The current version instead focuses on the
IAB outcomes, and studies an additional, smaller, set of BvD outcomes in the smaller and shorter Orbis-
ADIAB sample of BvD firms. The main results for capital and value added have remained robust to this
alternative sample; the capital share and outsourcing effects are closer zero in the Orbis-ADIAB sample.



                                                   25
double (standard errors expand to from 0.11 to 0.23). Point estimates are zero except for the
large negative simple difference with industry-year fixed effects; this specification however
converges towards zero in the difference-in-differences specification.
    As less demanding measures than value added, we also present log revenue per worker
and log revenue in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 2, a BvD outcome filled for considerably
more firms. Point estimates are positive throughout, 0.058 to 0.177 for log revenue per
worker (SEs of 0.140 to 0.154) and 0.159 to 0.296 for log revenue (SEs of around 0.26).
    Lastly, in Columns (5) and (6), we study log employment (BvD and IAB variables
respectively) as another measure of firm scale but also as the BvD employment measure
normalizes our per-worker outcomes. The BvD variable includes those abroad; the IAB
one captures employment subject to German social security and thus more relevant for
codetermination thresholds (see Annuß, 2019, DrittelbG § 3, Rn. 2). We find statistically
insignificant, positive effects, ranging from 0.005 to 0.092% (SEs of 0.154-0.160) for BvD
employment, and 0.045-0.065 (SEs of 0.136 to 0.153) for IAB employment. We also find no
effects on the skill structure and outsourcing as shown in Appendix Table A.10.
    We conclude that shared governance does not appear to reduce the size of the firm's
pie, either in total or on a per-worker basis. While effects are noisily estimated, if anything,
shared governance appears to raise surplus and firm scale proxies.

Capital Formation: Testing the Hold-Up Hypothesis We now study the effect of shared
governance on capital. An influential argument against shared governance is that granting
workers control rights will raise their bargaining power and wages, and thereby discourage
capital formation (Grout, 1984). Prominently, Jensen and Meckling (1979) lay out the
disinvestment effects of codetermination as follows:
      [T]he workers will begin `eating it up' [the firm] by transforming the assets of
      the firm into consumption or personal assets. [...] It will become difficult for
      the firm to obtain capital in the private capital markets. [...] The result of this
      process will be a significant reduction in the country's capital stock, increased
      unemployment, reduced labor income, and an overall reduction in output and
      welfare.
Formally, the firm invests anticipating wage rule (5), in which share  of the marginal
product of capital goes to wages, acting like a distortionary profit tax (as in Grout, 1984).
     We find negative point estimates throughout for the share of low-skilled workers without vocational
training. We further study effects on the share of workers in outsourceable occupations (food, cleaning,
security and logistics) and similarly find no evidence for firms reducing employment in these categories. We
also report positive, insignificant effects on the BvD-based value-added/revenue ratio as an inverse measure
of outsourcing.
     Consider a simplified two-stage setting, in which capital K is purchased in stage 1 at price c , becomes
productive in stage 2, then fully depreciates. There is no discounting between periods. The firm chooses K

                                                     26
    The BvD data report capital stocks but not capital expenditures ("investment"). We
start with fixed assets, which comprise tangible assets, such as buildings and equipment,
and intangible assets, such as patents or trademarks. The point estimates for log fixed
assets, reported in Column (7) of Table 2, are large and positive, around 0.431 to 0.546, and
relatively stable across specifications, with large standard errors of 0.317-0.352, such that
confidence intervals include zero. We further study tangible fixed assets in Column (8),
documenting large positive but again insignificant effects ranging from 0.270 to 0.490 (SEs
of 0.196-0.224).
    Since these scale outcomes are potentially skewed, we additionally normalize them
by BvD employment, as with value added. That is, we estimate effects on the capital-
labor ratio. Effects on log fixed assets per worker, reported in Column (9) are of similar
magnitude ranging between 0.443 and 0.587, but are now more precisely estimated with
standard errors dropping to 0.250-0.273; as a result, the positive effects are statistically sig-
nificant at the 5% (10%) level for the specifications with industry-year effects (year effects).
Column (10) reports effects on log tangible assets per worker, for which normalizing by
employment leaves point estimates similar but reduces standard errors as well.
    These non-negative capital effects imply that either shared governance does not de-
press capital formation through hold-up. Or, the hold-up mechanism is overturned by
counteracting forces that crowd in investment. Our analysis of effects on rent sharing will
allow us to shed further light on the former mechanism.nc
    As we drop some firms for this analysis using BvD outcomes (relative to our analysis
of wages), Appendix Table A.5 shows that the wage results from Table 1 are robust to
restricting the sample to firm-year observations with non-missing fixed asset information.
Again, Appendix Table A.4 reports results from placebo reforms in 1996 and 1997. We
also ballpark that the large implied capital effects can be considered consistent with the
moderate value added effects in a Cobb-Douglas constant-returns production framework.
maximizing expected profits, (w , L   ¯ , K ) F (K, L
                                                    ¯ ) - wL
                                                           ¯ - cK , by equalizing the marginal cost of purchasing
it, c , with its marginal benefit (output net of wage effects): FK (L ¯ , K) c + L ¯ w                ¯ , K) - c )
                                                                                          c +  ( FK ( L
                                                                                     K
                
c + (c - c )   1-   . Capital investment involves two considerations. First, the marginal unit of capital raises
output by FK , but comes at cost c . Second ­ the core of the hold-up mechanism ­ workers grab share 
of surplus in stage 2. At that stage, capital has value c  c . Underinvestment (Fk > c ) emerges as long as
wage bargaining power  > 0 and capital is at least partially sunk (c < c ). As a result, shared governance
may exacerbate hold-up, and reduce investment to the extent that it boosts worker bargaining power  in
                       
                                 ¯ , K  ) ( c - c ) (1- )2 < 0, the capital/labor ratio, and hence per-worker surplus.
                                1                      1
wage negotiations: dKd     FKK (L
Appendix Section C shows that these predictions extend to the case with endogenous labor.
    Consistent with the increase in capital intensity, we also documented a negative but insignificant decline
in the labor income share in Table 1 Column (7), although, for example with Cobb-Douglas the capital
income shared can remain constant even if capital intensity increases such as in response to factor price
shifts. Regarding the labor productivity effects, the capital share in our sample is 0.272 on average (one
minus control mean of labor share in Table 1 Column (7)), which in a Cobb-Douglas constant-returns
production function represents the elasticity of value added per worker to the capital-labor ratio (holding


                                                         27
Assessment of Hold-Up Theory Shared governance does not appear to induce firms to
become smaller or less productive. The data specifically reject the prominent disinvestment
prediction of the hold-up and agency cost views of shared governance (see, e.g., Jensen
and Meckling, 1979). A priori, such disinvestment could have rationalized the absence of
wage increases or even led to wage reductions.
    Instead, the findings on firm performance align more with richer perspectives on in-
dustrial relations and capital-labor interactions. For example, worker representatives may
have longer-term perspectives than shareholders or executives. Or, shared governance
may facilitate cooperation and long-term contracts between owners, managers and the
workforce, perhaps by institutionalizing communication channels and repeated interac-
tions. These views are consistent with anecdotal evidence for worker representatives'
self-described objectives to boost firm scale and investment, for example:

      [S]hared governance per se opposes short-term shareholder interests. The
      focus [of shared governance] is on the long-term safeguarding of the company
      through investments and innovations with participation of the employees [...].

                         Berthold Huber, Worker Supervisory Board Representative, Siemens

Similarly, surveys of plant-level agreements have found that workers often push for guar-
antees of investments in existing plants when negotiating (Rehder, 2003).
    Alternatively, the institution may lead to agency conflicts inside the firm such as fa-
cilitating managers' empire building, with resources being locked into fixed capital at
the expense of dividends ­ so that capitalists may not voluntarily adopt codetermination
(Jensen and Meckling, 1979). We study profitability effects below.


6.3    Does Shared Governance Boost Rent Sharing? d 
We directly assess the degree to which workers' bargaining power in wage setting may
have shifted in shared-governance firms. We do so by studying firm-level rent sharing
elasticities and find no shifts induced by shared governance. The motivation for the
efficiency constant). Hence, a 50% increase in fixed assets times a capital share of 0.272 would lead to a
13.6% predicted increase of value added per worker, close to the two higher point estimates among the four
specifications in Table 2 Column (1), and within the confidence interval of all estimates. The magnitude of
the capital point estimates also falls within the range of estimated firm-level investment responses to other
corporate governance variation. In the context of Compustat firms, Bertrand and Schoar (2003) find that
manager style effects on firm-level investment (to capital ratio) differ by 20 log points between the 25th and
75th percentile of managers. Pan, Wang, and Weisbach (2016) find a 29% (6.9/24) effect on investment over
the course of a new CEO's tenure comparing the first three years to the later years. In the context of smaller,
Danish firms, Bennedsen et al. (2007) find an effect of death-driven successions of CEOs by family members
rather than outside directors reduces assets by 0.30 (SE 0.24) in family firms.
     Source: Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, November 15, 2004, Nr. 267, p. 13, translation by authors.

                                                      28
analysis is that in bargaining settings, workers can capture firm-specific shifts in surplus,
to a degree that is guided by worker bargaining power  :

                                               w
                                                         .                                             (7)
                                               S /L

The rent sharing estimation therefore permits us to directly test whether shared governance
shifts worker bargaining power in wage setting (as in Jäger et al., forthcoming, who also
include a meta analysis of the implied parameters). In practice, we estimate standard rent
sharing elasticities that use variation in surplus arising from value added per worker, i.e.
  w  Y /L    Y /L
Y /L w
            w . We have found no effects on wages or the labor share, so we can plausibly
go from the elasticity to the bargaining interpretation.

Shared Governance and Rent Sharing In Figure 8, we plot the relationship between
wages to value-added per worker. Specifically, we use our AKM firm fixed effects as a
measure of composition-adjusted wage policies of firms on the y-axis, and firms' sample
average of log value added per worker on the x-axis. Our sample is firms incorporated
within two years around the reform. The slope between these two variables traces out the
rent-sharing elasticity. This slope is 0.067 (SE 0.018) for young shareholder corporations
not subject to the mandate. Comparing these firms with their slightly older peers subject
to the mandate, we detect no difference in rent sharing induced by shared governance. The
simple difference estimate is 0.010 (SE 0.026). We find a difference-in-differences estimate
of 0.007 (SE 0.022) using LLCs as a second control group, ruling out increases in the rent-
sharing elasticity of more than 0.05. Consequently, we find no evidence for workers
capturing a larger part of output when they have board representation ­ a result consistent
with and perhaps underlying the absence of hold-up patterns in capital formation.

Reconciling Wage and Value Added Effects Finally, we assess whether the wage and
value added effects can be rationalized with rent-sharing elasticities. The largest effect
on value added per worker in Table 2 is 0.075. Together with the rent-sharing elasticity
of 0.067 reported in Figure 8 among young stock corporations, the largest value added
per worker point estimate implies a wage increase of 0.075 × 0.067  0.005. By contrast,
     In Appendix Figure A.4, we plot the data for the pooled analysis sample. We estimate an elasticity of
0.084 (SE 0.004). While no previous worker-and-firm-level rent-sharing estimates for Germany have been
reported (for lack of matched firm and worker data), the elasticity is similar to those documented in other
countries (Card et al., 2018; Jäger et al., forthcoming) and to estimates in the German context based on
establishment-level survey data (Gürtzgen, 2009; Hirsch and Müller, forthcoming).
     The DiD estimate is the coefficient on the interaction between log value added per worker and an
indicator for stock corporations incorporated before August 10, 1994. The model also includes base effects
for cohort and legal form, each interacted with value added.



                                                    29
even when using the upper confidence interval of the value added per worker effects
of around 0.3, the predicted wage effect purely from the potential increase in surplus
would be 0.3 × 0.067  0.020. These predicted effects are strikingly similar to the point
estimates for the effect on firm pay premia in Column (5) of Table 1 range between 0.004
to 0.023, with tight confidence intervals especially for the difference and difference-in-
differences specifications (SEs of around 0.015). That is, workers may benefit from the
larger capital stock and larger pie through the standard rent-sharing channel, which, by
itself and absent increases in rent sharing, however, would imply small wage gains. Our
rent-sharing estimates revealed no large effects on this aspect of wage setting.

Profitability We find no evidence of profit effects (see Appendix Table A.8), which is
consistent with the absence of measurable effects on wages, rent sharing and labor shares.
This finding is also consistent with an absence of strategic delay or rushed entrance of
firms before the cutoff documented in Section 4, which would have been predicted if
shared governance were very costly or profitable (e.g., Jensen and Meckling, 1979).


6.4   Non-Wage Amenities, Compensating Differentials, and Outside Op-
      tions: Effects on Tenure and Separations
Shared governance may raise the amenity value of staying at the firm and such an in-
crease may be offset in lower wages through compensating differentials (Kim, Maug, and
Schneider, 2018). If shared governance led to higher worker rents, even if those manifested
themselves in non-monetary form rather than wages, we would see an increase in work-
ers' willingness to stay in the firm and hence an increase in average tenure, even if wages
were not or even negatively affected. Lastly, in principle, shared governance may affect
wage-relevant outside options (as in Jäger et al., forthcoming) , though we find it difficult
to formulate plausible scenarios, such as shifts in training in general human capital or
unemployment durations.
    We test these alternative mechanisms by studying tenure and separations in Appendix
Table A.10 Columns (6) through (8), studying log tenure, level of tenure in years, and
the annual separation rate, among the full-time workers that make up our wage analysis
sample. Effects on tenure are statistically insignificant but positive in most specifications.
In the simple difference specifications, point estimates suggest 0.071 and 0.077 increases
in log tenure (SEs of around 0.05) and 0.235 and 0.332 years of additional tenure (SEs of
0.279 and 0.301) with year and industry-year effects respectively. In the DiD specifications
(which would also account for potential mechanical effects from lower censoring of tenure
in older firms), effects fall towards zero and slightly negative (with similar SEs). We find


                                             30
essentially zero effects on the annual separation rate (-0.001 to -0.009 with SEs of around
0.0006 to 0.016, with control means of 0.095).
   Therefore, the results do not suggest that shared governance raises job quality aspects
valued by workers. Additionally, studying turnover is also another validation revealed-
preference check of the absence of wage premia. Finally, our results on turnover also
do not provide support for the voice-exit hypothesis, by which information sharing and
exercise of worker voice could have reduced turnover (Hirschman, 1970; Freeman, 1980).


6.5   Heterogeneity Analysis: Wage Flexibility, Collective Bargaining,
      High-Rent Industries, and Works Councils
Here, we analyze heterogeneity of wage affects across pockets of the labor market. To this
end, we calculate characteristics at the three digit industry level, for example, collective
bargaining agreement (CBA) coverage, and then analyze treatment effects depending on
whether the firm is in an industry cell above or below the median (allowing for all relevant
base and interaction effects). For the CBA and works council variables, our analysis draws
on the IAB Establishment Panel (a representative survey of establishments) from 2008
onwards (when the NACE Rev. 2 codes permit a direct mapping to the BvD NACE code).
We report results in Figure 9, including means of the sorting (heterogeneity) variables
separately for the above and below median samples of stock corporations in a two-year
bandwidth around the reform. Panel (a) does so for firm-level mean log wages, and Panel
(b) for AKM firm fixed effects. Appendix Table A.11 reports the full regression results.

Collective Bargaining Coverage and Observed Wage Differentiation A potential reason
why wage effects are close to zero may be that CBAs may leave little room for decentralized
wage setting at the firm level. Centralized wage setting may curb rent extraction and thus
reduce hold-up problems (Freeman and Lazear, 1995; Acemoglu, 2001). In the German
context, CBA coverage has been associated with lower responsiveness of establishment-
level wages to the presence of works councils and to establishment-level value added, as
well as with lower dispersion of establishment wage fixed effects Hübler and Jirjahn (2003);
Gürtzgen (2009); Hirsch and Müller (forthcoming).
   First, we sort firms into their industries by (industry- or firm-specific) CBA coverage
using the IAB Establishment Panel. There is substantial heterogeneity in CBA coverage,
namely 42.5% below and of 79.7% above the median. This wide dispersion and the
existence of pockets with low coverage reflect a trend towards decentralization since the
1990s (Brändle, Heinbach, and Maier, 2011; Dustmann et al., 2014; Kügler, Schönberg, and
Schreiner, 2018).


                                            31
    Analyzing heterogeneity across industries with low and high coverage, we find no
evidence that higher CBA coverage masks wage effects. We detect no statistically significant
effects in the two subsamples in any of the specifications for either mean log wages nor
AKM firm fixed effects. In the simple difference and difference-in-differences analyses,
low-coverage cells exhibit close to zero point estimates of 0.003 (SE 0.022) and -0.002 (SE
0.018); in the regression discontinuity specification, the point estimate is slightly larger but
with wider standard errors (0.045, SE 0.041).
    Second, we study heterogeneity in the fraction of firms with "binding" CBA coverage
in an industry (having a CBA and not paying above-CBA wages). The baseline levels
above and below the median are very low at 0.254 and 0.108, respectively, again reflecting
substantial scope for localized wage setting. We again find no evidence for larger wage
effects in cells of the labor market where few firms have a binding CBA.
    Third, we draw on measures of dispersion of the AKM firm pay premia we estimated
in Section 5, and calculate their standard deviation within a 3-digit industry to capture
scope for firm-level wage setting. We again find no evidence that firms in industries with
more decentralized wages experience larger wage effects of board-level codetermination.

Prevalence of Works Councils We calculate heterogeneity in the effect by the prevalence
of establishment-level works councils at the industry level. On the one hand, board-level
codetermination may have smaller effects when establishment-level representation in the
form of works councils is already prevalent as the institutions may partially duplicate
each other. On the other hand, observers of industrial relations in Germany have argued
for a complementarity between establishment- and board-level codetermination (as board
representatives can also serve as works councilors, see, e.g., Streeck, 1984; Paster, 2012).
We find substantial baseline variation in the prevalence of works councils with an average
prevalence of 57.2% and 83.5%, respectively, in cells above and below the median.
    Our results leave some room for larger wage effects in industries with higher works
council coverage. In the simple difference and difference-in-differences specifications, the
point estimates for wage effects are larger in industries with a higher prevalence, at 0.097
(SE 0.060) and 0.116 (SE 0.057). But the effects on AKM pay premia are smaller at 0.028
(SE 0.023) and 0.040 (SE 0.023). We find the mirror image of negative but insignificant
effects for cells below the median. In the regression discontinuity specification, we find
smaller effects on both outcomes at 0.020 (SE 0.120) for log wages and -0.010 (SE 0.039)
for AKM pay premia. Overall, we do not find sharp evidence for a complementarity or a
substitutability between works councils and board-level codetermination, but the weight
of the evidence speaks, if anything, more for a complementarity in terms of wage effects.



                                              32
Proxies for Surplus Finally, we assess heterogeneity in the effect by the level of surplus
per worker. At an extreme, in industries with low or no rents, increases in worker bargain-
ing power may not be consequential because wages are determined by outside options
rather than reflecting the surplus from the employment relationship. We consider three
surplus proxies at the industry level: log value added per worker, average AKM pay pre-
mium, and average tenure (revealed-preference measure of surplus). Figure 9 reveals no
significant heterogeneity in the wage effects across these surplus proxies.


7    Conclusion
Worker representation on company boards does not appear to affect wage setting in de-
tectable ways such as by raising bargaining power. We have studied a cohort- and legal-
form-based reform in Germany that abolished this form of shared governance in some
firms but permanently preserved it in others. Our main results are that, first, worker
representation on boards does not appear to affect wage setting, as measured by average
wages, firms' wage policies, the wage structure within firms, or the degree of rent sharing.
Second, the data reject the prominent disinvestment prediction of the hold-up and agency
cost views of shared governance (see, e.g., Jensen and Meckling, 1979), which could have
in principle rationalized the absence of wage effects. Third, we do not find negative prof-
itability effects, although we caution that our data do not contain dividend payouts or firm
valuations. Fourth, heterogeneity analyses rule out that sectoral collective bargaining, the
presence of works councils or low surplus masked potential wage effects. Hence, our
findings may extend beyond institutional settings similar to Germany's.
    We close by reflecting on aspects of the institution we study itself. First, owner repre-
sentatives always retain the majority of board seats in the German codetermination system
(and in other countries with codetermined boards). Even theories that do grant minor-
ity factions some real authority (Aghion and Tirole, 1997) would do so only in matters
unimportant to capital ­ a domain that plausibly excludes wage setting. Second, in the
dual board structure, the supervisory boards do not have direct influence on wage setting,
although we reviewed a number of plausible channels in the introduction. Third, unlike
the role of unions in an adversarial system, de jure the fiduciary duty of worker represen-
    While we did not find that board representation affected wage setting and found if anything larger
incremental effects in cells with more works councils, our study does speak to the potential independent
wage effects of plant-level works councils, the other facet of shared governance.
    The evidence is consistent with limited influence of gender quotas for board seats on the gender wage
gap as in Bertrand et al. (2018); Maida and Weber (2019). Yet, these studies affected the composition of
capital representatives along a demographic dimension. Other settings with unitary board structures as the
dominant governance form, such as in Finland, permit worker representation also on board of directors and
in management bodies.


                                                   33
tatives on the board lies with the corporation and hence may be more aligned with the
capital owners. In fact, it has been argued that worker board representatives are typically
moderate actors and that minority board representation itself may have contributed to
overall more cooperative labor relations in Germany (Thelen, 1991).




                                            34
References
Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. "High Wage Workers and High
 Wage Firms." Econometrica 67 (2):251­333.
Abowd, John and Thomas Lemieux. 1993. "The Effects of Product Market Competition on
 Collective Bargaining Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada." The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (4):983­1014.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2001. "Good Jobs versus Bad Jobs." Journal of labor Economics 19 (1):1­21.
Addison, John. 2009. The Economics of Codetermination: Lessons from the German Experience.
 New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Addison, John, Thorsten Schank, Claus Schnabel, and Joachim Wagner. 2007. "Do Works
 Councils Inhibit Investment?" ILR Review 60 (2):187­203.
Addison, John, Claus Schnabel, and Joachim Wagner. 2001. "Works Councils in Germany:
 their Effects on Establishment Performance." Oxford Economic Papers 53 (4):659­694.
Addison, John, Paulino Teixeira, and Thomas Zwick. 2010. "German Works Councils and
 the Anatomy of Wages." ILR Review 63 (2):247­270.
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole. 1997. "Formal and Real Authority in Organizations."
 Journal of Political Economy 105 (1):1­29.
Albach, Horst, Christiane Corte, Rolf Friedewald, Marcus Lutter, and Wolf Richter. 1988.
  Deregulierung des Aktienrechts: das Drei-Stufen-Modell: ein Entwurf zur Modifizierung des
  Aktienrechts im Hinblick auf personalistische Gesellschaftsstrukturen und einen erleichterten
  Börsenzugang. Verlag Bertelsmann-Stiftung, Gütersloh.
Annuß, Georg. 2019. Münchener Kommentar zum Aktiengesetz, vol. 2. C. H. Beck, 5 ed.
Antoni, Manfred, Katharina Koller, Marie-Christine Laible, and Florian Zimmermann.
 2018. "Orbis-ADIAB: From Record Linkage Key to Research Dataset." FDZ-
 Methodenreport 04/2018 (en). Editors Rainer Schnell, Manfred Antoni .
Autor, David, David Mindell, and Elisabeth Reynolds. 2019. "The Work of the Future:
 Shaping Technology and Institutions."
Bennedsen, Morten, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel
  Wolfenzon. 2007. "Inside the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Deci-
  sions and Performance." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2):647­691.
Bersch, Johannes, Sandra Gottschalk, Bettina Müller, and Michaela Niefert. 2014. "The
  Mannheim Enterprise Panel (MUP) and Firm Statistics for Germany." ZEW-Centre for
  European Economic Research Discussion Paper (14-104).
Bertrand, Marianne, Sandra Black, Sissel Jensen, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2018. "Break-
  ing the Glass Ceiling? The Effect of Board Quotas on Female Labour Market Outcomes
  in Norway." The Review of Economic Studies 86 (1):191­239.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. "Managing With Style: The Effect of
  Managers on Firm Policies." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4):1169­1208.

                                              35
Brändle, Tobias, Wolf Dieter Heinbach, and Michael Maier. 2011. "Tarifliche Öffnung
  in Deutschland: Ausmaß, Determinanten, Auswirkungen." Zeitschrift für Arbeitsmarkt-
  forschung 44 (1):163­172.
Brown, James and Orley Ashenfelter. 1986. "Testing the Efficiency of Employment Con-
  tracts." Journal of Political Economy 94 (3, Part 2):S40­S87.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. "Firms and Labor
  Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory." Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1):S13­
  S70.
Card, David, Francesco Devicienti, and Agata Maida. 2014. "Rent-Sharing, Holdup, and
  Wages: Evidence from Matched Panel Data." Review of Economic Studies 81 (1):84­111.
Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2013. "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise
  of West German Wage Inequality." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3):967­1015.
Connolly, Robert, Barry Hirsch, and Mark Hirschey. 1986. "Union Rent Seeking, Intangible
 Capital, and Market Value of the Firm." The Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (4):567­
 577.
Crawford, Vincent. 1988. "Long-Term Relationships Governed by Short-Term Contracts."
  The American Economic Review 78 (3):485­499.
Dustmann, Christian, Bernd Fitzenberger, Uta Schönberg, and Alexandra Spitz-Oener.
 2014. "From Sick Man of Europe to Economic Superstar: Germany's Resurgent Econ-
 omy." Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (1):167­88.
Fischer, Gabriele, Florian Janik, Dana Müller, Alexandra Schmucker et al. 2008. "The IAB
  Establishment Panel­from Sample to Survey to Projection." FDZ Methodenreport 1:2008.
FitzRoy, Felix R and Kornelius Kraft. 1993. "Economic Effects of Codetermination." The
  Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95 (3):365­375.
Freeman, Richard. 1980. "The Exit-Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market: Unionism, Job
  Tenure, Quits, and Separations." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (4):643­673.
Freeman, Richard and Edward Lazear. 1995. "An Economic Analysis of Works Councils."
  In Works Councils: Consultation, Representation, Cooperation in Industrial Relations, edited
  by Joel Rogers and Wolfgang Streeck. NBER Comparative Labor Markets Series.
Freeman, Richard and James Medoff. 1985. "What Do Unions Do?" Industrial and Labor
  Relations Review 38 (2):244­263.
Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch. 2018. "Do Higher Corporate Taxes
  Reduce Wages? Micro Evidence from Germany." American Economic Review 108 (2):393­
  418.
Gold, Michael. 2011. "`Taken on Board': An Evaluation of the Influence of Employee
 Board-Level Representatives on Company Decision-Making across Europe." European
 Journal of Industrial Relations 17 (1):41­56.
Gold, Michael, Norbert Kluge, and Aline Conchon. 2010. 'In the Union and on the Board':


                                             36
  Experiences of Board-level Employee Representatives Across Europe. European Trade Union
  Institute (ETUI).
Gorton, Gary and Frank Schmid. 2004. "Capital, Labor, and the Firm: A Study of German
 Codetermination." Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (5):863­905.
Grout, Paul. 1984. "Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash
  Bargaining Approach." Econometrica 52 (2):449­460.
Gürtzgen, Nicole. 2009. "Rent-Sharing and Collective Bargaining Coverage: Evidence from
 Linked Employer­Employee Data." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111 (2):323­349.
Hall, Peter and David Soskice. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of
 Comparative Advantage. Oxford University Press.
Hirsch, Barry. 2004. "What Do Unions Do for Economic Performance?" Journal of Labor
  Research 25 (3):415­455.
Hirsch, Boris and Steffen Müller. forthcoming. "Firm Wage Premia, Industrial Relations,
  and Rent Sharing in Germany." ILR Review .
Hirschman, Albert. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations,
  and States, vol. 25. Harvard University Press.
Hübler, Olaf and Uwe Jirjahn. 2003. "Works Councils and Collective Bargaining in Ger-
 many: the Impact on Productivity and Wages." Scottish Journal of Political Economy
 50 (4):471­491.
Jäger, Simon and Jörg Heining. 2019. "How Substitutable Are Workers? Evidence from
  Worker Deaths." Working Paper .
Jäger, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, Samuel Young, and Josef Zweimüller. forthcoming.
  "Wages and the Value of Nonemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling. 1979. "Rights and Production Functions: An Appli-
  cation to Labor-Managed Firms and Codetermination." Journal of Business 52 (4):469­506.
Kim, Han, Ernst Maug, and Christoph Schneider. 2018. "Labor Representation in Gover-
  nance as an Insurance Mechanism." Review of Finance 22 (4):1251­1289.
Kügler, Alice, Uta Schönberg, and Ragnhild Schreiner. 2018. "Productivity Growth, Wage
 Growth and Unions." In Price and Wage-Setting in Advanced Economies, vol. 2018. ECB,
 215­247.
Lee, David and Alexandre Mas. 2012. "Long-Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New Evi-
  dence From Financial Markets, 1961-1999." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1):333­
  378.
Lindbeck, Assar and Dennis Snower. 1989. The Insider-Outsider Theory of Employment and
  Unemployment. MIT Press.
Lucas, Robert. 1978. "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms." The Bell Journal of
  Economics 9 (2):508­523.



                                              37
Machin, Stephen and Sushil Wadhwani. 1991. "The Effects of Unions on Investment and
 Innovation: Evidence from WIRS." The Economic Journal 101 (405):324­330.
Maida, Agata and Andrea Weber. 2019. "Female Leadership and Gender Gap within
 Firms: Evidence from an Italian Board Reform." CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13476 .
Malcomson, James. 1983. "Trade Unions and Economic Efficiency." The Economic Journal
 93:51­65.
Manning, Alan. 1987. "An Integration of Trade Union Models in a Sequential Bargaining
 Framework." The Economic Journal 97 (385):121­139.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. "Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Disconti-
 nuity Design: A Density Test." Journal of Econometrics 142 (2):698­714.
McGaughey, Ewan. 2017. "The Codetermination Bargains: The History of German Cor-
 porate and Labour Law." Columbia Journal of European Law 23 (1):135­176.
Müller, Steffen and Jens Stegmaier. 2020. "Why Is There Resistance to Works Councils in
 Germany? An Economic Perspective." Economic and Industrial Democracy 41 (3):540­561.
Pan, Yihui, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael Weisbach. 2016. "CEO Investment Cycles." The
  Review of Financial Studies 29 (11):2955­2999.
Paster, Thomas. 2012. "Do German Employers Support Board-level Codetermination?
  The Paradox of Individual Support and Collective Opposition." Socio-Economic Review
  10 (3):471­495.
Piketty, Thomas. 2020. Capital and Ideology. Harvard University Press.
Raiser, Thomas, Rüdiger Veil, and Matthias Jacobs. 2015. Mitbestimmungsgesetz und Drit-
  telbeteiligungsgesetz. Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG.
Rapp, Marc Steffen, Michael Wolff, Jan Hennig, and Iuliia Udoieva. 2019. "Mitbestimmung
  im Aufsichtsrat und ihre Wirkung auf die Unterenhmensführung: Eine empirische
  Analyse vor dem Hintergrund der Finanz-und Wirtschaftskrise." Study Nr. 424, Hans-
  Böckler-Stiftung .
Redeker, Nils. 2019. "The Politics of Stashing Wealth: The Demise of Labor Power and the
  Global Rise of Corporate Savings." Center for Comparative and International Studies (CIS) .
Rehder, Britta. 2003. Betriebliche Bündnisse für Arbeit in Deutschland: Mitbestimmung und
  Flächentarif im Wandel. Campus Verlag.
Saez, Emmanuel, Benjamin Schoefer, and David Seim. 2019. "Payroll Taxes, Firm Behavior,
  and Rent Sharing: Evidence from a Young Workers' Tax Cut in Sweden." American
  Economic Review 109 (5):1717­63.
Schawilye, Ramona, Eduard Gaugler, and Detlef Keese. 1999. "Das Gesetz für kleine
  Aktiengesellschaften und zur Deregulierung des Aktienrechts." In Die kleine AG in der
  betrieblichen Praxis. Springer, 1­10.
Schnabel, Claus and Joachim Wagner. 1996. "Ausmaß und Bestimmungsgründe der Mit-



                                             38
  gliedschaft in Arbeitgeberverbänden: eine empirische Untersuchung mit Firmendaten."
  Industrielle Beziehungen/The German Journal of Industrial Relations 3 (4):293­306.
Scholz, Robert and Sigurt Vitols. 2019. "Board-Level Codetermination: A Driving Force for
  Corporate Social Responsibility in German Companies?" European Journal of Industrial
  Relations 25 (3):233­246.
Steger, Thomas. 2011. "Context, Enactment and Contribution of Employee Voice in the
  Boardroom: Evidence From Large German Companies." International Journal of Business
  Governance and Ethics 6 (2):111­134.
Streeck, Wolfgang. 1984. "Co-Determination: The Fourth Decade." In International Per-
  spectives of Organizational Democracy. John Wiley & Sons.
Svejnar, Jan. 1981. "Relative Wage Effects of Unions, Dictatorship and Codetermination:
  Econometric Evidence From Germany." The Review of Economics and Statistics 63:188­197.
Thelen, Kathleen Ann. 1991. Union of Parts: Labor Politics in Postwar Germany. Cornell
  University Press.
Western, Bruce and Jake Rosenfeld. 2011. "Unions, Norms, and the Rise in US Wage
 Inequality." American Sociological Review 76 (4):513­537.
Winkler, Heinrich August. 1998. Weimar 1918-1933: Die Geschichte der ersten deutschen
 Demokratie. CH Beck.




                                           39
Tables

                           Table 1: Effect of Shared Governance on Wages


                          Log Wage, Log Wage, % Above SocSec  Log Wage,          AKM Firm       AKM Worker      Labor
                            Mean        p50      Maximum     Mincer Resid.       Fixed Effect    Fixed Effect   Share
                             (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)                 (5)             (6)         (7)
 Panel A: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

 Year FE                    0.025       0.037         0.014           -0.004           0.011        0.009        -0.029
                           (0.039)     (0.043)       (0.019)         (0.028)          (0.015)      (0.021)      (0.034)

 Industry-Year FE           -0.012      -0.013        -0.004          -0.025           0.004        -0.021       -0.034
                           (0.041)     (0.043)       (0.020)         (0.030)          (0.016)      (0.018)      (0.035)

 Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

 Year FE                    0.017       0.028         0.014           -0.010           0.010        0.006        -0.035
                           (0.039)     (0.043)       (0.019)         (0.028)          (0.015)      (0.021)      (0.035)

 Industry-Year FE           0.003       0.003         0.004           -0.018           0.010        -0.016       -0.033
                           (0.037)     (0.040)       (0.017)         (0.028)          (0.015)      (0.018)      (0.033)

 Panel C: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

 Year FE                    0.080       0.049         0.007           0.012            0.023        -0.010       -0.029
                           (0.082)     (0.089)       (0.039)         (0.059)          (0.031)      (0.042)      (0.069)

 Industry-Year FE           0.062       0.045         0.013           -0.010           0.010        0.006        0.025
                           (0.091)     (0.096)       (0.045)         (0.069)          (0.034)      (0.042)      (0.067)


 Control Mean: Stock Cs    4.576       4.672          0.130           0.087           -0.008        0.120       0.728
 N, Stock Cs                229         229            229             229              226          226         151
 N, Firm-Years Stock Cs    3,179       3,179          3,179           3,179            2,667        2,667        920


 Control Mean: LLCs        4.366       4.434          0.049           -0.064           -0.057      -0.032        0.757
 N, LLCs                   12,639      12,639         12,639          12,639           12,047      12,047        3,694
 N, Firm-Years LLCs       146,289     146,289        146,289         146,289          116,932     116,932       18,008




Note: The table reports the effect of shared governance on wages. Panel A reports the effect of shared
governance,     ^ Diff , in simple difference specifications (1) comparing stock corporations incorporated in a
two-year window before vs. after the August 10, 1994 cutoff date. Panel B reports difference-in-differences
results, ^ DiD in Equation (2), additionally drawing on LLCs (a legal form unaffected by the 1994 reform) as
a control group. Panel C reports estimates        ^ RD from the RD specifications in Equation (3). We use 2-digit
NACE designations to create industry-year fixed effects. All outcomes, with the exception of the indicator
variable in Column (3), are winsorized at the 1% level by year. The control means refer to observations of
firms incorporated on or after August 10, 1994. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported
in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        40
                                   Table 2: Effect of Shared Governance on Labor Productivity and Capital Intensity



                                Log VA Log Value Log Revenue                  Log       Log Emp     Log Emp        Log        Log       Log Fixed A.    Log Tang. A.
                                per Emp     Added      per Emp.             Revenue      (BvD)       (IAB)       Fixed A.   Tang. A.      per Emp        per Emp.
                                   (1)        (2)         (3)                 (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)            (9)            (10)
       Panel A: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

       Year FE                      0.075        0.022          0.058         0.159       0.070        0.045       0.500      0.323        0.478             0.273
                                   (0.118)      (0.221)        (0.154)       (0.264)     (0.158)      (0.144)     (0.322)    (0.283)       (0.260)          (0.209)

       Industry-Year FE             0.022       -0.233          0.137         0.212       0.005        0.056       0.546      0.490        0.587            0.486
                                   (0.114)      (0.229)        (0.140)       (0.266)     (0.158)      (0.153)     (0.352)    (0.299)       (0.273)          (0.224)

       Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

       Year FE                      0.074        0.015          0.055         0.152       0.050        0.065       0.431      0.270        0.443             0.253
                                   (0.119)      (0.224)        (0.154)       (0.265)     (0.160)      (0.144)     (0.323)    (0.284)       (0.261)          (0.211)

       Industry-Year FE             0.055       -0.033          0.177         0.296       0.092        0.046       0.514      0.394        0.492            0.338
                                   (0.113)      (0.226)        (0.141)       (0.260)     (0.154)      (0.136)     (0.317)    (0.264)       (0.250)          (0.196)
41




       Control Mean: Stock Cs       11.367      16.062         12.262        16.526       4.174       3.880       13.966     12.962         9.962           8.935
       N, Stock Cs                   146         152            171           178          212         229          217        217           212             211
       N, Firm-Years Stock Cs        894         923            892           982         1,367       3,179        1,548      1,535         1,359           1,350


       Control Mean: LLCs           11.074      15.215         11.976        15.264       3.318       3.255       12.424     12.132         9.243            8.935
       N, LLCs                      3,524       3,715          8,776         9,242       11,096      12,639       11,491     11,407        11,000           10,916
       N, Firm-Years LLCs           16,783      18,110         35,983        43,434      57,006      146,289      72,988     72,177        56,265           55,724



     Note: The table reports the effect of shared governance on measures of productivity and capital intensity. Panel A reports the effect of shared governance,
      ^ Diff , in simple difference specifications (1) comparing stock corporations incorporated in a two-year window before vs. after the August 10, 1994 cutoff
     date. Panel B reports difference-in-differences results,      ^ DiD in Equation (2), additionally drawing on LLCs (a legal form unaffected by the 1994 reform) as a
     control group. Appendix Table A.7 reports estimates          ^ RD from the RD specifications in Equation (3), but features substantially wider confidence intervals.
     We use 2-digit NACE designations to create industry-year fixed effects. All outcomes are winsorized at the 1% level by year. The control means refer to
     observations of firms incorporated on or after August 10, 1994. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. Stars denote
     statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Figures
   Figure 1: Corporate Governance and Worker Representation on Supervisory Board

     (a) One-Third Worker Representation                      (b) No Worker Representation




Note: The figure illustrates the supervisory board composition and election in German corporations with and
without worker-elected supervisory board directors. Panel (a) illustrates the stylized corporate governance
structure with one-third worker representation (here depicted as the blue supervisory board members).
Panel (b) shows the stylized corporate governance structure with no worker representation. Our paper
studies variation in whether workers elect a third of the supervisory board members.




                                                    42
                                           Figure 2: Overview of Reform and Research Design
                                     (a) Worker Representation by Legal Form and Incorporation Date

                                     1/3
                                                                                      Stock Corporations
                                                                                      LLCs
             Worker Share on Board



                                                 Permanent Lock-In
                                                 for Old Stock Corps
                                                                            Abolition in Young Stock Corps
                                                                                   on August 10 1994




                                                  No change in LLCs

                                       0
                                          1993            1994             1995              1996            1997
                                                                 Incorporation Date

                         (b) Empirical Share of Worker Board Seats in Listed Stock Corporations


                                                                                        500 Employees
                                     40                                                >500 Employees
            Worker Share on Board




                                     30


                                     20


                                     10


                                      0
                                      Incorporation in/before 1994              Incorporation after 1994



Note: Panel (a) illustrates board codetermination rules as a function of incorporation date and legal form
among firms with at most 500 employees. Stock corporations incorporated before August 10, 1994 face a
mandate to have one-third worker representatives on the supervisory board. Stock corporations incorporated
on or after August 10, 1994 have no worker representatives on the supervisory board. LLCs, which we use
as control group in the DiD specifications, have no worker representation on the board. Regardless of
incorporation date and legal form, firms with 501 to 2,000 workers have one-third representation, firms with
more than 2,000 employees have quasi-parity representation. See Section 2.1 for more information. Panel
(b) shows the empirical share of worker seats in listed stock corporations founded between 1989 and 1999
based on the Hoppenstedt Aktienführer, by size and incorporation date.



                                                                       43
                                                                     Figure 3: Validation of Design: Incorporation, Selection, and Survival
                   (a) Frequency of Incorporation and McCrary Test                                                                    (c) Balance of Industry Composition

                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                    Mining
                   Number of Stock Corporations




                                                          10
                                                                                                                                            Manufacturing
                                                              8

                                                              6                                                                              Construction


                                                              4                                                                                 Wholesale

                                                              2
                                                                                                                                           Transportation
                                                              0                                Disc. Estimate: 0.439 (SE 0.628)
                                                                  -24           -12             0            12           24
                                                                                                                                         Communications
                                                                    Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Months)


                                                          (b) Selection Into Stock Corporation Status                                  Finance/Insurance


                                                          5
                                                                                                                                               Real Estate
                   Proportion Stock Corporations (ppt)




                                                          4
                                                                                                                                    Professional/Scientific

                                                          3
                                                                                                                                   Administration/Support

                                                          2
                                                                                                                                      Arts/Entertainment

                                                          1
                                                                                                                                           Other Services

                                                          0                                                                                               -.4      -.2    0     .2        .4
                                                              -24           -12             0            12           24
                                                                Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Months)                                         Difference    DiD    RD

                                                                                                   (d) Survival Probability by Group
                                                         1
                                                                                                                                  Old Stock Corporations (Shared Governance)
 Share of Cohort Surviving




                                                                                                                                  Young Stock Corporations (No Shared Goverance)
                                                                                                                                  Old LLCs
                                                         .8                                                                       Young LLCs




                                                         .6



                                                         .4
                                                              1        2     3     4     5     6     7      8      9     10   11   12     13         14       15   16    17   18     19        20
                                                                                                                Years Since Incorporation
Note: Panel (a) plots the frequency of the incorporation of stock corporations around the August 10, 1994 cutoff date, after which the
shared governance mandate was relaxed. It reports the result of the McCrary (2008) test for a jump in the density at the threshold.
Panel (b) visualizes the selection into stock corporation status as the share of a sample of all incorporations (stock corporations and
LLCs) by incorporation date. Appendix Table A.1 reports corresponding regression results. Panel (c) plots the simple difference
(^ Diff ), difference-in-differences ( ^ DiD ) and regression discontinuity (^ RD ) coefficients with 95% confidence intervals corresponding
to, respectively, Equations (1), (2), and (3) with an indicator for industry type (NACE Rev. 2 Classification 1) as the outcome variable.
Some industries are excluded due to insufficient observations among stock corporations.F -tests of joint significance show no statistically
significant compositional changes in any of the three specifications with p-values of p 0.384, p 0.396 and p 0.828, respectively.
Due to insufficient observations, some industries are dropped in the RD design (denoted by a gray ×). Appendix Table A.2 reports the
corresponding regression results in detail. Panels (a) through (c) of this figure are based on the Orbis-ADIAB data; we plot versions of
Panels (a) and (c) in Appendix Figure A.1 using the Mannheim Enterprise Panel (MUP) data. Panel (d) is based on MUP data and shows
survival probabilities of firms incorporated within a two-year window of August 10, 1994 separately for firms incorporated before or
after the cutoff date, and for stock corporations and LLCs.

                                                                                                                        44
                                        Figure 4: Effects on Mean Log Wages

                   (a) Over Time, by Group                                (b) By Incorporation Date and Legal Form
      5                                                                    5         Old Stock Corps (Shared Gov.) Young Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)



   4.8                                                                   4.8



   4.6                                                                   4.6



   4.4                                                                   4.4


                                                                                   Old LLCs                                         Young LLCs
   4.2                                                                   4.2
     1994         1998     2002      2006       2010       2014                -20      -16   -12     -8    -4      0    4      8     12    16     20
                                   Year                                                Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Quarters)


(c) Differences (Old - Young Stock Corps),                            (d) DiD (w/ LLCs as Additional Control Group),
By Bandwidth Around Reform Date                                       By Bandwidth Around Reform Date
      .4                                                                   .4

      .2         Diff: -0.012 (SE 0.041)                                   .2              DiD: 0.003 (SE 0.037)


      0                                                                        0

     -.2                                                                  -.2

     -.4                                                                  -.4

     -.6                                                                  -.6
           6     12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60                                        6     12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60
               Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)                               Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)

(e) RD Estimates Among Stock Corporations,                            (f) RD Donut Hole Estimate,
By Bandwidth Around Reform Date                                       Excluding Months Around Reform Date

     .4                                                                    .4

     .2                                                                    .2

      0                                                                    0

    -.2                                                                   -.2

    -.4          RD: 0.062 (SE 0.091)                                     -.4

    -.6                                                                   -.6
           6     12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60                                        0            5           10           15          20            25
               Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)                                 Months excluded around August 10, 1994


Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on firm-level mean worker-level log wages. Panel (a) presents the time series of
old (incorporated up to two years before the cutoff) and young (incorporated up to two years after the cutoff) firms, of stock corporations
and LLCs, averaged by firm group and year. Panel (b) is a binned scatter plot by quarter of incorporation date around the reform
cutoff with a five-year bandwidth. It also plots results of a local linear regression with a uniform kernel and a two-year bandwidth,
using day-specific incorporation date as the running variable. Panels (c), (d), and (e) plot the coefficients varying the bandwidths for,
respectively, the simple difference, difference-in-differences, and regression discontinuity specifications with industry-year fixed effects
and standard errors clustered at the firm level. Panel (f) reports regression discontinuity estimates for a donut hole specification with
a two-year bandwidth, industry-year fixed effects, and standard errors clustered at the firm level. Here we drop observations in a
radius, indicated on the x-axis, around the reform cutoff and extend the overall two-year bandwidth correspondingly. We report the
corresponding main estimates, denoted in Panels (c) through (f) by the highlighted blue square and blue 95% confidence interval, in
Table 1 Column (1).

                                                                    45
                                        Figure 5: Effects on AKM Pay Premia

                  (a) Over Time, By Group                                (b) By Incorporation Date and Legal Form
    4.75                                                                  .1 Old Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)        Young Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)



                                                                         .05
    4.65

                                                                          0


    4.55
                                                                        -.05



    4.45                                                                 -.1    Old LLCs                                          Young LLCs
       1996          2000          2004          2008          2012            -20    -16   -12     -8    -4      0    4      8    12    16      20
                                   Year                                              Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Quarters)


(c) Differences (Old - Young Stock Corps),                            (d) DiD (w/ LLCs as Additional Control Group),
By Bandwidth Around Reform Date                                       By Bandwidth Around Reform Date
      .3                                                                  .3

      .2                                                                  .2

      .1                                                                  .1

      0                                                                    0

    -.1          Diff: 0.004 (SE 0.016)                                  -.1             DiD: 0.010 (SE 0.015)

    -.2                                                                  -.2

    -.3                                                                  -.3
           6     12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60                                     6      12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60
               Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)                             Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)

(e) RD Estimates Among Stock Corporations,                            (f) RD Donut Hole Estimate,
By Bandwidth Around Reform Date                                       Excluding Months Around Reform Date
      .3                                                                  .3

      .2                                                                  .2

      .1                                                                  .1

      0                                                                    0

    -.1                                                                  -.1
                 RD: 0.010 (SE 0.034)
    -.2                                                                  -.2

    -.3                                                                  -.3
           6     12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60                                      0            5           10           15          20            25
               Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)                               Months excluded around August 10, 1994
Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on AKM firm effects. Panel (a) presents the time series of old (incorporated
up to two years before the cutoff) and young (incorporated up to two years after the cutoff) firms, of stock corporations and LLCs,
averaged by firm group and year. Panel (b) is a binned scatter plot by quarter of incorporation date around the reform cutoff with a
five-year bandwidth. It also plots results of a local linear regression with a uniform kernel and a two-year bandwidth, using day-specific
incorporation date as the running variable. Each calendar year indicates the mid-point of a five-year estimation window of the AKM
effects. (Since the levels of the AKM specifications are not comparable across years, we normalize the AKM pay premia among older
stock corporations to correspond to the average log wage in this firm group within each year and adjust the premia in the other groups
accordingly.) Panels (c), (d), and (e) plot the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals varying the bandwidths for, respectively, the
simple difference, difference-in-differences, and regression discontinuity specification with industry-year fixed effects and standard
errors clustered at the firm level. Panel (f) reports regression discontinuity estimates for a donut hole specification with a two-year
bandwidth, industry-year fixed effects, and standard errors clustered at the firm level. Here we drop observations in a radius, indicated
on the x-axis, around the reform cutoff and extend the overall two-year bandwidth correspondingly. We report the corresponding main
estimates, denoted in Panels (c) through (f) by the highlighted blue square and blue 95% confidence interval, in Table 1 Column (2).
                                                                   46
                              Figure 6: Effects on the Wage Distribution



      .5
                                                                   Difference              DiD           RD

      .4

      .3

      .2

      .1

       0

    -.1

    -.2
           p10         p20         p30       p40     p50   p60       p70                      p80         p90
                                         Within-Firm Wage Percentile


Note: The figure displays the effect of shared governance on the within-firm wage distribution. Specifically we
study as outcome variables the deciles of the within-firm log wage distribution in a given year. Blue squares
denote the effect of shared governance,     ^ Diff , in Equation (1) comparing stock corporations incorporated in a
two-year window before and after the August 10, 1994 cutoff date. Grey hollow circles denote difference-in-
differences results,  ^ DiD in Equation (2), additionally drawing on LLCs (a legal form unaffected by the 1994
reform) as a control group. Grey hollow triangles denote results for RD estimates          ^ RD in Equation (3). We
use 2-digit NACE designations to create industry-year fixed effects. The vertical lines denote 95% confidence
intervals with standard errors clustered at the firm level. Appendix Table A.3 reports the full regression
results.




                                                        47
                    Figure 7: Effects on Labor Productivity and Capital Intensity


          (a) Log Value Added per Worker                    (b) Differences (Old - Young Stock Corps)
    12                                                     4.5

                                                           3.5
   11.5
                                                           2.5

                                                           1.5
    11

                                                            .5         Diff: 0.022 (SE 0.114)


   10.5                                                    -.5
       2006         2008      2010        2012     2014          6    12   18    24  30    36   42   48   54   60
                              Year                                   Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)

                   (c) Log Fixed Assets                     (d) Differences (Old - Young Stock Corps)
   15.5                                                    4.5

                                                           3.5
   14.5


                                                           2.5
                                                                       Diff: 0.546 (SE 0.352)
   13.5
                                                           1.5

   12.5
                                                            .5


   11.5                                                    -.5
       2006         2008      2010        2012     2014          6    12   18    24  30    36   42   48   54   60
                              Year                                   Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)

              (e) Log Fixed Assets per Worker               (f) Differences (Old - Young Stock Corps)
   11.5                                                    4.5

                                                           3.5
   10.5
                                                           2.5
                                                                       Diff: 0.587 (SE 0.273)
                                                           1.5
    9.5

                                                            .5


    8.5                                                    -.5
       2006         2008      2010        2012     2014          6    12   18    24  30    36   42   48   54   60
                              Year                                   Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)



Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on firm-level labor productivity and capital.
The left column presents the time series of old (incorporated up to two years before the cutoff) and young
(incorporated up to two years after the cutoff) firms, of stock corporations and LLCs, averaged by firm group
and year. The right column plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals varying the bandwidth for simple
difference specifications with industry-year effects and standard errors clustered at the firm level. We report
the corresponding main estimates, denoted in Panels (b), (d), and (e) by the highlighted blue square and
blue 95% confidence interval, in Table 2 Columns (1), (7), and (9). For each outcome, Appendix Figure A.3
reports additional results, namely scatter plots by quarter of incorporation along with RD estimates, and
bandwidth plots of DiD specifications with industry-year fixed effects.
                                                      48
Figure 8: Rent Sharing in Stock Corporations with and without Shared Governance: Firms'
Pay Premia (AKM Firm Fixed Effects) and Value Added per Worker


                                 .2
                                            Old Stock Corp's (Shared Gov.)
  Residualized Firm Pay Premia




                                            Young Stock Corp's (No Shared Gov.)

                                 .1



                                  0



                                 -.1
                                                                          Slope of Control Group (Young Stock Corps): 0.067 (SE 0.018)
                                                                    Simple Difference Effect (Old - Young Stock Corps): 0.010 (SE 0.026)
                                                                      DiD Effect (w/ LLCs as Additional Control Group): 0.007 (SE 0.022)
                                 -.2
                                       -2                 -1                   0                   1                                  2
                                                  Residualized Firm-Level Mean of Log Value Added per Worker



Note: This figure presents a binned scatter plot of firm's average pay premia (AKM firm fixed effects) plotted
against average log value added per worker in the 2006-14 sample of the Orbis-ADIAB data. The AKM
firm fixed effects are estimated in a five-year rolling window and then averaged by firm. Both variables
are residualized by industry (2-digit NACE) fixed effects. The figure draws on our analysis sample of stock
corporations incorporated two years around the reform date. It separately plots the observations for older
firms, i.e. with shared governance, in solid navy circles and a solid estimated linear regression line, and for
younger firms, i.e. without shared governance, in hollow red circles and a dashed regression line. We report
the slope of young stock corporations (the control group) in the bottom right along with standard errors. We
also report the estimates of the slope from the simple difference and difference-in-differences specifications
(with LLCs as a second control group) in the lower right-hand corner. Appendix Figure A.4 displays the
pooled rent sharing elasticity including both stock corporations and LLCs.




                                                                           49
Figure 9: Heterogeneity Analysis: Wage Effect of Shared Governance in Subsamples of
Firms


                                                  (a) Mean Log Wages

                      Mean of Sorting Variable:
                         Below:   0.425
      CBA Coverage       Above: 0.796


           Binding                0.108
      CBA Coverage                0.254

           AKM Pay                0.135
         Premia SD                0.161

      Industry AKM                0.059
                                  0.150
                                                                                            Below Median:
      Works Council               0.572                                                     Diff
                                  0.835                                                     DiD
                                                                                            RD
   Log Value Added            10.916
        per Worker            11.365                                                        Above Median:
                                                                                            Diff
            Tenure                3.014
                                                                                            DiD
                                  6.562
                                                                                            RD

                      -.5                  -.3          -.1            .1         .3              .5

                                                  (b) AKM Pay Premia

                      Mean of Sorting Variable:
                         Below:   0.425
      CBA Coverage       Above: 0.796


           Binding                0.108
      CBA Coverage                0.254

           AKM Pay                0.135
         Premia SD                0.161

      Industry AKM                0.059
                                  0.150
                                                                                            Below Median:
      Works Council               0.572                                                     Diff
                                  0.835                                                     DiD
                                                                                            RD
   Log Value Added            10.916
        per Worker            11.365                                                        Above Median:
                                                                                            Diff
            Tenure                3.014
                                                                                            DiD
                                  6.562
                                                                                            RD

                      -.5                  -.3          -.1            .1         .3              .5

Note: The figure reports heterogeneity in the effect of shared governance on mean log wages (top, Panel (a))
and the AKM firm fixed effect (bottom, Panel (b)). We split the firm sample at the median according the
3-digit NACE industry average of the variables reported on the left-hand side. Blue solid (hollow) squares
denote the estimate of the sample with values below (above) the median. We highlight the simple difference
specification, and report DiD and RD specifications in gray circles and triangles, respectively. We also print
the means of the sorting (heterogeneity) variables on the left column, as shown in the figure. The means are
calculated for stock corporations in a two-year bandwidth around the reform. To illustrate, we find a small
negative point estimate for the effect on mean log wages among firms in industries with below-median CBA
coverage (first solid square), and a small positive point estimate among those with above-median coverage
(first hollow square). The CBA and works council variables are based on the IAB Establishment Panel from
2008 onward; the remaining variables based on the Orbis-ADIAB data. All specifications include 2-digit
NACE industry-year fixed effects. The horizontal lines indicate 95% confidence intervals, with standard
errors clustered at the firm level. See Section 6.5 for more information; Appendix Table A.11 reports the
detailed regression results.
                                                          50
                               Online Appendix of:
                             Labor in the Boardroom
              Simon Jäger, Benjamin Schoefer and Jörg Heining



Contents
A Additional Tables                                                                               53

B Additional Figures                                                                              64

C Theoretical Appendix: Hold-Up, Shared Governance, and Investment                                68
  C.1 Comparative Statics of Investment to Bargaining Power Parameters  and                       69
  C.2 Endogenous Labor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          72


List of Tables
   A.1  Differential Trends for Incorporation of Stock Corporations . . . . . . . . . .           53
   A.2  1994 Reform and Industry Composition of Stock Corporations . . . . . . . .                54
   A.3  Effects on the Wage Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        55
   A.4  Placebo: Effect of Shared Governance on Wages (Placebo Reforms in 1996
        and 1997) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
   A.5 Effect of Shared Governance on Wages (Non-Missing Fixed Assets) . . . . .                  57
   A.6 Effect of Shared Governance on Wages (Non-Missing Value Added per Worker)                  58
   A.7 Placebo: Effect of Shared Governance on Labor Productivity and Capital
        Intensity (RD and Placebo Reforms in 1996 and 1997) . . . . . . . . . . . . .             59
   A.8 Effect of Shared Governance on Profitability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         60
   A.9 Placebo: Effect of Shared Governance on Profitability (Placebo Reforms in
        1996 and 1997) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    61
   A.10 Effect of Shared Governance on Skill Structure, Outsourcing, and Tenure
        (Matched Employer-Employee Data) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            62
   A.11 Heterogeneity of Shared Governance Effects on Wages . . . . . . . . . . . . .             63




                                               51
List of Figures
  A.1   Frequency of Incorporation and Selection: MUP Data . . . . . . . . . . . . .         64
  A.2   Firm Survival and Bankruptcy by Incorporation Date and Corporation Type              65
  A.3   Effects on Labor Productivity and Capital Intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      66
  A.4   Pooled Rent Sharing : Firms' Pay Premia (AKM Firm Fixed Effects) and
        Value Added per Worker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   67




                                             52
A      Additional Tables

            Table A.1: Differential Trends for Incorporation of Stock Corporations


                                                            1(Inc. as Stock Corp.)
                                                              (1)          (2)

                              Incorporation Date             0.352       0.269
                                                            (0.325)     (0.323)

                              1(Pre-Reform)                  0.005       -0.040
                                                            (0.470)     (0.465)

                              Inc. Date × 1(Pre-Reform)      0.046       0.139
                                                            (0.403)     (0.398)

                              Industry FE                                  X
                              N, Stock Cs                     231         230

                              N, LLCs                       12,643       12,640



Note: This table reports estimates of whether the reform had an effect on firms' decision to incorporate as a
stock corporation (AG). We test for differential trends before and after the reform by interacting an indicator
for whether the firm incorporated pre-reform with a continuous time trend variable (denominated in years)
for incorporation date relative to August 10, 1994. Estimates are in percentage points. The sample is restricted
to stock corporations ( and limited liability companies (LLCs) with 10 or more employees incorporated within
two years of the reform date of August 10, 1994. Column (1) reports the basic specification and Column (2)
includes industry fixed effects. The observations are firms rather than firm-years. Standard errors clustered
at the firm level are reported in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01. Figure 3 Panel (b) plots the underlying data.




                                                       53
              Table A.2: 1994 Reform and Industry Composition of Stock Corporations


 NACE Industry Classification                               DiD       Diff      RD       NACE Industry Classification                             DiD       Diff      RD

 B: Mining and quarrying                                    0.012     0.011      ×       K: Financial and insurance activities                    -0.034    -0.038    -0.036
                                                           (0.011)   (0.011)                                                                     (0.029)   (0.029)   (0.060)
    Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                     0.0000    0.0000                  Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                   0.071     0.071     0.071
    Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                          0.002      n/a                   Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                       0.008      n/a       n/a

 C: Manufacturing                                          -0.011    -0.009     0.136    L: Real estate activities                                0.017     0.015      ×
                                                           (0.047)   (0.047)   (0.100)                                                           (0.017)   (0.017)
    Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                      0.142     0.142     0.142        Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                   0.007     0.007
    Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                          0.213      n/a       n/a         Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                       0.023      n/a

 F: Construction                                           -0.022    -0.031    -0.018    M: Professional, scientific, and technical activities    0.060     0.063     -0.109
                                                           (0.021)   (0.020)   (0.048)                                                           (0.055)   (0.055)   (0.113)
    Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                      0.043     0.043     0.043        Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                   0.170     0.170     0.170
    Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                          0.151      n/a       n/a         Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                       0.057      n/a       n/a

 G: Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles   -0.092    -0.069    -0.014    N: Administrative and support service activities         -0.023    -0.030    -0.025
                                                           (0.048)   (0.048)   (0.099)                                                           (0.034)   (0.034)   (0.069)
    Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                      0.191     0.191     0.191        Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                   0.085     0.085     0.085
    Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                          0.242      n/a       n/a         Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                       0.075      n/a       n/a

 H: Transportation and storage                              0.019     0.023     0.045    R: Arts, entertainment, and recreation                   0.007     0.004      ×
                                                           (0.025)   (0.025)   (0.046)                                                           (0.013)   (0.013)
    Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                      0.021     0.021     0.021        Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                   0.007     0.007
    Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                          0.052      n/a       n/a         Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                       0.011      n/a

 J: Information and communication                           0.057     0.053    -0.031    S: Other services activities                             -0.004    -0.007     ×
                                                           (0.056)   (0.056)   (0.109)                                                           (0.007)   (0.007)
    Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                      0.191     0.191     0.191        Control Mean: Post-Reform Stock Cs                   0.007     0.007
    Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                          0.056      n/a       n/a         Control Mean: Post-Reform LLCs                       0.017      n/a

                                                                                         N, Firms                                                12,874     231       231
                                                                                         N, Stock Cs.                                              231      231       231
                                                                                         N, LLCs                                                 12,643     n/a       n/a
                                                                                         Joint P-Value                                            0.384    0.396     0.828




Note: This table reports estimates of the effect of shared governance on the industry composition of stock
corporations. Formally, we use indicators for each NACE Rev. 2 Classification 1 industry code as outcomes
for DiD specifications as in equation (2). Some industries are excluded due to insufficient observations
among stock corporations. Column "DiD" reports the basic specification from equation (2), column "Diff"
reports the basic specification from (1) and column "RD" reports results from basic specification of (3). The
RD design has missing entries indicated by × as those cells had zero observations in those industries among
young stock corporations. We visually report all estimates in Panel (c) of Figure. Stars denote statistical
significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Figure 3 Panel b plots the underlying data. 3.




                                                                                  54
                                     Table A.3: Effects on the Wage Distribution


  Outcome                                                               Mean Log Wage
  Percentile                         p10         p20      p30       p40      p50                  p60          p70         p80         p90
                                                    Panel A: Actual Reform (1994)

  Difference                        0.006      -0.026       -0.019      -0.012      -0.013       -0.014      -0.010      -0.003       -0.004
  Industry-Year FE                 (0.074)     (0.061)      (0.052)     (0.046)     (0.043)      (0.041)     (0.039)     (0.035)      (0.029)

  DiD                               0.024      -0.001       -0.004       0.001       0.003        0.004       0.006       0.009        0.004
  Industry-Year FE                 (0.063)     (0.053)      (0.047)     (0.042)     (0.040)      (0.039)     (0.037)     (0.033)      (0.028)

  RD                               0.199        0.095     0.045      0.049   0.045               0.050       0.052        0.039       0.021
  Industry-Year FE                (0.151)      (0.128)   (0.109)    (0.100) (0.096)             (0.095)     (0.090)      (0.083)     (0.072)
  Control Mean: Stock Cs           3.953        4.284     4.456      4.574   4.672               4.758       4.845        4.941       5.051
  N, Stock Cs                       229          229       229        229     229                 229         229          229         229
  N, Firm-Years Stock Cs           3,179        3,179     3,179      3,179   3,179               3,179       3,179        3,179       3,179
  Control Mean: LLCs               3.823        4.097     4.248      4.351   4.434               4.509       4.586        4.675       4.802
  N, LLCs                         12,639       12,639    12,639     12,639  12,639              12,639      12,639       12,639      12,639
  N, Firm-Years LLCs              146,289      146,289 146,289 146,289 146,289                  146,289     146,289      146,289     146,289
                                                     Panel B: Placebo Reform 1996

  Difference                       -0.016       0.018        0.011      -0.001      -0.009       -0.022      -0.033      -0.030       -0.025
  Industry-Year FE                 (0.062)     (0.054)      (0.049)     (0.046)     (0.044)      (0.041)     (0.037)     (0.033)      (0.026)

  DiD                              -0.047      -0.001       -0.001      -0.010      -0.019       -0.027      -0.037      -0.033       -0.031
  Industry-Year FE                 (0.057)     (0.050)      (0.045)     (0.042)     (0.040)      (0.038)     (0.036)     (0.033)      (0.027)

  RD                               0.113        0.077    0.064      0.071   0.047                0.024       0.018        0.024       0.021
  Industry-Year FE                (0.126)      (0.110)  (0.099)    (0.093) (0.087)              (0.081)     (0.075)      (0.066)     (0.051)
  Control Mean: Stock Cs           3.968        4.267    4.448      4.584   4.695                4.792       4.889        4.980       5.083
  N, Stock Cs                       327          327      327        327     327                  327         327          327         327
  N, Firm-Years Stock Cs           4,001        4,001    4,001      4,001   4,001                4,001       4,001        4,001       4,001
  Control Mean: LLCs               3.808        4.083    4.235      4.340   4.424                4.500       4.579        4.669       4.795
  N, LLCs                         13,574       13,574   13,574     13,574  13,574               13,574      13,574       13,574      13,574
  N, Firm-Years LLCs              143,087      143,087 143,087 143,087 143,087                  143,087     143,087      143,087     143,087
                                                    Panel C: Placebo Reform 1997

  Difference                        0.062       0.061        0.040       0.036       0.044        0.047       0.046       0.041        0.033
  Industry-Year FE                 (0.056)     (0.049)      (0.044)     (0.040)     (0.037)      (0.034)     (0.031)     (0.027)      (0.022)

  DiD                               0.042       0.046        0.026       0.017       0.019        0.019       0.015       0.007        0.001
  Industry-Year FE                 (0.051)     (0.045)      (0.040)     (0.037)     (0.035)      (0.033)     (0.031)     (0.028)      (0.023)

  RD                               0.002        -0.013      -0.068      -0.073       -0.054      -0.048      -0.046       -0.052      -0.041
  Industry-Year FE                (0.113)      (0.099)     (0.091)     (0.083)      (0.077)     (0.072)     (0.064)      (0.055)     (0.044)
  Control Mean: Stock Cs           3.922        4.242       4.431       4.567        4.674       4.769       4.864        4.958       5.062
  N, Stock Cs                       456           456         456         456          456         456         456          456         456
  N, Firm-Years Stock Cs           5,184         5,184       5,184       5,184        5,184       5,184       5,184        5,184       5,184
  Control Mean: LLCs               3.791        4.068       4.220       4.324        4.407       4.484       4.562        4.652       4.778
  N, LLCs                         14,770       14,770      14,770      14,770       14,770      14,770      14,770       14,770      14,770
  N, Firm-Years LLCs              148,565      148,565     148,565     148,565      148,565     148,565     148,565      148,565     148,565
Note: The table reports the effect of shared governance on the within-firm wage distribution, using as outcome variables the deciles of
the intra-firm log wage distribution in a given year. The first row reports the effect of shared governance,        ^ Diff , in simple difference
specifications (1) comparing stock corporations incorporated in a two-year window before vs. after the August 10, 1994 cutoff date. The
second row reports difference-in-differences results,  ^ DiD in Equation (2), additionally drawing on LLCs (a legal form unaffected by the
1994 reform) as a control group. The third row reports RD specifications, i.e. estimates of      ^ RD in Equation (3). We use 2-digit NACE
designations to create industry-year fixed effects. All outcomes are winsorized at the 1% level by year. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level are reported in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


                                                                      55
Table A.4: Placebo: Effect of Shared Governance on Wages (Placebo Reforms in 1996 and
1997)


                                 Log Wage,      Log Wage,     % Above SocSec       Log Wage,      AKM Firm       AKM Worker      Labor
                                   Mean            p50          Maximum           Mincer Resid.   Fixed Effect    Fixed Effect   Share
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)             (5)             (6)         (7)
                                                                       Panel A: Placebo Reform 1996
    Panel A.a: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

    Year FE                         -0.020         -0.022            -0.026            -0.013          -0.019        -0.019       0.014
                                    (0.036)        (0.040)           (0.016)          (0.025)         (0.013)       (0.018)      (0.031)
    Industry-Year FE                -0.011         -0.009            -0.026            -0.009          -0.020        -0.006       0.007
                                    (0.038)        (0.044)           (0.019)          (0.028)         (0.013)       (0.019)      (0.035)
    Panel A.b: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

    Year FE                        -0.029         -0.033            -0.024            -0.022           -0.021        -0.022       0.023
                                   (0.037)       (0.040)           (0.017)            (0.025)         (0.013)       (0.018)      (0.031)
    Industry-Year FE               -0.025         -0.019            -0.018            -0.019          -0.023         -0.005       0.011
                                   (0.036)       (0.040)           (0.016)            (0.026)         (0.013)       (0.017)      (0.032)
    Panel A.c: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

    Year FE                         0.041          0.034           -0.0005             0.036          0.017         0.004        -0.009
                                  (0.076)        (0.083)           (0.034)            (0.056)        (0.026)       (0.037)       (0.060)
    Industry-Year FE                0.052          0.047             0.005             0.033          0.016         0.013         0.027
                                  (0.078)        (0.087)           (0.039)            (0.058)        (0.026)       (0.038)       (0.061)
    Control Mean: Stock Cs          4.595          4.695             0.157             0.104          0.009         0.144         0.713
    N, Stock Cs                      327            327               327               327            319           319           187
    N, Firm-Years Stock Cs         4,001          4,001              4,001             4,001          3,227         3,227         1,094
    Control Mean: LLCs              4.356          4.424             0.051             -0.070         -0.061        -0.030        0.765
    N, LLCs                        13,574         13,574            13,574             13,574        12,878         12,878        3,935
    N, Firm-Years LLCs            143,087        143,087           143,087            143,087       111,707        111,707       18,679
                                                                        Panel B: Placebo Reform 1997
    Panel B.a: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

    Year FE                          0.036          0.032            0.0005            0.013           0.010        0.0004        0.030
                                    (0.033)        (0.036)           (0.015)          (0.023)         (0.011)       (0.016)      (0.027)
    Industry-Year FE                 0.043          0.044             0.003            0.019           0.013         0.012        0.031
                                    (0.034)        (0.037)           (0.016)          (0.024)         (0.012)       (0.015)      (0.030)
    Panel B.b: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

    Year FE                         0.011         0.004              -0.002            -0.008         0.0006         -0.010       0.037
                                   (0.033)       (0.036)            (0.015)           (0.023)         (0.012)       (0.016)      (0.027)
    Industry-Year FE                0.018         0.019              0.003            -0.007           0.002         0.005       0.046
                                   (0.032)       (0.035)            (0.014)           (0.023)         (0.011)       (0.015)      (0.028)
    Panel B.c: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

    Year FE                        -0.036         -0.058            -0.006            -0.046         -0.007         -0.046        0.037
                                  (0.069)        (0.076)           (0.031)           (0.043)        (0.023)        (0.032)       (0.049)
    Industry-Year FE               -0.042         -0.054            -0.011            -0.047         -0.003         -0.025        0.015
                                  (0.070)        (0.077)           (0.032)           (0.045)        (0.024)        (0.030)       (0.055)
    Control Mean: Stock Cs          4.571          4.674             0.151             0.100         -0.002         0.137         0.708
    N, Stock Cs                      456            456               456               456            444           444           242
    N, Firm-Years Stock Cs         5,184          5,184              5,184             5,184          4,068         4,068         1,393
    Control Mean: LLCs              4.340          4.407             0.050            -0.079         -0.067         -0.035        0.767
    N, LLCs                        14,770         14,770            14,770            14,770         13,951         13,951        4,267
    N, Firm-Years LLCs            148,565        148,565           148,565           148,565        113,990        113,990       19,944



Note: The table reports placebo specifications for the effect of shared governance on wages. Panel A reports
results for a counterfactual reform on August 10, 1996, Panel B for a placebo reform on August 10, 1997. Panel
A.a and B.a reports the effect of shared governance,   ^ Diff , in simple difference specifications (1) comparing
stock corporations incorporated in a two-year window before vs. after the August 10, 1994 cutoff date.
Panels A.b and B.b report difference-in-differences results,       ^ DiD in Equation (2), additionally drawing on
LLCs (a legal form unaffected by the 1994 reform) as a control group. Panels A.c and B.c report estimates
 ^ RD from the RD specifications in Equation (3). We use 2-digit NACE designations to create industry-year
fixed effects. All outcomes are winsorized at the 1% level by year. The control means refer to observations
of firms incorporated on or after August 10, 1994. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level are reported
in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. We report main
estimates in Table 1.                                 56
       Table A.5: Effect of Shared Governance on Wages (Non-Missing Fixed Assets)


                          Log Wage, Log Wage,      % Above SocSec    Log Wage,        AKM Firm       AKM Worker      Labor
                            Mean         p50         Maximum        Mincer Resid.     Fixed Effect    Fixed Effect   Share
                              (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)         (7)
 Panel A: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

 Year FE                    0.025       0.041           0.018           -0.004           0.013           0.014       -0.029
                           (0.046)     (0.048)         (0.020)         (0.031)          (0.016)         (0.024)      (0.034)

 Industry-Year FE          -0.018      -0.013           -0.002          -0.026           0.001          -0.013       -0.034
                           (0.045)     (0.047)         (0.021)         (0.034)          (0.016)         (0.022)      (0.035)

 Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

 Year FE                    0.019       0.037           0.018           -0.008           0.013           0.013       -0.035
                           (0.046)     (0.048)         (0.020)         (0.032)          (0.016)         (0.024)      (0.035)

 Industry-Year FE           0.005       0.010           0.009           -0.016           0.015          -0.010       -0.033
                           (0.042)     (0.044)         (0.018)         (0.031)          (0.016)         (0.020)      (0.033)

 Panel C: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

 Year FE                    0.069       0.032           0.014           0.000            0.015          -0.010       -0.029
                           (0.098)     (0.102)         (0.043)         (0.069)          (0.034)         (0.049)      (0.069)

 Industry-Year FE           0.056       0.038           0.021           -0.019           0.001           0.006        0.025
                           (0.101)     (0.104)         (0.050)         (0.074)          (0.037)         (0.047)      (0.067)


 Control Mean: Stock Cs     4.567       4.665          0.131            0.100           -0.007           0.123       0.728
 N, Stock Cs                 217         217            217              217             212              212         151
 N, Firm-Years Stock Cs     1,548       1,548          1,548            1,548           1,275            1,275        920


 Control Mean: LLCs         4.342        4.414          0.049          -0.053           -0.057          -0.032        0.756
 N, LLCs                   11,491       11,491         11,491          11,491           11,011          11,011       3,675
 N, Firm-Years LLCs        72,988       72,988         72,988          72,988           58,278          58,278       17,855




Note: This table replicates Table 1 for non-missing firm-year BvD observations of fixed assets.




                                                          57
Table A.6: Effect of Shared Governance on Wages (Non-Missing Value Added per Worker)


                          Log Wage, Log Wage,      % Above SocSec    Log Wage,        AKM Firm       AKM Worker      Labor
                            Mean         p50         Maximum        Mincer Resid.     Fixed Effect    Fixed Effect   Share
                              (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)         (7)
 Panel A: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

 Year FE                   -0.002       0.023           0.012           -0.023           0.003           0.004       -0.032
                           (0.055)     (0.060)         (0.026)         (0.036)          (0.020)         (0.028)      (0.035)

 Industry-Year FE          -0.042      -0.032           -0.018          -0.035           0.001          -0.034       -0.040
                           (0.056)     (0.058)         (0.027)         (0.039)          (0.020)         (0.028)      (0.035)

 Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

 Year FE                    0.008       0.034           0.016           -0.013           0.009           0.005       -0.039
                           (0.056)     (0.060)         (0.026)         (0.037)          (0.020)         (0.029)      (0.035)

 Industry-Year FE          -0.009       0.003           -0.000          -0.018           0.012          -0.016       -0.037
                           (0.049)     (0.053)         (0.023)         (0.036)          (0.019)         (0.024)      (0.033)

 Panel C: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

 Year FE                    0.102       0.051           -0.010          0.063            0.013          -0.012       -0.035
                           (0.122)     (0.131)         (0.056)         (0.084)          (0.045)         (0.058)      (0.069)

 Industry-Year FE           0.094       0.074           -0.004          0.050            0.023          -0.003        0.014
                           (0.123)     (0.134)         (0.064)         (0.086)          (0.046)         (0.058)      (0.067)


 Control Mean: Stock Cs     4.628       4.716          0.158            0.143            0.022           0.134       0.729
 N, Stock Cs                 146         146            146              146              144             144         146
 N, Firm-Years Stock Cs      894         894            894              894              740             740         892


 Control Mean: LLCs        4.505        4.558          0.094           0.075            -0.003          0.019        0.754
 N, LLCs                   3,524        3,524          3,524           3,524            3,395           3,395        3,508
 N, Firm-Years LLCs        16,783       16,783         16,783          16,783           14,211          14,211       16,707




Note: This table replicates Table 1 for non-missing firm-year BvD observations of value added per worker.




                                                          58
Table A.7: Placebo: Effect of Shared Governance on Labor Productivity and Capital Inten-
sity (RD and Placebo Reforms in 1996 and 1997)


                            Log VA      Log Value    Log Revenue       Log    Log Emp Log Emp          Log            Log      Log Fixed A.   Log Tang. A.
                            per Emp      Added        per Emp.       Revenue    (BvD)       (IAB)    Fixed A.       Tang. A.     per Emp       per Emp.
                               (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)
                                                                           Panel A: Actual Reform (1994)
Panel A.a: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

Year FE                      -0.186       -0.109          0.094        0.515         0.345       0.124     0.928     0.528        0.534          0.208
                             (0.223)      (0.453)        (0.284)      (0.536)       (0.356)     (0.335)   (0.681)   (0.578)      (0.551)        (0.409)
Industry-Year FE              -0.257       -0.447         0.014        0.288         0.144       -0.101    0.935     0.496        0.772          0.368
                             (0.241)      (0.438)        (0.337)      (0.623)       (0.363)     (0.336)   (0.766)   (0.607)      (0.547)        (0.437)
Control Mean: Stock Cs       11.367       16.062         12.262       16.526         4.174       3.880    13.966    12.962        9.962          8.935
N, Stock Cs                    146          152            171          178           212         229       217       217          212            211
N, Firm-Years Stock Cs         894          923            892          982          1,367       3,179     1,548     1,535        1,359          1,350
                                                                                Panel B: Placebo Reform 1996
Panel B.a: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

Year FE                        -0.038       0.084          0.082        0.318        0.220      0.199      0.042     0.278        -0.216         0.055
                               (0.097)     (0.192)        (0.130)      (0.224)     (0.143)     (0.132)    (0.254)   (0.229)      (0.203)        (0.173)
Industry-Year FE                -0.102     0.0009          0.003        0.177        0.154      0.147      -0.082    0.070        -0.234         -0.071
                               (0.104)     (0.225)        (0.142)      (0.248)     (0.154)     (0.144)    (0.279)   (0.226)      (0.221)        (0.167)
Panel B.b: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

Year FE                       -0.026      0.118           0.073        0.285          0.186     0.210     -0.053     0.172        -0.258         0.005
                             (0.098)     (0.196)         (0.130)      (0.225)        (0.145)   (0.133)    (0.256)   (0.230)      (0.205)        (0.175)
Industry-Year FE              -0.042      0.114           -0.025       0.224          0.183     0.215      -0.098    0.113        -0.297         -0.067
                             (0.098)     (0.199)         (0.120)      (0.221)        (0.142)   (0.131)    (0.252)   (0.212)      (0.202)        (0.162)
Panel B.c: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

Year FE                        0.059        0.073         0.321        0.658         0.106       0.150      0.216    0.140        0.075          0.085
                             (0.195)      (0.365)        (0.267)      (0.443)       (0.296)     (0.273)   (0.537)   (0.470)      (0.413)        (0.331)
Industry-Year FE              -0.026       -0.067         0.220        0.473         0.013       0.039     -0.048    0.024        -0.143         0.023
                             (0.190)      (0.359)        (0.288)      (0.487)       (0.321)     (0.300)   (0.550)   (0.448)      (0.413)        (0.302)
Control Mean: Stock Cs       11.407       15.969         12.180       16.205         3.951       3.680    13.924    12.684       10.176          8.879
N, Stock Cs                     184          187           251          258           305         327        312      312          304            303
N, Firm-Years Stock Cs         1,061        1,101         1,264        1,406         1,861       4,001      2,148    2,132        1,851          1,842
Control Mean: LLCs           11.086       15.246         11.969       15.230         3.283       3.266    12.330    12.026        9.200          8.885
N, LLCs                        3,748        3,951         9,377        9,930        11,922      13,574    12,432    12,331       11,802         11,717
N, Firm-Years LLCs           17,341       18,786         37,961       46,015        60,059     143,087    77,233    76,362       59,142         58,567
                                                                                Panel C: Placebo Reform 1997
Panel C.a: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

Year FE                        -0.120       0.035          0.055        0.349      0.328       0.236       0.349    0.500        -0.015          0.134
                              (0.087)      (0.169)        (0.112)      (0.196)     (0.124)     (0.112)    (0.227)   (0.202)      (0.179)        (0.149)
Industry-Year FE              -0.197        0.083         -0.018        0.341      0.381       0.283       0.368    0.405        -0.052          0.020
                              (0.093)      (0.193)        (0.114)      (0.213)     (0.132)     (0.118)    (0.239)   (0.198)      (0.182)        (0.139)
Panel C.b: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

Year FE                      -0.132       -0.042         0.024         0.248         0.246     0.204       0.261    0.382        -0.029          0.096
                             (0.089)     (0.174)        (0.114)       (0.198)        (0.126)   (0.113)    (0.228)   (0.204)      (0.181)        (0.152)
Industry-Year FE             -0.165       -0.057         -0.053        0.193         0.232     0.194       0.161     0.268       -0.124         -0.015
                             (0.088)     (0.176)        (0.107)       (0.195)        (0.126)   (0.112)    (0.228)   (0.194)      (0.178)        (0.142)
Panel C.c: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

Year FE                      -0.142        0.284          -0.269      -0.152          0.273     0.156     -0.072     0.301        -0.391         0.040
                             (0.177)      (0.325)        (0.194)      (0.377)        (0.249)   (0.231)    (0.443)   (0.390)      (0.343)        (0.285)
Industry-Year FE              -0.106       0.521          -0.340       -0.122         0.330     0.195      -0.122    0.207        -0.429         0.005
                             (0.183)      (0.329)        (0.211)      (0.376)        (0.246)   (0.229)    (0.454)   (0.364)      (0.352)        (0.269)
Control Mean: Stock Cs       11.481       15.973         12.164       16.102          3.831     3.617     13.761    12.509       10.119          8.830
N, Stock Cs                     237         242             354          364           425       456         437      435           423           421
N, Firm-Years Stock Cs         1,358       1,402           1,772        1,949         2,523     5,184       2,923    2,903         2,516         2,500
Control Mean: LLCs           11.061       15.176         11.950       15.173          3.244     3.262     12.305    11.991        9.199          8.874
N, LLCs                        4,074       4,285         10,213       10,802         13,016    14,770     13,588    13,468       12,894         12,791
N, Firm-Years LLCs           18,537       20,054         41,311       50,049         65,240    148,565    83,976    82,990       64,291         63,634



Note: This table replicates Table 2 for RD specifications (Panel A) and placebo reforms (Panel B and Panel C).




                                                                                59
                      Table A.8: Effect of Shared Governance on Profitability



                            EBITDA       EBIT     Net Income              EBITDA         EBIT       Net Income
                           /Revenue /Revenue      /Revenue                /Total A.    /Total A.     /Total A.
                               (1)        (2)         (3)                    (4)          (5)           (6)
  Panel A: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

  Year FE                        0.004        -0.070          0.018         0.013       -0.009        -0.006
                                (0.015)       (0.045)        (0.031)       (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.013)

  Industry-Year FE              -0.011        -0.071         -0.012         0.003       -0.011        -0.010
                                (0.020)       (0.049)        (0.037)       (0.023)      (0.025)       (0.015)

  Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

  Year FE                        0.007        -0.068          0.015         0.016       -0.008        -0.007
                                (0.015)       (0.045)        (0.031)       (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.013)

  Industry-Year FE              -0.004        -0.056         -0.000         0.006       -0.011        -0.009
                                (0.015)       (0.042)        (0.029)       (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.013)

  Panel C: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

  Year FE                        0.007         0.084         -0.049        -0.072       -0.037        -0.033
                                (0.027)       (0.081)        (0.056)       (0.049)      (0.048)       (0.029)

  Industry-Year FE              -0.006         0.111         -0.092        -0.105       -0.064        -0.042
                                (0.043)       (0.104)        (0.085)       (0.059)      (0.057)       (0.035)


  Control Mean: Stock Cs         0.098         0.013          0.056         0.162        0.086         0.057
  N, Stock Cs                     124           131            131           145          152           152
  N, Firm-Years Stock Cs          562           715            699           772          945           929


  Control Mean: LLCs             0.083        0.037          0.024         0.177        0.104          0.057
  N, LLCs                        2,938        3,060          3,029         3,597        3,726          3,697
  N, Firm-Years LLCs             11,160       12,417         11,898        16,527       18,228         17,704



Note: The table reports the effect of shared governance on measures of profitability. Panel A reports
the effect of shared governance,     ^ Diff , in simple difference specifications (1) comparing stock corporations
incorporated in a two-year window before vs. after the August 10, 1994 cutoff date. Panel B reports
difference-in-differences results,  ^ DiD in Equation (2), additionally drawing on LLCs (a legal form unaffected
by the 1994 reform) as a control group. Panel C reports estimates       ^ RD from the RD specifications in Equation
(3). We use 2-digit NACE designations to create industry-year fixed effects. All outcomes are winsorized
at the 1% level by year. The control means refer to observations of firms incorporated on or after August
10, 1994. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. Stars denote statistical
significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Appendix Table A.9 reports effects of placebo reforms.



                                                        60
Table A.9: Placebo: Effect of Shared Governance on Profitability (Placebo Reforms in 1996
and 1997)


                                         EBITDA          EBIT   Net Income EBITDA          EBIT           Net Income
                                        /Revenue      /Revenue   /Revenue      /Total A. /Total A.         /Total A.
                                           (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)               (6)
                                                              Panel A: Placebo Reform 1996
            Panel A.a: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

            Year FE                         -0.018       0.036         -0.017       0.014        0.015      0.009
                                           (0.015)      (0.030)       (0.023)      (0.018)     (0.017)     (0.012)
            Industry-Year FE                -0.021       0.016         -0.022       0.007       -0.004     -0.0008
                                           (0.016)      (0.037)       (0.027)      (0.024)     (0.022)     (0.016)
            Panel A.b: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

            Year FE                       -0.013        0.035        -0.015         0.020        0.013       0.010
                                          (0.015)      (0.030)       (0.023)       (0.019)      (0.018)     (0.012)
            Industry-Year FE              -0.002        0.038        -0.011        0.039         0.026       0.017
                                          (0.015)      (0.030)       (0.021)       (0.020)      (0.018)     (0.013)
            Panel A.c: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

            Year FE                        0.002         0.111        -0.037      -0.000026    0.015         0.015
                                          (0.031)      (0.069)        (0.051)       (0.034)   (0.029)       (0.022)
            Industry-Year FE               0.006       0.132          -0.067         -0.006   -0.003        -0.004
                                          (0.026)      (0.065)        (0.048)       (0.048)   (0.039)       (0.025)
            Control Mean: Stock Cs         0.116        -0.025         0.070          0.148    0.066         0.044
            N, Stock Cs                     162           169           169            179      187           187
            N, Firm-Years Stock Cs          722           902           885            929     1,131         1,114
            Control Mean: LLCs             0.088         0.033         0.024          0.183    0.096         0.054
            N, LLCs                        3,210         3,361         3,318          3,817    3,961         3,923
            N, Firm-Years LLCs            12,197       13,680         13,047        17,017    18,898        18,271
                                                                 Panel B: Placebo Reform 1997
            Panel B.a: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

            Year FE                         -0.020        0.033        -0.019      -0.032        -0.009     -0.006
                                            (0.012)      (0.031)       (0.023)      (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.012)
            Industry-Year FE               -0.039         0.023        -0.013       -0.032       -0.011     -0.001
                                            (0.014)      (0.039)       (0.027)      (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.014)
            Panel B.b: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

            Year FE                       -0.018        0.035        -0.019        -0.035       -0.012      -0.011
                                          (0.013)      (0.031)       (0.023)       (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.012)
            Industry-Year FE              -0.018        0.040        -0.015        -0.027       -0.007      -0.006
                                          (0.013)      (0.032)       (0.023)       (0.015)      (0.015)     (0.012)
            Panel B.c: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

            Year FE                       -0.039       -0.091         -0.025        -0.014      -0.025      -0.020
                                         (0.025)       (0.053)        (0.043)      (0.029)      (0.027)     (0.022)
            Industry-Year FE             -0.058         -0.069        -0.007       -0.041       -0.036      -0.010
                                         (0.029)       (0.060)        (0.045)      (0.039)      (0.033)     (0.022)
            Control Mean: Stock Cs         0.114        -0.051         0.067         0.161       0.061       0.043
            N, Stock Cs                     210           226           225           226         243         242
            N, Firm-Years Stock Cs          925          1,230         1,215         1,137       1,463       1,449
            Control Mean: LLCs             0.087         0.033         0.023         0.179       0.093       0.051
            N, LLCs                        3,488         3,654         3,610         4,130       4,295       4,255
            N, Firm-Years LLCs            13,113       14,740         14,090       18,087       20,183      19,543


Note: This table replicates Table A.8 for the placebo reforms.




                                                                 61
Table A.10: Effect of Shared Governance on Skill Structure, Outsourcing, and Tenure (Matched Employer-
Employee Data)

                                  Low-      Med-       High-  Outsourceable    Value Added    Log      Tenure     Separation
                                Skilled % Skilled % Skilled %   (FSCL) %        /Revenue     Tenure    (Years)   Rate (Annual)
                                   (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)              (5)        (6)       (7)           (8)
       Panel A: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

       Year FE                  -0.019      0.001      0.017        -0.009         0.101      0.071     0.235        -0.003
                                (0.031)    (0.024)    (0.038)      (0.015)        (0.079)    (0.052)   (0.279)      (0.006)

       Industry-Year FE          0.006      0.010     -0.017        0.012          0.008      0.077     0.332        -0.001
                                (0.031)    (0.027)    (0.039)      (0.009)        (0.081)    (0.054)   (0.301)      (0.007)

       Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

       Year FE                  -0.037      0.009      0.028        -0.016         0.091     -0.027    -0.206        0.002
                                (0.032)    (0.024)    (0.038)      (0.016)        (0.079)    (0.051)   (0.282)      (0.006)

       Industry-Year FE          0.005      0.006     -0.011        -0.000         0.003      0.009    -0.032        -0.002
                                (0.030)    (0.024)    (0.033)      (0.016)        (0.063)    (0.049)   (0.268)      (0.006)

       Panel C: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

       Year FE                   0.004      0.043     -0.046        -0.001         -0.186     0.125     0.529        -0.009
                                (0.062)    (0.048)    (0.073)      (0.028)        (0.139)    (0.111)   (0.594)      (0.014)

       Industry-Year FE         -0.025      0.013      0.012        0.004          -0.225     0.067     0.288        -0.006
                                (0.067)    (0.059)    (0.083)      (0.026)        (0.145)    (0.109)   (0.554)      (0.016)


       Control Mean: Stock Cs    0.293      0.296     0.411            0.059       0.463     -4.457     4.865        0.095
       N, Stock Cs                226        226       226              229         131        229       229          229
       N, Firm-Years Stock Cs    2,947      2,947     2,947            3,179        694       3,179     3,179        3,179


       Control Mean: LLCs        0.493      0.301     0.205         0.148          0.345      -4.330    5.522        0.105
       N, LLCs                   11,865     11,865    11,865        12,639         3,049      12,639    12,639       12,639
       N, Firm-Years LLCs       124,016    124,016   124,016       146,289        12,316     146,289   146,289      146,289


      Note: The table reports the effect of shared governance on employer-reported education measures in the
      IAB data (namely (i) low-skilled workers with no vocational training, (ii) medium-skilled workers with a
      finished school degree and a vocational qualification, and (iii) high-skilled workers with a university degree),
      outsourcing (the share of workers in outsourceable low-skilled occupations (i.e. food, security, cleaning and
      logistics, following Goldschmidt and Schmieder, 2017), and the BvD-based value-added/revenue ratio as
      an inverse measure of outsourcing), and tenure and annual separation rates. Panel A reports the effect of
      shared governance,   ^ Diff , in simple difference specifications (1) comparing stock corporations incorporated in
      a two-year window before vs. after the August 10, 1994 cutoff date. Panel B reports difference-in-differences
      results, ^ DiD in Equation (2), additionally drawing on LLCs (a legal form unaffected by the 1994 reform) as
      a control group. Panel C reports estimates        ^ RD from the RD specifications in Equation (3). We use 2-digit
      NACE designations to create industry-year fixed effects. All outcomes are winsorized at the 1% level by year.
      The control means refer to observations of firms incorporated on or after August 10, 1994. Standard errors
      are clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance: * p < 0.10, **
      p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                62
                                            Table A.11: Heterogeneity of Shared Governance Effects on Wages


                      Outcome                               Control Means                      Mean Log Wage                       AKM Firm Fixed Effect
                      Cut                            Below Median Above Median        Below Median        Above Median        Below Median        Above Median
                      Panel A: Difference Design (Stock Corporations)

                      CBA Coverage                      0.425           0.796         -0.041   (0.056)     0.031   (0.063)    0.003    (0.022)     0.004   (0.025 )
                      Binding CBA Coverage              0.108           0.254         -0.019   (0.057)    -0.020    (0.058)   0.012    (0.020)    -0.011    (0.024 )
                      AKM Pay Premia SD                 0.135           0.161          0.011   (0.053)    -0.069    (0.064)   0.005    (0.018)    -0.015    (0.029 )
                      Industry AKM                      0.059           0.150         -0.079   (0.058)     0.005   (0.055)    -0.024   (0.023)     0.010   (0.020 )
                      Works Council                     0.572           0.835         -0.095   (0.059)     0.097   (0.060)    -0.017   (0.024)     0.028   (0.023 )
                      Log Value Added per Worker        10.916          11.365        -0.017    (0.063)   -0.027    (0.056)   -0.002    (0.025)    0.004   (0.020 )
                      Tenure                            3.014           6.562         -0.051   (0.047)     0.005   (0.045)    0.010    (0.019)    -0.010    (0.020 )

                      Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Design (Stock Corporations + LLC Control Group)

                      CBA Coverage                      0.425           0.796         -0.050   (0.046)     0.088   (0.065)    -0.002   (0.018)     0.028   (0.027 )
                      Binding CBA Coverage              0.108           0.254         -0.009   (0.048)     0.018   (0.061)    0.004    (0.019)     0.017   (0.024 )
                      AKM Pay Premia SD                 0.135           0.161          0.037   (0.046)    -0.052    (0.064)   0.017    (0.018)    -0.003    (0.028 )
                      Industry AKM                      0.059           0.150         -0.114   (0.068)     0.045   (0.044)    -0.041   (0.028)     0.028   (0.017 )
                      Works Council                     0.572           0.835         -0.099   (0.048)     0.116   (0.057)    -0.018   (0.019)     0.040   (0.023 )
63




                      Log Value Added per Worker        10.916          11.365        -0.041    (0.072)    0.005   (0.043)    -0.015    (0.032)    0.015   (0.017 )
                      Tenure                            3.014           6.562         -0.029   (0.043)     0.053   (0.040)    0.010    (0.016)     0.008   (0.020 )

                      Panel C: Regression Discontinuity Design (Stock Corporations)

                      CBA Coverage                      0.425           0.796          0.099   (0.128)     0.058   (0.135)    0.045    (0.041)    -0.020    (0.057 )
                      Binding CBA Coverage              0.108           0.254          0.117   (0.141)     0.030   (0.110)    0.031    (0.048)    -0.009    (0.047 )
                      AKM Pay Premia SD                 0.135           0.161          0.181   (0.127)    -0.176    (0.136)   0.066    (0.043)    -0.095    (0.057 )
                      Industry AKM                      0.059           0.150         -0.160   (0.128)     0.187   (0.121)    -0.083   (0.053)     0.055   (0.041 )
                      Works Council                     0.572           0.835          0.151   (0.136)     0.020   (0.120)    0.040    (0.046)    -0.010    (0.050 )
                      Log Value Added per Worker        10.916          11.365        -0.044    (0.133)    0.152   (0.126)    -0.039    (0.055)    0.049   (0.039 )
                      Tenure                            3.014           6.562          0.080   (0.103)     0.028   (0.101)    0.033    (0.040)    -0.028    (0.043 )



     Note: The table reports heterogeneity in the effect of shared governance on wage measures. The rows are labeled by the heterogeneity categories, which are
     calculated as averages at the three-digit industry (NACE) level (with CBA coverage and works council prevalence calculated based on the IAB Establishment
     Panel). For example, CBA coverage splits firms into two categories depending on whether their industry has above or below-median collective bargaining
     coverage. The reported coefficients correspond to the effect of shared governance in firms above or below the median for the relevant heterogeneity category.
     The underlying regression model (with interacted base effects) is a simple difference specification as in Equation (1) in Panel A, a difference-in-difference
     specification as in Equation (2) in Panel B, and an RD specification as in Equation (3) in Panel C. Across panels, the means of the sorting (heterogeneity)
     variables are calculated among stock corporations in a two-year bandwidth around the reform.. All specifications include 2-digit NACE industry-year effects.
     Standard errors are clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. Stars denote statistical significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. We plot
     our main graphical results in Figure 6.
B     Additional Figures

               Figure A.1: Frequency of Incorporation and Selection: MUP Data


                                                                  (a) Frequency of Incorporation

                                                20

                                                18
                Number of Stock Corporations




                                                16

                                                14

                                                12

                                                10

                                                 8

                                                 6

                                                 4

                                                 2

                                                 0                                   Disc. Estimate: 0.261 (SE 0.439)
                                                     -24              -12              0             12            24
                                                           Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Months)

                                                               (b) Balance of Industry Composition

                                               .1


                                         .05


                                                0


                              -.05


                                               -.1    MUP DiD
                                                                                 e




                                                                              es
                                                                                 n

                                                                              ns




                                                                                 e


                                                                                ic


                                                                                 t


                                                                                 t
                                                                                 g


                                                                                 g


                                                                                 n


                                                                               le




                                                                             or


                                                                            en
                                                                            nc


                                                                             at
                                                                             in

                                                                           rin




                                                                           tio
                                                                           tio




                                                                            tif
                                                                           sa




                                                                           ic
                                                                          tio




                                                                         pp
                                                                          in




                                                                          st




                                                                         m
                                                                         ra




                                                                        en
                                                                        ta
                                                                        uc




                                                                        rv
                                                                        tu




                                                                        le




                                                                        a
                                                                       M




                                                                       E




                                                                      in
                                                                     Su
                                                                     su
                                                                    ho


                                                                     or




                                                                    Se
                                                                    ac




                                                                     ic




                                                                     ci
                                                                     tr




                                                                   al




                                                                   ta
                                                                   n




                                                                  /S
                                                                  ns




                                                                  In
                                                                 sp




                                                                  n/
                                                                 W
                                                                 uf




                                                                Re
                                                                 u




                                                                er


                                                                er
                                                               e/




                                                               al
                                                              Co




                                                               io
                                                              an
                                                              an




                                                              m




                                                             nt


                                                             th
                                                            on


                                                            at
                                                           nc
                                                            m
                                                           Tr
                                               M




                                                          /E


                                                           O
                                                          tr
                                                        Co




                                                         si
                                                        na




                                                       ts
                                                       is
                                                      es
                                                     Fi




                                                    Ar
                                                    in
                                                   of

                                                  m
                                                Pr

                                               Ad




Note: This figure reports results analogous to Panels (a) and (c) in Figure 3 based on data from the Mannheim
Enterprise Panel (MUP), which is available from 1991 onward. This figure does not contain the MUP version
of Figure 3 Panel (b) or all specifications in Panel (c) of Figure 3 due to data access restrictions. See figure
note for Figure 3 for additional information.




                                                                                64
Figure A.2: Firm Survival and Bankruptcy by Incorporation Date and Corporation Type


                                                                     (a) Survival Probability by Group

                                                  1



                                                 .8
                  Share of Cohort Surviving




                                                 .6



                                                 .4



                                                 .2       Old Stock Corporations (Shared Governance)
                                                          Young Stock Corporations (No Shared Goverance)
                                                          Old LLCs
                                                          Young LLCs
                                                  0
                                                      5   6   7      8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15             16   17   18   19   20
                                                                             Years Since Incorporation

            (b) Difference-in-Differences Estimates on Cumulative Exit and Bankruptcy

                                                .2
             Cumulative Effect (DiD Estimate)




                                                .1




                                                 0




                                                -.1



                                                          Any Exit        Bankruptcy
                                                -.2
                                                      1              5                  10                 15                  20
                                                                               Years After Incorporation




Note: The figure is based on the Mannheim Enterprise Panel. Panel (a) replicates Figure 3 Panel (d) in showing
the survival probability for firms incorporated within a two-year window of August 10, 1994. separately
for firms incorporated before or after the cutoff date and for stock corporations and LLCs. Unlike Figure 3
Panel (d), this panel plots survival rates conditional on the firm being five years and older, to highlight the
elimination of visible differences starting then. Panel (b) shows difference-in-differences point estimates and
95% confidence intervals for cumulative bankruptcy probabilities and for cumulative firm exit probabilities
at various years after incorporation, showing that differences are small and statistically insignificant.


                                                                                       65
                         Figure A.3: Effects on Labor Productivity and Capital Intensity


                (a) Log Value Added per Worker                                               (b) Log Value Added per worker , DiD
   12.5                                                                                2.5
           Old Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)     Young Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)
                                                                                        2
    12
                                                                                       1.5

   11.5                                                                                 1

                                                                                        .5         DiD: 0.055 (SE 0.113)
    11
                                                                                        0

   10.5       Old LLCs                                        Young LLCs               -.5
          -20      -16   -12    -8    -4      0    4      8    12    16      20              6    12   18    24  30    36   42   48   54   60
                 Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Quarters)                       Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)

                          (c) Log Fixed Assets                                                       (d) Log Fixed Asset, DiD
   17                                                                                  2.5

          Old Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)      Young Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)            2
   16
                                                                                                   DiD: 0.514 (SE 0.317)
                                                                                       1.5
   15

                                                                                        1
   14
                                                                                        .5
   13
                                                                                        0
   12
          Old LLCs                                            Young LLCs               -.5
        -20      -16   -12    -8     -4      0     4      8    12    16      20              6    12   18    24  30    36   42   48   54   60
                Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Quarters)                        Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)

                (e) Log Fixed Assets per Worker                                              (f) Log Fixed Assets per Worker, DiD
   13     Old Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)      Young Stock Corps (Shared Gov.)           2.5

                                                                                        2
   12
                                                                                       1.5         DiD: 0.492 (SE 0.250)

   11                                                                                   1

                                                                                        .5
   10
                                                                                        0

    9     Old LLCs                                            Young LLCs               -.5
        -20      -16   -12    -8     -4      0     4      8    12    16      20              6    12   18    24  30    36   42   48   54   60
                Incorporation Date Relative To August 10, 1994 (Quarters)                        Bandwidth (Months around August 10, 1994)



Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on firm-level labor productivity and capital.
The left column presents binned scatter plots by quarter of incorporation date around the reform cutoff
with a five-year bandwidth. It also plots results of a local linear regression with a uniform kernel and a
two-year bandwidth, using day-specific incorporation date as the running variable. The right column plots
coefficients and 95% confidence intervals (with SEs clustered at the firm level) from difference-in-differences
specifications with industry-year effects with varying bandwidths, reported on the x-axis. We report the
corresponding main estimates, denoted by the highlighted blue square and blue 95% confidence intervals in
Panels (b), (d) and (e), in Table 2 Columns (1), (7), and (9). We report our main graphical results in Figure 7.

                                                                                  66
Figure A.4: Pooled Rent Sharing : Firms' Pay Premia (AKM Firm Fixed Effects) and Value
Added per Worker


                                 .2
  Residualized Firm Pay Premia




                                 .1



                                  0



                                 -.1


                                                                                        Slope: 0.084 (SE 0.004)
                                 -.2
                                       -2           -1                   0                   1                    2
                                            Residualized Firm-Level Mean of Log Value Added per Worker



Note: This figure presents a binned scatter plots of firm's average pay premia (AKM firm fixed effects) plotted
against average log value added per worker, in the 2006-14 sample of the Orbis-ADIAB data. The AKM
firm fixed effects are estimated in a five-year rolling window and then averaged by firm. Both variables are
residualized by industry (2-digit NACE) fixed effects. The figure also includes the estimated linear regression
line, the slope of which we report in the bottom right along with standard errors. The sample consists of
all firm-year observations in our analysis sample (LLCs and stock corporations) incorporated in a two-year
bandwidth around the reform.




                                                                   67
C     Theoretical Appendix: Hold-Up, Shared Governance,
      and Investment
We now show that a simple but plausible extension that models worker participation as
occurring also in bargaining over inputs, besides bargaining over wages, can overturn the
underinvestment result of (Grout, 1984). Specifically, we separate the decisions in a model
of sequential bargaining: rather than a unilateral firm decision, in stage 1 the firm and the
workers now jointly determine the capital stock by bargaining. As in (Manning, 1987), on
whom our application to shared governance draws, we permit the wage and investment
bargaining to feature different worker bargaining power parameters, with  applying to
bargaining over investment:

                      max{  log S1
                                 W       ¯ , K ) + (1 - ) log S F (w  , L
                                   (w  , L                              ¯ , K )} ,            (A.1)
                        K                                      1


where stage-1 investment choices are again made anticipating wage rule (5), the structure
of which remains unchanged in stage 2. The worker and firm surpluses entering first-stage
bargaining are S1  W    ¯  - bL
                        Lw                         ¯ ) - wL
                               ¯ , while S F F (K, L      ¯ - cK . The previous case of the firm
                                          1
unilaterally setting capital is nested if  0, when underinvestment emerged whenever
 > 0 and c < c . In that case, modeling shared governance as an increase in  distorted
investment further downward.
    Indeed, the specific institution of codetermination gives workers a vote alongside cap-
italists in a series of corporate decisions, including those over strategically important in-
vestment decisions, and in the appointment and holding accountable of managers. Shared
governance may therefore alternatively be viewed as an increase in  . To foreshadow why
this channel will lead to higher rather than lower investment, note that here workers care
about the capital choice K solely because of its effect on wages. First consider the extreme
case where workers have full bargaining power over inputs, i.e.  1. The optimization
problem (A.1) now maximizes worker surplus, maxK {log S1       W        ¯ , K )}, with the following
                                                                  (w  , L
first order condition:

                                                 ¯ w
                                                         
                                                 L           0                                (A.2)
                                                   K
                                           ¯
                                    FK ( K , L ) -  c        0                                (A.3)
                                                      ¯)
                                            FK ( K  , L       c  c.                           (A.4)

Workers' capital choice trades off the benefit ­ its marginal product ­ of which share 
goes to the worker, with the marginal cost ­ resale value c ­ because each unit of capital
boosts the firm's outside option in form of c K in wage setting. Workers ignore direct
capital costs c . The two extreme cases of  0 and  1 make clear that increasing worker
bargaining power in capital choice  overturns the grout1984investment underinvestment
result (FK > c ) to overinvestment if c < c (then FK c < c ).




                                                  68
    The general bargained capital level K  under   [0, 1] is given by:

                                          ( -  )(F (K  , L¯ ) - bL
                                                                 ¯ - c K  ) +  ( c - c )K 
                     ¯)
            FK ( K , L     c - (c - c ) ×                                                  .             (A.5)
                                                          ¯ ) - bL
                                          (1 -  )(F (K  , L      ¯ - c K  ) +  ( c - c )K 

Here, K  depends on  as follows:

      dK                      -( c - c )(F - b L¯ - c K  + ( c - FK ) K  )
                                                                                                         (A.6)
       d                          ¯ - c K  ) + (FK - c )2 ] - ( c - c )[FK - c +  FKK K  ]
               (1 -  )[FKK (F - b L

This expression (which we formally evaluate in Appendix C.1) is positive, so K  is increas-
ing in  , as long as  > 0 and c < c . If given a chance, workers will bargain to raise
capital investment, as they will benefit in stage-2 wage bargaining from the higher produc-
tion. Hence, increasing worker bargaining power in operational decisions such as capital
choices may mitigate hold-up and lead to efficient investment, and even overinvestment.

In sum, this extended model of labor-capital interaction serves as a proof of concept that
a given institution boosting workers' control rights need not crowd out, and can in fact
crowd in, investment.


C.1     Comparative Statics of Investment to Bargaining Power Parameters
         and 
We here formally derive the properties of the comparative static of capital stock choice K 
to worker bargaining power parameters  (in wage setting) and  (in input choice).

Capital Choice        In period 1, the objective function in the bargaining is:

                                            ¯ , K ) + (1 - ) log S 1F (, L
                          max{  log S 1W (, L                            ¯ , K )} ,                      (A.7)
                           K


where the surpluses of the parties depend on period 2 Nash bargaining: S 1W (, L                ¯ , K)
         ¯ ) and S 1F (, L
 S 2 (K, L               ¯ , K ) (1 -  )S2 (K, L
                                               ¯ ) + (c - c )K , with S 2 (K, L
                                                                              ¯ ) F (K, L
                                                                                        ¯ ) - bL
                                                                                               ¯ - c K.

    The optimality condition for K is:

                                              1W                 1F
                                             SK                 SK
                                                    + (1 -  )          0.                                (A.8)
                                             S 1W               S 1F

Where the subscript K indicates the partial derivative of the function with respect to K .
The second-order condition, a property we will use for the comparative statics below and
  If  0 (i.e the workforce has no power in setting the wage), then w  b does not depend on K . For
 1, any K  is a solution, while for  < 1, efficiency emerges (FK c ).
  Period 2 Nash bargaining allocates surplus so that S2W (w  , L ¯ , K )  S 2 (K, L
                                                                                  ¯ ) and S2F (w  , L
                                                                                                    ¯ , K ) (1 -
       ¯
)S (K, L). Period 1 and period 2 surpluses are related as follows: S
  2                                                                   1 W  2 W
                                                                          S and S      1 F S + ( c - c )K .
                                                                                            2 F




                                                        69
the value of which we define as B , is:

                         1W 1W   1W 1W                   1F 1F   1F 1F
                        SKK S - SK SK                   SKK S - SK SK
                                          + (1 -  )                              < 0.             (A.9)
                              S 1W S 1W                       S 1F S 1F

                                           B


The Effect of Worker Bargaining Power in Wage-Setting,  , on K  To characterize the
effect of K  on  totally differentiate first-order condition (A.8) with respect to K  and  in
the neighborhood of K  :

                         1W 1W   1W 1W                    1F 1F   1W 1F
                        SK 
                            S - SK S                     SK 
                                                             S - SK S
             
      B × dK +                            + (1 -  )                               d     0.       (A.10)
                              S 1W S 1W                       S 1F S 1F

                                           A

And therefore,

                                          dK         A
                                                        .                                        (A.11)
                                          d          -B

                                                                                  dK 
By SOC (A.9), -B > 0. We will now evaluate A and hence the sign of                d .
   Note that

                 S1W      S2                          S 1F   (1 -  )S2 + ( c - c )K              (A.12)
                 S1
                  
                    W
                         S2                           S1
                                                       
                                                         F
                                                             -S 2                                (A.13)
                  1W
                 SK       SK
                           2                           1F
                                                      SK     (1 -  )SK
                                                                     2
                                                                       + (c - c )                (A.14)
                  1W
                 SK      S1
                          K
                            W      2
                                  SK                  1W
                                                     SK      S1
                                                              K
                                                                F       2
                                                                     -S K .                      (A.15)

Therefore
                            1W 1W
                           SK S
                                     1W 1W
                                  - SK S          2
                                                 SK  S2 -  SK
                                                            2 2
                                                              S           0                      (A.16)
                                                                            1F
                                                                          SK           KS1W
(the first parenthesis in A = 0). Recall also that from FOC (A.8),        S 1F
                                                                                   - 1-  S1W . Note also




                                                70
that S 1
       
         F
             -S 1
                
                  W      1F
                    and SK 
                                    1W
                                 -S K 
                                       . Therefore, A becomes:

                              1W 1W   1W 1W                                1F 1F   1F 1F
                             SK 
                                 S - SK S                                 SK 
                                                                              S - SK S
                  A                                       + (1 -  )                                         (A.17)
                                   S 1W S 1W                                   S 1F S 1F
                                  1F                1F
                                 SK 
                                               1F S
                                              SK    
                        (1 - )           -                                                                  (A.18)
                                  S 1F        S 1F S 1F
                                      1W       1W 1W
                               S 1W SK      SK S
                        -(1 - ) 1F       +                                                                  (A.19)
                               S    S 1W 1 -  S1W S1W
                                            2
                               S 1W   1 SK
                        -(1 - ) 1F                                                                          (A.20)
                               S    1 -  S 1W
                                          2
                                         SK         (1 - ) S 2
                        -                                                                                   (A.21)
                             (1 -  )S 2 + (c - c )K (1 - )  S 2
                      < 0,                                                                                  (A.22)

provided that  < 1,  > 0, S2 > 0.
   Since A < 0 and -B > 0, we have now shown that

                                                     dK 
                                                         <0                                                 (A.23)
                                                     d

for any level of  < 1, provided that  > 0 and S 2 > 0.

The Effect of Worker Bargaining Power in Investment,  , on K                               We totally differentiate
FOC (A.8) with respect to K  and  :

                                                      1W            1F
                                               
                                                     SK            SK
                                   B × dK +                    -          d   0.                            (A.24)
                                                     S1W           S 1F

                                                           C

so,

                                                   dK          C
                                                                  .                                         (A.25)
                                                    d          -B




                                                          71
Again by SOC (A.9), -B > 0. We will now evaluate the sign of C , which determines the
                                                       1F
          dK                                         SK              K  S1W
sign of    d .   Recall that from FOC (A.8),         S 1F
                                                                 - 1-  S1W . Therefore, C becomes:

                                                  1W              1F
                                                 SK              SK
                                          C                 -                                        (A.26)
                                                 S 1W            S 1F
                                                  1W                    1W
                                                 SK                 SK
                                                            +                                        (A.27)
                                                 S 1W            1 -  S 1W
                                                       1W
                                                  1 SK
                                                                                                     (A.28)
                                                1 -  S 1W
                                                  1  SK
                                                         2
                                                                                                     (A.29)
                                                1 -   S2
                                              > 0.                                                   (A.30)

   Since C > 0 and -B > 0,

                                                     dK 
                                                         >0                                          (A.31)
                                                      d

for any level of 1 >  > 0. If  0, i.e workers have no power in setting the wage, then w 
is equal to b and does not depend on K . Therefore, for  1 any K is a solution, while for
                                                                
 < 1 we have efficiency (FK c ) and K  does not depend on  ( dK
                                                              d     0).


C.2    Endogenous Labor
Here, we relax the assumption of exogenous labor and assume instead that labor L is chosen
contemporaneously to K with the same bargaining parameter  . If labor and capital are
complements (FLK > 0), the effects of changes in  or  on labor have the same signs as
the respective effects on capital (and opposite for FLK < 0). Importantly, the model can
therefore rationalize positive or neutral effects of increases in  on labor.
   The stage 1 objective function in Nash bargaining is now

                            max{  log S 1W (, K, L ) + (1 - ) log S 1F (, K, L)} ,                   (A.32)
                             K, L


where stage-2 surplus is anticipated to be Nash bargained as above. Note that L only enters
the surplus of the respective parties through aggregate period-2 surplus: S 1W ( , K, L )
 S 2 (K, L) and S 1F (, K, L) (1 -  )S 2 (K, L ) + (c - c )K , where S2 (K, L ) F (K, L) - bL - c K .
Hence, both parties will agree on choosing the optimal level of L regardless of bargaining
powers, given by:

           1W                1F
          SL                SL                             (1 -  )
                 + (1 - )               2
                                    0  SL        + (1 -  )                      2
                                                                               SL   0  FK      b.    (A.33)
          S 1W              S 1F               U              V


                                                            72
L  does not depend on  or  directly but only through K ; for any change in K , L adjusts
such that FL (K, L) b and hence:

                                               dL          FLK
                                                       -       .                                      (A.34)
                                               dK          FLL
                                                                        
Moreover, the results (A.23) on dK  d  < 0 and (A.31) on d  > 0 continue to hold in the
                                                           dK

case with endogenous L . The formulae (A.11) and (A.25) still hold, with B now being a
function of the Hessian of the objective function which we can again sign by appealing to
the second order condition.
    As a result, employment effects inherit the qualitative properties of the capital effects
in this extended setting as long as FLK > 0. Going forward, we therefore consider the
general setting with endogenous labor. Therefore, the results derived for capital effects
with fixed labor above correspond to the partial effects  K
                                                          
                                                                A
                                                                -B and 
                                                                       K    C
                                                                            -B in the model
with endogenous labor (with the seemingly fixed labor level set to the originally optimal
                                           dK   A      dK    C
one). However, the total capital effects d       ~ and d 
                                                -B          -B~ (while having the same sign
as in the fixed-labor setting) also reflect endogenous adjustment in labor (with B ~ defined
in Footnote 42).

The Effect of Worker Bargaining Power on K   L   We further show that the capital-labor ratio
will increase with  as long as the capital-labor complementarity is not too large. These
predictions will be qualitatively consistent with our empirical evidence. Related models
with an insider/outsider perspective, in which worker representatives might advocate to
keep employee numbers low in order to increase the capital-labor ratio and to reap ensuing
rents as in lindbeck1989insider,johnson1990work, would predict a decline in employment
­ in contrast to our findings.
    We now derive the additional comparative statics of profit and the capital labor ratio,
and do so in the aforementioned extended model with endogenous labor. Denote the
bargained capital-labor ratio by R K  L . The effect of a parameter   { ,  } on R is:

                                       dR      1 dK   K dL
                                                    - 2                                               (A.35)
                                       d       L d L d
                                               1     K FLK dK
                                                  1+          ,                                       (A.36)
                                               L     L FLL d 

where the second equality uses (A.34). The capital-labor ratio will move in the same
     To see this, take the total derivative of the FOCs (A.8) ­ now with endogenous labor ­ and (A.33) with
respect to L, K and the parameter of interest. Use the latter to replace dL as a function of dK in the former.
This yields (A.10) and (A.24), with B being replaced by
                                              -1
                                  ~     2          2  2     2  2 
                                  B                       -
                                        L2         K 2 L2   K L L K

where (K, L; , )  log S1W (, K, L) + (1 -  ) log S1F (, K, L) is the objective function of the bargaining.
          ~ < 0 by SOC.
Note that B



                                                     73
                           dK             
                                         d  ), if and only if FLK < - K FLL , that is if the
                                   sign( dK
                              L                                       L
direction as capital, sign( d   )
complementarity between K and L is not too large for the labor response (to the capital
increase) to outpace the capital response.




                                             74
Online Appendix References
Goldschmidt, Deborah and Johannes Schmieder. 2017. "The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing
 and the Evolution of the German Wage Structure." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
 132 (3):1165­1217.
Grout, Paul. 1984. "Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash
  Bargaining Approach." Econometrica 52 (2):449­460.
Manning, Alan. 1987. "An Integration of Trade Union Models in a Sequential Bargaining
 Framework." The Economic Journal 97 (385):121­139.




                                         75
