                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       VALUING PRIVATE EQUITY STRIP BY STRIP

                                           Arpit Gupta
                                    Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh

                                      Working Paper 26514
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26514


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




The authors would like to thank Thomas Gilbert, Arthur Korteweg, Stavros Panageas, Antoinette
Schoar, and Morten Sorensen (discussants); as well as Ralph Koijen, Neng Wang, and seminar
and conference participants at the the 2018 UNC Real Estate Research Symposium, the 2019
American Finance Association annual meetings, the Southern California Private Equity
Conference, NYU Stern, the 2019 NBER Long-Term Asset Management conference, the
University of Michigan, SITE 2019: Asset Pricing Theory and Computation, the Western Finance
Association, Arizona State University, the MIT Junior Finance Conference, the Advances in
Financial Research Conference at the San Francisco Fed, Columbia GSB, and 11th Annual PERC
Symposium. We thank Burgiss and the Private Equity Research Consortium for assistance with
data. This work is supported by the NYU Stern Infrastructure Initiative. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Arpit Gupta and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Valuing Private Equity Strip by Strip
Arpit Gupta and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 26514
November 2019
JEL No. G00,G11,G12,G23,G32,R30,R51

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a new valuation method for private equity investments. First, we construct a cash-
flow replicating portfolio for the private investment, applying Machine Learning techniques on
cash-flows on various listed equity and fixed income instruments. The second step values the
replicating portfolio using a flexible asset pricing model that accurately prices the systematic risk
in bonds of different maturities and a broad cross-section of equity factors. The method delivers a
measure of the risk-adjusted profit earned on a PE investment and a time series for the expected
return on PE fund categories. We apply the method to buyout, venture capital, real estate, and
infrastructure funds, among others. Accounting for horizon-dependent risk and exposure to a
broad cross-section of equity factors results in negative average risk-adjusted profits. Substantial
cross-sectional variation and persistence in performance suggests some funds outperform. We
also find declining expected returns on PE funds in the later part of the sample.


Arpit Gupta
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
agupta3@stern.nyu.edu

Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Columbia University
Graduate school of Business
Uris Hall, office 809
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu




Dividend Strip data is available at https://github.com/arpitrage/Dividend_Strip
1    Introduction
Private equity investments have risen in importance over the past twenty-five years, rel-
ative to public equity. Indeed, the number of publicly listed firms has been falling since
1997, especially among smaller firms. Private equity funds account for $5.8 trillion in as-
                                                                               ¨
sets under management, and raised nearly $800 billion in new capital in 2018 (Bokberg,
Carrellas, Chau, and Duane, 2019). Large institutional investors now allocate substan-
tial fractions of their portfolios to such private investments. For example, the celebrated
Yale University endowment has a portfolio weight of over 50% in alternative investments.
Pension funds and sovereign wealth funds have also ramped up their allocations to al-
ternatives. As the fraction of overall wealth that is held in the form of private investment
grows, so does the importance of developing appropriate valuation methods. The non-
traded nature of these assets and their irregular cash-flows makes this a challenge.
    As with any investment, the value of a private equity (PE) investment equals the
present discounted value of its cash-flows. The general partner (GP, fund manager) de-
ploys the capital committed by the limited partners (LPs, investors) by investing in a
portfolio of risky projects. The risky projects may pay some interim cash-flows that are
distributed back to the LPs. The bulk of the cash flows accrue when the GP sells the
projects, and distributes the proceeds net of fees (carry, promote) to the LPs. The main
challenge in evaluating a PE investment is how to adjust the profits the LP earns for the
systematic risk inherent in the distribution cash flows. Industry practice is to report the
ratio of distributions to capital contributions (TVPI) and the internal rate of return (IRR).
Neither metric takes into account the riskiness of the cash-flows.
    We propose a novel, two-step methodology that centers on the nature and the tim-
ing of cash-flow risk for PE investments. In a first step, we estimate the exposure of PE
funds' cash-flows to the cash-flows of a set of publicly listed securities. The main analysis
considers Treasury bonds, the aggregate stock market, a real estate stock index (REIT),
an infrastructure stock index, small stocks, value stocks, growth stocks, and natural re-
source stocks as its set of public market risk factors. The method considers a much richer
cross-section of risks than the literature hitherto, and can easily accommodates additional
publicly-traded risk factors. Inspired by Lettau and Wachter (2011) and van Binsbergen,
Brandt, and Koijen (2012), we "strip" the sequence of PE cash-flows horizon by horizon,
and estimate exposures of the PE cash flow strips to public market strips. We use both
dividend strips and capital gains strips for each of our equity factors. Our identification
assumes that the systematic cash-flow exposures depend on PE category, horizon, and

                                             2
the underlying market conditions at the time of fund origination. All PE funds within
the same category and vintage have the same exposures to the public market strips. We
estimate the exposures using OLS, which necessitates a much smaller cross-section of two
factors, as well as using an Elastic Net estimation, which handles the large cross-section
using a regularization approach and enforces a positivity constraint so that the replicating
portfolio is long-only.
   In a second step, we use a rich, no-arbitrage asset pricing model that prices the as-
set strips. Except for dividend strips on the aggregate stock market for short subsample,
strips on REITs, infrastructure, or any other cross-sectional equity factor are unavailable,
as are capital gains strips for all assets. We use the asset pricing model to back them
out. The model estimates prices of risk by closely matching the history of bond yields of
different maturities, as well as prices and expected returns on the seven equity indices
(aggregate stock, small stock, value stock, growth stock, REIT, natural resource, and in-
frastructure markets). It also matches the data on aggregate stock market dividend strips
reported in van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2012); van Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen,
and Vrugt (2013); van Binsbergen and Koijen (2017). The asset pricing model deliver a
rich time series and cross-section of risk and return. We use the shock price elasticities of
Borovicka and Hansen (2014) to understand how risk change with horizon in the model.
   Combining the cash-flow replicating portfolio of strips obtained from the first step
with the prices for these strips from the asset pricing model estimated in the second step,
we obtain the fair price for the PE-replicating portfolio in each vintage and category. To
estimate the risk-adjusted profit (RAP) of private equity funds, we compare the difference
between excess returns delivered by private equity funds against that the replicating port-
folio. We subtract from this the relative cost of the replicating portfolio and the PE invest-
ment; the latter is normalized to $1 of capital committed in the data. Private equity funds
deliver the realized cash flow minus this of capital. Under the joint null hypothesis of the
correct asset pricing model and the absence of (asset selection or market timing) skill, the
RAP is zero. A fund with positive RAP delivers the same systematic risk exposure more
cheaply than it can be purchased for in the public bond and equity markets.
   The asset pricing model is used also to compute the expected return on a PE invest-
ment, which reflects the systematic risk exposure of the PE fund. Our method breaks
down the expected return into its various horizon components (strips), and, at each hori-
zon, into its exposures to the various risk factors. Since the expected return on the listed
strips varies with the state of the economy, so does the expected return on PE investments.


                                              3
Our method can also be used to ask what the expected return is on all outstanding PE in-
vestments, by aggregating across current vintages. By providing the expected return on
PE, and the covariances of PE funds with traded securities, our approach facilitates port-
folio analysis with alternatives for which return time series are unavailable.
   We use data from Preqin on all PE funds with non-missing cash-flow information
that were started between 1980 and 2017. Cash-flow data until December 2017 are used
in the analysis, corresponding to after-fee receipts by investors at the fund level. Our
sample includes 4,219 funds in eight investment categories. The largest categories are
Buyout, Real Estate, and Venture Capital. The main text reports results for these three
categories as well as Infrastructure, and relegates the results for the other four categories
(Restructuring, Debt Funds, Fund of Funds, and Natural Resources) to the Appendix. The
PE data from Preqin are subject to the usual selection bias concerns, which we address by
also examining data from Burgiss. We find similar results on that data set.1
   A contribution of our work is methodological: we develop a novel approach for as-
sessing the factor exposure for non-listed securities. Though our primary application
here is on private equity, a particularly important asset class, our approach can be ap-
plied more broadly to consider the risk and expected return of generic streams of cash
flows--a topic of increasing importance with the rise of privately listed assets.
   We also contribute to the private equity literature specifically. We find strong evidence
that private equity funds have exposure to cross-sectional factor exposures that are not
typically considered in the literature. The nature of this factor exposure varies in ways
related to the nature of the underlying asset the fund invests in. Real estate funds, for
instance, take on listed real estate exposure; infrastructure funds have some additional
listed infrastructure factor exposure; and Venture Capital (VC) funds have distribution
payoffs best proxied by growth gains strips, corresponding to a strategy of selling growth
stocks. Buyout funds have a more complicated factor exposure, but include substantial
amounts of small, growth, and value exposures for both dividend and capital gains strips.
Economically, this accords well with strategies which buy a range of companies, harvest
some dividends in early stages, and then sell them of near the end of the life of the fund.
   Our finding that private equity funds take on substantial cross-sectional factor expo-
sure beyond the aggregate stock index and bonds has large implications for our assess-
ment of private equity. First, it suggests that LPs in PE vehicles need to carefully assess
   1 Preqindata are thought to understate performance. Some high-performing funds that are closed to
outside investors to protect from FOIA requests are not in our dataset. Brown, Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan,
and Robinson (2015) reports superior coverage of these funds in Burgiss.


                                                   4
portfolio selection and risk management, given that their PE investments provide expo-
sure to a range of factors which may overlap considerably with other investments in their
portfolios. Second, it suggests that we may be arriving at a distorted assessment of factor
exposures. We find, for instance, that VC funds have large exposure to the risk in growth
stocks. This exposure may have been attributed to the aggregate stock market in a simpler
model of risk and return. Third, and maybe most importantly, we find that accounting for
a richer factor exposure leads to large changes in average risk-adjusted profits (RAP). A
substantial component of the returns to PE, which previous research has considered to be
excess returns, can instead be attributed to missing factor exposure. We estimate negative
average RAP of around -18 cents per $1 invested in the Buyout category, -11 cents per $1
invested in VC, -17 cents in real Estate, and -10 cents in Infrastructure. However, there
is substantial cross-sectional variation, with about a quarter of funds delivering in excess
of 10 cents of RAP. We also find considerable persistence in our RAP measure, though
less than in conventional performance metrics. Fourth. both profits and expected returns
have been trending downward, and are especially low in recent periods. The decline in
expected returns for PE funds reflects a broad-based decline in expected returns in public
markets.


Related Literature   This paper contributes to a large empirical literature on performance
evaluation in private equity funds, such as Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Cochrane (2005),
Korteweg and Sorensen (2017), Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2014), Phalippou and
Gottschalg (2009), Robinson and Sensoy (2011), among many others. Most of this litera-
ture focuses on Buyout and Venture Capital funds. Recent work in valuing privately-held
real estate assets includes Peng (2016) and Sagi (2017); Ammar and Eling (2015) and An-
donov, Kr¨
         aussl, and Rauh (2018) have studied infrastructure investments. This literature
has found mixed results regarding PE fund outperformance and its persistence, depend-
ing on the data set and period in question. Our analysis spans the full sample from 1980
until 2017 and all PE investment categories. Our replicating portfolio approach results in
a substantially negative estimate of average risk-adjusted profits for PE funds across all
categories, albeit with large cross-sectional and time-series variation.
   While performance evaluation in private equity is still often expressed as an internal
rate of return or a ratio of distributions to capital committed, several important papers
have incorporated risk into the analysis. The public market equivalent (PME) approach
of Kaplan and Schoar (2005) compares the private equity investment to a public market


                                             5
benchmark (the aggregate stock market) with the same magnitude and timing of cash-
flows. Sorensen and Jagannathan (2015) assess the PME approach from a SDF perspec-
tive. The closest antecedent to our paper is Korteweg and Nagel (2016), who propose
a generalized PME approach (GPME) that relaxes the assumption that the beta of PE
funds to the stock market is one. This is particularly important in their application to
VC funds. Like ours, the PME and GPME approaches avoid making strong assumptions
on the return-generating process of the PE fund, because they work directly with the
cash-flows. Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) discuss this distinction.
In contrast, much of the earlier literature assumes linear beta-pricing relationships, e.g.,
Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003), Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012).
   The literature that estimates beta exposures of PE funds with respect to the stock
market has generally estimated stock market exposures of Buyout funds above one and
even higher estimates for VC funds (e.g., Gompers and Lerner, 1997; Ewens, Jones, and
Rhodes-Kropf, 2013; Peng, 2001; Woodward, 2009; Korteweg and Nagel, 2016). Our work
contributes to this literature by allowing not for a flexible estimation of aggregate stock
market exposure across horizon and vintage, but also by allowing risk exposure estimates
to differ by PE fund category, considering a broader set of PE categories than typically ex-
amined, and especially by going beyond the aggregate stock market as the only source of
aggregate risk. VC funds are found to load on small stock and growth stock risk. Finally,
we connect the systematic risk exposures of funds to a rich asset pricing model, which
allows us to estimate risk-adjusted profits and time-varying expected returns.
   Like Korteweg and Nagel (2016), we estimate a stochastic discount factor (SDF) from
public securities. Our SDF contains additional risk factors and richer price-of-risk dy-
namics. Those dynamics are important for generating realistic, time-varying risk premia
on bond and stock strips, which are the building blocks of our PE valuation method. The
SDF model extends earlier work by Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan (2013) who
value a claim to aggregate consumption to help guide the construction of consumption-
based asset pricing models. The asset pricing model combines a vector auto-regression
model for the state variables as in Campbell (1991, 1993, 1996) with a no-arbitrage model
for the (SDF) as in Duffie and Kan (1996); Dai and Singleton (2000); Ang and Piazzesi
(2003). The SDF model needs to encompass the sources of aggregate risk that the investor
has access to in public securities markets and that PE funds are exposed to. The question
of performance evaluation then becomes whether, at the margin, PE funds add value to a
portfolio that already contains these traded assets.


                                             6
    In complementary work, Ang, Chen, Goetzmann, and Phalippou (2017) filter a time
series of realized private equity returns using Bayesian methods. They then decompose
that time series into a systematic component, which reflects compensation for factor risk
exposure, and an idiosyncratic component (alpha). While our approach does not recover
a time series of realized PE returns, it does recover a time series of expected PE returns.
At each point in time, the asset pricing model can be used to revalue the replicating port-
folio for the PE fund. Since it does not require a difficult Bayesian estimation step, our
approach is more flexible in terms of number of factors as well as the factor risk premium
dynamics. Other important methodological contributions to the valuation of private eq-
uity include Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012), Sorensen, Wang, and Yang (2014), and
Metrick and Yasuda (2010).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our methodology.
Section 3 sets up and solves the asset pricing model. Section 4 presents the main results
on the risk-adjusted profits and expected returns of PE funds. Section 5 concludes. Ap-
pendices A provide additional derivations, while Appendix B has additional detail on
the VAR estimation. Appendix C provides estimates on shock-exposure elasticities of our
estimates. Appendix D includes results on additional fund categories. Appendix E per-
forms a validation exercise on public equities, and Appendix F provides estimates on the
Burgiss dataset.



2    Methodology
PE investments are finite-horizon strategies, typically around ten years in duration. Upon
inception of the fund, the investor (LP) commits capital to the fund manager (GP). The
GP deploys that capital at her discretion, but typically within the first 2-4 years. Interme-
diate cash-flows may accrue from the operations of the assets, for example, net operating
income from renting out an office building. Towards the end of the life of the fund (typ-
ically in years 5-10), the GP "harvests" the assets and distributes the proceeds to the LPs
after subtracting fees (including performance fees called the carry or promote). These
distribution cash-flows are risky, and understanding (and pricing) the nature of the risk
in these cash-flows is the key question in this paper.
                                                                               i }T .
    Denote the sequence of net-of-fee cash-flow distributions for fund i by { Xt + h h =0
Time t is the inception quarter of the fund, the vintage. The horizon h indicates the num-
ber of quarters since fund inception. The maximum horizon H is set to 60 quarters to


                                             7
allow for "zombie" funds that continue past their projected life span of approximately
10 years. All cash flows observed after quarter 60 are allocated evenly to quarters 61-
64. We do so to ensure evenly spaced quarterly cash flows, and interpret the last year
of cash flows as this terminal cash flow event. Monthly fund cash-flows are aggregated
to the quarterly frequency. All PE cash-flows in our data are reported for a $1 investor
commitment.
   Once the capital is committed, the GP has discretion to call that capital. We take the
perspective that the risk-adjusted profit (RAP) measure should credit the GP for the skill-
ful timing of capital calls. Correspondingly, we assume that the replicating portfolio is
fully invested at time t. If strategic delay in capital deployment results in better invest-
ment performance, the RAP will reflect this. In sum, we purposely do not use the data on
capital calls, only the distribution cash flow data.2 In Appendix E, we benchmark against
a standard factor-correction as in Fama and French (1992).


2.1    Two-Step Approach
In a first step, we use our asset pricing model, spelled out in the next section, to price the
time series and cross-section of zero coupon bond and equity strips. Let the HK × 1 vector
F t,t+h be the vector of cash flows on the securities in the replicating portfolio. The first
H elements of F t,t+h are constant equal to 1. They are the cash-flows on nominal zero-
coupon U.S. Treasury bonds that pay $1 at time t + h. The other H (K - 1) elements of
F t,t+h denote risky cash-flow realizations at time t + h. They are the payoffs on "dividend
strips" (Lettau and Wachter, 2011; van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen, 2012) and "capital
gain strips." Dividend strips pay one risky stock dividend at time t + h and nothing at
any other date. We scale the risky dividend at t + h by the cash flow at fund inception
                                                             Dt + h ( k )
time t. For example, a risky cash-flow of Ft,t+h (k ) =       Dt ( k )
                                                                            = 1.05 implies that there was
a 5% realized cash-flow growth rate between periods t and t + h on the kth asset in the
replicating portfolio. This scaling makes the payoffs on dividend strips comparable in
magnitude to that of zero coupon bonds, in turn making bond and stock exposures in the
replicating portfolio comparable in magnitude. Capital gain strips, or gain strips for short,
pay one risky cash flow at time t + h equal to the realized ex-dividend price of the stock.
We scale this cash flow by the current stock price. For example, a 20-quarter gain strip on
   2 Note  that under this assumption, the net present value of deployed capital may differ from $1. Our
methodology can handle capital calls. In that case, the replicating portfolio would mimic not only the
distribution cash flows but also the call cash flows. The calls would be treated as negative bond strip
positions.


                                                   8
the aggregate stock market bought at time t pays the single cash flow Ptm      m
                                                                        +20 / Pt = 1.05 at
time t + 20, if the realized cumulative capital gain on the stock market over this 20-quarter
investment horizon is 5%. The reason for including gain strips in the replicating portfolio
is that PE cash flows during the harvesting period are likely to reflect asset dispositions.
These dispositions take place at prices that reflect all future cash flows on those assets. It
is conceivable that these late-life distributions are more highly correlated with publicly
listed equity prices (future equity dividends) than with current equity dividends.
   Denote the HK × 1 price vector for strips by Pt,h . The first H × 1 elements of this price
vector are the prices of nominal zero-coupon bonds of maturities h = 1, · · · , H , which
we denote by Pt,h (1) = P$
                         t,h . Let the one-period stochastic discount factor (SDF) be Mt+1 ,
then the h-period SDF is:
                                                         h
                                      Mt , t + h =      Mt + j .
                                                       j =1

The (vector of) strip prices satisfy the (system of) Euler equation:

                                  P t , h = E t [ Mt , t + h F t , t + h ] .

Strip prices reflect expectations of the SDF and cash flows.
   The second step of our approach is to obtain the cash-flow replicating portfolio of
strips for the PE cash-flow distributions. Denote the cash flow on the replicating portfolio
by i                                     i
   t,h F t,t+h , where the 1 × HK vector t,h denotes the exposure of PE fund i to the HK
assets in the replicating portfolio. We estimate the exposures from a projection of cash-
flows realized at time t + h of PE funds started at time t on the cash-flows of the risk-free
and risky strips:
                                   i        i                  i
                                  Xt + h =  t, h F t,t + h + e t + h .                     (1)

where e denotes the idiosyncratic cash-flow component, orthogonal to Ft,t+h . The vector
it,h describes how many units of each strip are in the replicating portfolio for the fund
cash-flows. Equation (1) is estimated on a sample of all funds in a given category, all
vintages t, and all horizons h. We impose cross-equation restrictions on this estimation,
as explained below.


Expected Returns      The expected return on private equity fund is given by:

                                          H     K
                            Et R i =       wit,h (k)Et [ Rt+h (k)]                         (2)
                                        h =1 k =1

                                                     9
where wi is a 1 × HK vector of replicating portfolio weights with generic element wi
                                                                                   t, h ( k ) =
it,h (k) Pt,h (k). The HK × 1 vector Et [ R] denotes the expected returns on the K traded as-
set strips at each horizon h, obtained by the asset pricing model. Time variation in strip
expected returns combines with the time variation coming from i
                                                              t,h to induce time vari-
ation in the expected return on the private equity fund. Equation (2) decomposes the risk
premium into compensation for exposure to the various risk factors, horizon by horizon.
The expected return is measured over the life of the fund (not annualized). It can be an-
nualized by taking into account the maturity of the fund. Akin to a Macauley duration,
we define the maturity of the fund, expressed in years (rather than quarters), as:

                                                   1 H K i
                                            i
                                            t =
                                                   4h w       ~ t, h ( k ) h ,                     (3)
                                                      =1 k =1


                  ~i
where the weights w                                     i
                    t,h ( k ) are the original weights wt,h ( k ) rescaled to sum to 1. The annu-
alized expected fund return is then:

                                                                               i
                                                                             1/t
                                  Et Riann        = 1 + Et R           i
                                                                                   -1              (4)


Risk-Adjusted Profit      Performance evaluation of PE funds requires quantifying the LP's
profit on a particular PE investment, after taking into account its riskiness. This ex-post
realized, risk-adjusted profit is the second main object of interest. Under the maintained
assumption that all the relevant sources of systematic risk are captured by the replicating
portfolio, the PE cash-flows consist of one component that reflects compensation for risk
and a risk-adjusted profit (RAP) equal to the discounted value of the idiosyncratic cash-
flow component. For fund i in vintage t, we redefine the idiosyncratic component of fund
cash-flows as ei :
                                                          i
                                       ei        i
                                        t + h = Xt + h -  t, h F t,t + h .

   We define the RAP as:

                              H                                   H    K
            RAPti    =             i
                                  Xt     $
                                     +h Pt,h    -1 -               k            $      k
                                                                   t,h F t,t+h Pt,h -  t,h P t,h
                           h =1                                  h =1 k =1
                                     TVPI
                          H                      H    K
                     =          ei    $
                                 t+h Pt,h   +     k
                                                  t,h P t,h - 1.                                   (5)
                         h =1                   h =1 k =1

   The risk-adjusted profit compares the returns on the PE fund against the returns on the

                                                            10
replicating portfolio. The returns of the PE fund are the future cash flows of the PE fund,
discounted at the risk-free term structure of interest rates (recall nominal bond prices are
Pt$
  ,h ), minus the $1 of capital committed to the fund. Except for the discounting compo-
nent, this measure is similar to a traditional TVPI measure. The second term measures
the return from the replicating portfolio: the discounted value of all realized cash flows
minus the cost of purchasing the replicating portfolio. Rewriting, we can express the
RAP as the discounted sum of the idiosyncratic cash-flows, and the difference between
the purchase price of the replicating portfolio of strips and one. Since the idiosyncratic
cash-flow components are orthogonal to the priced cash-flow shocks, they are discounted
at the risk-free interest rate. Since the term structure of risk-free bond prices Pt$
                                                                                    ,h is known
at time t, there is no measurement error involved in the discounting. The null hypothesis
of no outperformance is E[ RAPti ] = 0, where the expectation is taken on average across
funds. This is because the idiosyncratic cash-flows average to zero, and our null hypoth-
esis is that purchasing a portfolio of strips that has the same systematic risk as the PE
fund will have the same cost as the PE fund, namely $1. Our approach credits PE funds
with out-performance to the extent they are able to deliver factor exposure at an (after-
fee) expense lower than that of existing publicly traded assets. It does not credit the GP
for factor timing, i.e., an unexpectedly high realization of the factors.
   A fund with strong asset selection skills picks investment projects with payoffs supe-
rior to the payoffs on traded assets and will have a positive RAP. Additionally, a fund
with market timing skills, which invests at the right time (within the investment period)
and sells at the right time (within the harvesting period) will have positive risk-adjusted
profit.3 If capital lock-up in the PE fund structure enables managers to earn an illiquidity
premium, we would also expect this to be reflected in a positive RAP on average. Like
any other performance metric in the PE literature, our approach does not allow us to dis-
entangle true skill from this illiquidity premium. To the best of our knowledge there is
no hard evidence of the existence of an illiquidity premium. Many institutional investors
such as pension funds value the fact that PE investments do not have to be marked-to-
market. Given that public pensions make up the largest asset allocator to private equity,4
then the illiquidity premium could in fact be negative. Regardless of the sign, our RAP
   3 The fund's horizon is endogenous because it is correlated with the success of the fund. As noted by
Korteweg and Nagel (2016), this endogeneity does not pose a problem as long as cash-flows are observed.
They write: "Even if there is an endogenous state-dependence among cash-flows, the appropriate valuation
of a payoff in a certain state is still the product of the state's probability and the SDF in that state."
   4 See data from Preqin:            https://www.preqin.com/insights/blogs/an-analysis-of-usbased-
public-pension-fund-allocations-to-private-equity-june-2015/11528.


                                                   11
does incorporate illiquidity (either as a discount or premium).
   To assess the performance of PE funds, we report both the distribution of risk-adjusted
profits across all funds in the sample, as well as the equal-weighted average RAP by
vintage. When calculating our RAP measure (and only then), we exclude vintages after
2010 for which we are still missing a substantial fraction of the cash flows.


2.2    Identifying and Estimating Cash-Flow Betas
The replicating portfolio must be rich enough that it spans all priced (aggregate) sources
of risk, yet it must be parsimonious enough that its exposures can be estimated with
sufficient precision. Allowing every fund in every category and vintage to have its own
unrestricted cash-flow beta profile for each risk factor leads to parameter proliferation
and lack of identification. We impose cross-equation restrictions to aid identification.


Identifying Assumptions          Identification is achieved both from the cross-section and
                                                                       i c of all funds i
from the time series. We make four assumptions. First, the cash-flows Xt +h
in the same category c (category superscripts are omitted for ease of notation) and vintage
t have the same risk factor exposures at horizon h,  t,h . We have N f × T × H fund cash-
flow observations, where T reflects the number of different vintages and N f the average
number of funds in a category c per vintage. Second, the risk exposures k
                                                                        t,h for each factor
k are the sum of a vintage effect ak                       k
                                   t and a horizon effect bh . Third, horizon effects are constant
for the four quarters within the same calendar year. This reduces the number of horizon
effects that need to be estimated for each factor from H = 64 to H /4 = 16. Fourth, the
vintage effects depend on the price-dividend ratio on the aggregate stock market in the
quarter of fund inception. The vintage effects thus captures dependence on the overall
investment climate at the time of PE fund origination. The choice of the pdm
                                                                           t ratio is also
motivated by the asset pricing model of Section 3, where the pdm
                                                               t ratio is one of the key
state variables driving time variation in risk premia.5 To simplify the time dimension,
we categorize vintages t by the quartile of the pdm
                                                  t ratio in the vintage quarter; quartile
breakpoints are based on the same 1974-2017 sample. The vintage effects are normalized
to be zero on average across quartiles, so that 3 vintage coefficients need to be estimated
for each factor. To summarize, with K factors, we estimate (16 + 3) × K risk exposures,
rather than H × T × K coefficients in an unrestricted model.
   5 Haddad, Loualiche, and Plosser (2017) emphasizes the importance of P/D ratios and aggregate equity
premia in explaining Buyout activity.


                                                  12
Two-factor Model     We start with a model in which all private equity cash-flows are as-
sumed to have bond and aggregate stock market exposure. We refer to this as the two-
factor model (K = 2). This model extends not only the PME approach of Kaplan and
Schoar (2005), which assumes a stock market beta of 1 for all PE funds, but also the GPME
approach of Korteweg and Nagel (2016), which assumes a constant stock market beta (dif-
ferent from 1). Our approach allows for exposures to both bonds and stocks be horizon
dependent as well as vintage-specific. Korteweg and Nagel (2016)'s two-factor model has
2 exposure coefficients while we estimate 38 coefficients. Another difference is that the
GPME approach uses the realized SDF while we use strip prices, which are expectations
of the SDF (multiplied by risky cash flow realization in the case of equity strips).
   Fund cash-flows for the two-factor model can be expressed as:

                  i c      bond       equity equity
                 Xt + h =  t, h +  t, h     Ft,t+h + ei t+h
                                                 equity    equity    equity
                        =    abond   bond
                              pdt + bh     + a pdt + bh             Ft,t+h + ei
                                                                              t+h .      (6)

   We include all available vintages that have at least eight quarters of cash flows because
the extra information from recent vintages may be useful to better identify the first few
elements of bh . We estimate equation (6) by OLS.


K-factor Model Our main model is a K-factor model in which we allow for K - 2 ad-
ditional cross-sectional equity market factors (beyond the two factors from the previous
model) to better capture the systematic risk in PE fund cash flows. PE fund cash flows are
modeled as:

                                          K
                    i c
                   Xt        bond
                      + h =  t, h +       k    k        i
                                          t,h Ft,t+h + et+h
                                        k =2
                                                  K
                            = abond
                               t
                                       bond
                                    + bh    +           ak    k  k        i
                                                         t + bh Ft,t+h + et+h .          (7)
                                                 k =2

In the empirical implementation, K = 15. The factors are bond strips, and both dividend
strips and capital gain strips on seven equity factors: the aggregate stock market, small
stocks, growth stocks, value stocks, REITs, infrastructure stocks, and natural resource
stocks. Under our identifying assumptions, we estimate 3K = 45 vintage coefficients and
KH /4 = 240 horizon coefficients for a total of 285 coefficients.
   Because of the large number of coefficients to estimate, we use an Elastic Net ap-


                                                13
proach that constrains all penalized coefficients to be non-negative, and imposes addi-
tional shrinkage penalties on parameters. This second approach follows a recent litera-
ture on Machine Learning in asset pricing (e.g., Gu, Kelly, and Xiu, 2018; Kozak, Nagel,
and Santosh, 2017) and aims to shrink the dimensionality of the factors that enter the PE
fund-replicating portfolio. This estimation offers two key economic advantages. First,
it constrains the replicating portfolio to long positions only, which avoids costs and dif-
ficulties related to short positions. Second, the Elastic Net model will set to zero many
possible factor and horizon terms in the replicating portfolio. This avoids having to take
a stance on the identity of a small number of factors, a problem with the OLS approach.
The Elastic Net simplifies the resulting replicating positions considerably (both through
the ridge regression and Lasso penalties). The Elastic Net estimation of equation (1) can
be written as:

     ^ ElasticNet = arg min X i - i F t,t+h   2
                                                  + 0 1{  > 0} + 1      1   + 2    2
                                                                                         (8)
                             t+h  t, h        2
                     RKH


    We set the hyper-parameter 0 = , which ensures only positive coefficients. We use
cross-validation to tune the parameters 1 , which governs the Lasso parameter zeroing
out a subset of coefficients (factor selection), and the 2 ridge regression penalty which
shrinks the magnitude of coefficient estimates closer to zero, for each fund category sep-
arately.



3    Asset Pricing Model
The second main step is to price the replicating portfolio. If the only sources of risk were
fluctuations in the term structure of interest rates, this step would be straightforward.
After all, we can infer the prices of zero-coupon bonds of all maturities from the observed
yield curve at each date. However, fluctuations in interest rates are not the only and not
even the main source of risk in the cash-flows of private equity funds as we will show. If
fluctuations in the aggregate stock market were the only other source of aggregate risk,
then we could use price information from dividend strips. Those prices can either be
observed directly from dividend strip futures markets (van Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen,
and Vrugt, 2013) or inferred from options and stock markets (van Binsbergen, Brandt, and
Koijen, 2012). However, the available time series is too short for our purposes, strips are
not available for horizons beyond seven years and do not come in one-quarter horizon


                                            14
increments. Most importantly, the only dividend strip data are for the aggregate stock
market. There are no strip data for the additional traded factors we wish to include in
our analysis such as publicly listed real estate or infrastructure assets, a small stock, value
stock, or growth stock index. Finally, we do not observe expected returns on the available
strips, only realized returns. Expected returns are difficult to infer from short time series
of realized returns. For all these reasons, we need an asset pricing model to generate the
time series of strip prices, Pt,h , and the corresponding expected returns for each strip.
But we impose that the asset pricing model is consistent with the available aggregate
dividend strip data in addition to the standard asset pricing moments.
   We propose a reduced-form stochastic discount factor (SDF) model rather than a struc-
tural asset pricing model, since it is more important for our purposes to price the repli-
cating portfolio of publicly traded assets correctly than to understand the fundamental
sources of risk that underly the pricing of stocks and bonds. Our approach builds on
Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan (2013), who price a claim to aggregate con-
sumption and study the properties of the price-dividend ratio of this claim, the wealth-
consumption ratio. A virtue of the reduced-form model is that it can accommodate a
substantial number of risk factors. We argue that it is important to go beyond the aggre-
gate stock and bond markets to capture the risk embedded in PE fund cash flows.
   As in Korteweg and Nagel (2016), the objective here is not to test the asset pricing
model but rather to investigate whether a potential PE investment adds value to an in-
vestor who already has access to securities whose sources of risk are captured by the SDF.


3.1     Setup
3.1.1   State Variable Dynamics

Time is denoted in quarters. We assume that the N × 1 vector of state variables follows a
Gaussian first-order VAR:
                                                            1
                                     z t =  z t -1 +  2  t ,                                (9)

with shocks t  i.i.d. N (0, I ) whose variance is the identity matrix. The companion
matrix  is a N × N matrix. The vector z is demeaned. The covariance matrix of the
innovations to the state variables is ; the model is homoscedastic. We use a Cholesky
                                                    1   1
decomposition of the covariance matrix,  =  2  2 , which has non-zero elements only on
and below the diagonal. The Cholesky decomposition of the residual covariance matrix
allows us to interpret the shock to each state variable as the shock that is orthogonal to

                                               15
the shocks of all state variables that precede it in the VAR. We discuss the elements of the
state vector and their ordering below. For now, we note that the (demeaned) one-month
bond nominal yield is one of the elements of the state vector: y$      $
                                                                t,1 = y0,1 + eyn zt , where
 $
y0,1 is the unconditional average 1-quarter nominal bond yield and eyn is a vector that
selects the element of the state vector corresponding to the one-quarter yield. Similarly,
the (demeaned) inflation rate is part of the state vector: t = 0 + e zt is the (log) inflation
rate between t - 1 and t. Lowercase letters denote logs.


3.1.2    Stochastic Discount Factor

We specify an exponentially affine SDF, similar in spirit to the no-arbitrage term structure
                                                      $            $
literature (Ang and Piazzesi, 2003). The nominal SDF Mt +1 = exp( mt+1 ) is conditionally
log-normal:

                                            1
                            m$        $
                             t+1 = - yt,1 - 2 t t - t t+1 .                              (10)


Note that y$            $                $                               $
           t,1 = -Et [ mt+1 ] - 0.5Vt [ mt+1 ]. The real log SDF mt+1 = mt+1 + t+1 is also
conditionally Gaussian. The innovations in the vector  t+1 are associated with a N × 1
market price of risk vector t of the affine form:

                                       t = 0 + 1 z t .

The N × 1 vector 0 collects the average prices of risk while the N × N matrix 1 governs
the time variation in risk premia. Asset pricing amounts to estimating the market prices
of risk (0 , 1 ). We specify the moment conditions to identify the market prices of risk
below.


3.1.3    Bond Pricing

Proposition 1 in Appendix A shows that nominal bond yields of maturity  are affine in
the state variables:
                                       1 $ 1
                                y$
                                 t, = - A  -  B$
                                                           zt .
                                             
                                  $
The scalar A$ ( ) and the vector B  follow ordinary difference equations that depend on
the properties of the state vector and on the market prices of risk. The appendix also
calculates the real term structure of interest rates, the real bond risk premium, and the
inflation risk premium on bonds of various maturities. We will price a large cross-section

                                             16
of nominal bonds that differ by maturity, paying special attention to matching the time
series of one- and twenty-quarter bond yields since those bond yields are part of the state
vector zt .


3.1.4   Equity Pricing

The present-value relationship says that the price of a stock equals the present-discounted
value of its future cash-flows. By value-additivity, the price of the stock, Ptm , is the sum
                                                m . These future cash-flow claims are the
of the prices to each of its future cash-flows Dt
so-called dividend strips or zero-coupon equity (Wachter, 2005). Dividing by the current
          m:
dividend Dt

                                                          
                                                    Ptm
                                                    Dtm =  Ptd,                          (11)
                                                           =1
                                            
                     exp pd + e pdm zt =     exp     Am   m
                                                       + B zt ,                          (12)
                                             =0


where Ptd
        , denotes the price of a  -period dividend strip divided by the current dividend.
Proposition 2 in Appendix A shows that the log price-dividend ratio on each dividend
strip, pd         d
        t, = log Pt, , is affine in the state vector and provides recursions for the coef-
                m
ficients ( Am
             , B ). Since the log price-dividend ratio on the stock market is an element
of the state vector, it is affine in the state vector by assumption. Equation (12) restates
the present-value relationship from equation (11). It articulates a non-linear restriction
on the coefficients {( Am   m 
                         , B ) } =1 at each date (for each state zt ), which we impose in the
estimation. Analogous present value restrictions are imposed for the other traded equity
factors, whose price-dividend ratios and dividend growth rates are also included in the
state vector.
   If dividend growth were unpredictable and its innovations carried a zero risk price,
then dividend strips would be priced like real zero-coupon bonds. The strips' dividend-
price ratios would equal yields on real bonds with the coupon adjusted for deterministic
dividend growth. All variation in the price-dividend ratio would reflect variation in the
real yield curve. In reality, the dynamics of real bond yields only account for a small frac-
tion of the variation in the price-dividend ratio, implying large prices of risk associated
with shocks to dividend growth that are orthogonal to shocks to bond yields.




                                             17
3.1.5   Dividend Futures

The model readily implied the price of a futures contract that received the single realized
                                       $                           d
nominal dividend at some future date, Dt +k . That futures price, Ft, , scaled by the current
                  $
nominal dividend Dt , is:
                                     Ftd
                                       ,                 $
                                      $
                                             = Ptd
                                                 , exp  yt, ,
                                     Dt
The one-period realized return on this futures contract for k > 1 is:

                                       f ut,d        Ftd
                                                       +1, -1
                                     Rt+1, =                       - 1.
                                                       Ftd
                                                         ,

                                       f ut,d
Appendix A shows that log(1 + Rt+1, ) is affine in the state vector zt and in the shocks
 t+1 . It is straightforward to compute average realized returns over any subsample, and
for any portfolio of futures contracts.


3.2     Estimation
3.2.1   State Vector Elements

The state vector contains the following 18 variables, in order of appearance: (1) GDP price
inflation, (2) real per capita GDP growth, (3) the nominal short rate (3-month nominal
Treasury bill rate), (4) the spread between the yield on a five-year Treasury note and a
three-month Treasury bill, (5) the log price-dividend ratio on the CRSP value-weighted
stock market, (6) the log real dividend growth rate on the CRSP stock market. Elements 7,
9, 11, 13, 15, and 17 are the log price-dividend ratios on the REIT index of publicly listed
real estate companies, a listed infrastructure index (infra), the first size quintile of stocks
(small), the first book-to-market quintile of stocks (growth), natural resource stocks (nr),
and the fifth book-to-market quintile of stocks (value). Elements 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 18
are the corresponding log real dividend growth rates:

                                                                                   in f ra      in f ra
          zt =      t , xt , y$      $       $       m     m     reit  reit
                              t,1 , yt,20 - yt,1 , pdt ,  dt , pdt ,  dt , pdt               , dt         ,   (13)
                                           growth         growth
                    pdsmall
                      t     , dsmall
                               t     , pdt          , dt           , pdnr    nr    value
                                                                       t ,  dt , pdt     , dvalue
                                                                                            t     .

   This state vector is observed at quarterly frequency from 1974.Q1 until 2017.Q4 (176
observations). This is the longest available time series for which all variables are avail-


                                                     18
able.6 Our PE cash flow data starts shortly thereafter in the early 1980s. While most of our
PE fund data are after 1990, we deem it advantageous to use the longest possible sample
to more reliably estimate the VAR dynamics and especially the market prices of risk. All
state variables are demeaned with the observed full-sample mean.
    The VAR is estimated by OLS in the first stage of the estimation. We recursively zero
out all elements of the companion matrix  whose t-statistic is below 1.96. Appendix B
                                                             1
contains the resulting point estimates for  and  2 .


3.2.2      Market Prices of Risk

The state vector contains both priced sources of risk as well as predictors of bond and
stock returns. We estimated 12 non-zero parameters in the constant market price of risk
vector 0 and 92 non-zero elements of the matrix 1 which governs the dynamics of the
risk prices. The point estimates are listed in Appendix B.2. We use the following target
moments to estimate the market price of risk parameters.
    First, we match the time-series of nominal bond yields for maturities of one quarter,
one year, two years, five years, ten years, twenty years, and thirty years. They constitute
about 7 × T moments, where T = 176 quarters.7
    Second, we impose restrictions that we exactly match the average five-year bond yield
and its dynamics. This delivers 19 additional restrictions:

      $         $                        $
   - A20 /20 = y0,20       and        - B20 /20 = [0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]

Because the five-year bond yield is the sum of the third and fourth element in the state
                                                       $
vector, the market prices of risk must be such that - B20 /20 has a one in the third and
fourth place and zeroes everywhere else.
    Third, we match the time-series of log price-dividend ratios on the stock market, real
estate stocks, infrastructure stocks, small stocks, growth stocks, natural resource stocks,
   6 The  model is quarterly. We use the average of daily Constant Maturity Treasury yields within the quar-
ter. The REIT index is the NAREIT All Equity index, which excludes mortgage REITs. The first observation
for REIT dividend growth is in 1974.Q1. All dividend series are deseasonalized by summing dividends
across the current month and past 11 months. This means we lose the first 8 quarters of data in 1972 and
1973 when computing dividend growth rates. The infrastructure stock index is measured as the value-
weighted average of the eight relevant Fama-French industries (Aero, Ships, Mines, Coal, Oil, Util, Telcm,
Trans). The natural resource index is measured from the Alerian Master Limited Partnership from 1996.Q1
onwards and as the Oil industry index beforehand.
    7 The 20-year bond yield is missing prior to 1993.Q4 while the 30-year bond yield data is missing from

2002.Q1-2005.Q4. In total 107 observations are missing, so that we have 1232-107=1125 bond yields to
match.


                                                     19
and value stocks. The model-implied price-dividend ratios are built up from 3,500 quar-
terly dividend strips according to equation (11). We impose these present-value relation-
ships in each quarter, delivering 7 × T moments.
   Fourth, we impose that the time series of risk premia for the seven stock indices in
the model match the risk premia implied by the VAR, i.e., from the data. As usual, the
expected excess return in logs (including a Jensen adjustment) must equal minus the con-
ditional covariance between the log SDF and the log return. For example, for the overall
stock market:

                                 m,$    $     1     m,$                 m,$
                           Et rt  +1 - yt,1 + 2 Vt rt+1  = -Covt m$
                                                                  t+1, rt+1
 m        $                m
r0 + 0 - y0 (1) + (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt
             1         m                     m                                 m             1
         +     edivm + 1 e pd + e    edivm + 1 e pd + e            =   edivm + 1 e pd + e    2 t
             2

The left-hand side is given by the VAR (data), while the right-hand side is determined by
the market prices of risk 0 and 1 (model). This provides ( N + 1) × 7=133 additional
restrictions. These moments help identify the 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, 14th, 16th, and 18th ele-
ments of 0 and corresponding rows of 1 (together with the present-value restrictions).
   Fifth, we price a claim that pays the next eight quarters of realized nominal dividends
on the aggregate stock market. The value of this claim is the sum of the prices to the near-
est eight dividend strips. Data for the price-dividend ratio on this claim and the share it
represents in the overall stock market (S&P500) for the period 1996.Q1-2009.Q3 (55 quar-
ters) are obtained from van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2012). This delivers 2 × 55
moments. We also ensure that the model is consistent with the high average realized re-
turns on short-horizon dividend futures, first documented by van Binsbergen, Hueskes,
Koijen, and Vrugt (2013). Table 1 in van Binsbergen and Koijen (2017) reports the observed
average monthly return on one- through seven-year U.S. SPX dividend futures over the
period Nov 2002 - Jul 2014. That average portfolio return is 8.71% per year. We construct
an average return for the same short maturity futures portfolio (paying dividends 2 to 29
quarters from now) in the model:

                                                     1 29 f ut,d
                                                        Rt+1,
                                   f ut, port f
                                 R t +1           =
                                                    28  =2

We evaluate the realized return on this dividend futures portfolio at the state variables
observed between 2003.Q1 and 2014.Q2, average it, and annualize it. This results in one

                                                   20
additional restriction. We free up the market price of risk associated with the market
price-dividend ratio (fifth element of 0 and first six elements of the fifth row of 1 ) to
help match the dividend strip evidence.
   Sixth, we impose a good deal bound on the standard deviation of the log SDF, the
maximum Sharpe ratio, in the spirit of Cochrane and Saa-Requejo (2000).
   Seventh, we impose regularity conditions on bond yields. We impose that very long-
term real bond yields have average yields that weakly exceed average long-run real GDP
growth, which is 1.65% per year in our sample. Long-run nominal yields must exceed
long-run real yields by 2%, an estimate of long-run average inflation. These regularity
conditions are satisfied at the final solution.
   Not counting the regularity conditions, we have 2, 620 moments to estimate 104 mar-
ket price of risk parameters. The estimation is massively over-identified.


3.2.3   Model Fit

Figure 1 plots the bond yields on bonds of maturities 1 quarter, 1 year, 5 years, and 10
years. Those are the most relevant horizons for the private equity cash-flows. The model
matches the time series of bond yields in the data closely for the horizons that matter
for PE funds (below 15 years). It matches nearly perfectly the 1-quarter and 5-year bond
yield which are part of the state space.
   The top panels of Figure 2 show the model's implications for the average nominal (left
panel) and real (right panel) yield curves at longer maturities. These long-term yields are
well behaved. The bottom left panel shows that the model matches the dynamics of the
nominal bond risk premium, defined as the expected excess return on five-year nominal
bonds. The compensation for interest rate risk varies substantially over time, both in data
and in the model. The bottom right panel shows a decomposition of the yield on a five-
year nominal bond into the five-year real bond yield, annual expected inflation over the
next five years, and the five-year inflation risk premium. On average, the 5.7% five-year
nominal bond yield is comprised of a 1.7% real yield, a 3.3% expected inflation rate, and
a 0.8% inflation risk premium. The importance of these components fluctuates over time.
   Figures 3 and 4 show the equity risk premium, the expected excess return, in the left
panels and the price-dividend ratio in the right panels. The various rows cover the seven
stock indices we price. The dynamics of the risk premia in the data are dictated by the
VAR. The model chooses the market prices of risk to fit these risk premium dynamics as



                                              21
closely as possible.8 The price-dividend ratios in the model are formed from the price-
dividend ratios on the strips of maturities ranging from 1 to 3500 quarters, as explained
above. The figure shows an excellent fit for price-dividend levels and a good fit for risk
premium dynamics. Some of the VAR-implied risk premia have outliers which the model
does not fully capture. This is in part because the good deal bounds restrict the SDF from
becoming too volatile and extreme. We note large level differences in valuation ratios
across the various stock factors, as well as big differences in the dynamics of risk premia
and price levels, which the model is able to capture well.


3.3    Temporal Pricing of Risk
The first key input from the model into the private equity valuation exercise are the prices
of nominal zero-coupon bonds and of the various dividend strips. Figure 5 plots these
strip prices, scaled by the current quarter dividend. For readability, we plot only three
maturities: one, five, and ten years. The model implies substantial variation in strip prices
over time, across maturities, as well as across risky assets. If the replicating portfolio for
VC funds originated in the year 2000 loads heavily on growth strips, when growth strips
are expensive, then the risk-adjusted performance of vintage-2000 VC funds will be high,
all else equal.
   As part of the estimation, the model fits several features of traded dividend strips
on the aggregate stock market. Figure 6 shows the observed time series of the price-
dividend ratio on a claim to the first 8 quarters of dividends (red line, left panel), as well
as the share of the total stock market value that these first eight quarters of dividends
represent (red line, right panel). The blue line is the model. The model generates the right
level for the price-dividend ratio for the short-horizon claim. For the same 55 quarters
for which the data are available, the average is 7.75 in the model and 7.65 in the data.
The first 8 quarters of dividends represent 3.4% of the overall stock market value in the
data and 4.5% in the model, over the period in which there are data. The model mimics
the observed dynamics of the short-horizon value share quite well, including the sharp
decline in 2000.Q4-2001.Q1 when the short-term strip value falls by more than the overall
stock market. This reflects the market's perception that the recession would be short-
lived. In contrast, the share of short-term strips increases in the Great Recession, both in
   8 Thequarterly risk premia are annualized (multiplied by 4) for presentational purposes only. The VAR
does not restrict risk premia to remain positive. The VAR-implied market equity risk premium is negative
in 21% of the quarters.



                                                  22
the data and in the model, in recognition of the persistent nature of the crisis.
   The second key input from the model into the private equity valuation exercise are the
expected excess return on the bond and stock strips of horizons of 1-60 quarters. After all,
the expected return of the PE fund is a linear combination of these expected returns; re-
call equation (2). Figure 7 plots the average risk premium on nominal zero coupon bond
yields (top left panel) and on all dividend strips (other panels). Risk premia on nomi-
nal bonds are increasing with maturity from 0 to 3.5%. The second panel shows the risk
premia on dividend strips on the overall stock market (solid blue line). It also plots the
dividend futures risk premium (red line). The difference between the spot and futures
risk premium is approximately equal to the nominal bond risk premium. The uncondi-
tional dividend futures risk premium is downward sloping in maturity at the short end of
the curve, and then flattens out. The graph also plots the model-implied dividend futures
risk premium, averaged over the period 2003.Q1-2014.Q2 (yellow line). It is substantially
more downward sloping at the short end than the risk premium averaged over the entire
1974-2017 sample. In fact, the model matches the realized portfolio return on dividend fu-
tures of maturities 1-7 years over the period 2003.Q1-2014.Q2, which is 8.7% in the data
and 8.7% in the model.9
   The remaining panels of Figure 7 show the dividend strip risk spot and future pre-
mia for the other cross-sectional factors. There are interesting differences in the levels of
future risk premia especially at shorter horizons and in the shape of term structures. Av-
erage futures risk premia are generally declining to flat in maturity. Heterogeneity in risk
premia by asset class, by horizon, and over time will give rise to heterogeneity in the risk
premia on the PE-replicating portfolios.
   Figure 8 plots the time series of expected returns on bonds and on both dividend and
gain strips for the seven equity factors; the maturity of all strips is 20 quarters. Expected
returns are annualized. We note rich cross-sectional heterogeneity in levels and dynamics
across panels, a low-frequency decline over time in the level of expected returns common
across most panels, and high pairwise correlation between dividend and capital gain strip
expected returns in each panel.
   Appendix C provides further insight into how the model prices risk at each horizon
using tools developed by Hansen and Scheinkman (2009) and Borovicka and Hansen
(2014). The shock price elasticities measure how the model prices risk exposure to each
  9 As an aside, the conditional risk premium, which is the expected return on the dividend futures portfolio

over the 2003.Q1-2014.Q2 period is 6.0% per year in the model. The unconditional risk premium on the
dividend futures portfolio (over the full sample) is 5.2%.


                                                    23
VAR innovation at various horizons. The shock exposure elasticities measure how cash
flow (dividend) growth on each of the seven listed equity factors responds to an impulse
in inflation, GDP growth, short rates, the slope of the term structure, and shocks to the
cash flows themselves. It makes clear that the various equity factors have very different
risk exposures from each other, and at various horizons.



4      Expected Returns and Risk-adjusted Profits in PE Funds
In this section, we combine the cash-flow exposures from section 2 with the asset prices
from section 3 to obtain risk-adjusted profits on private equity funds.


4.1      Summary Statistics
Our fund data cover the period January 1981 until December 2017. Our main data source
is Preqin, but we also replicate our analysis using data from Burgiss in Appendix F.10 We
group private equity funds into eight categories: Buyout (LBO), Venture Capital (VC),
Real Estate (RE), Infrastructure (IN), Natural Resources (NR), Fund of Funds (FF), Debt
Funds (DF), and Restructuring (RS). Our FF category contains the Preqin categories Fund
of Funds, Hybrid Equity, and Secondaries. The Buyout category is commonly referred to
as Private Equity, whereas we use the PE label to refer to the combination of all investment
categories.
     We include all funds with non-missing cash-flow information. We group funds by
their vintage, defined as the quarter in which they make their first capital call. The last
vintage we consider in the analysis is 2017.Q4. Table 1 reports the number of funds and
the aggregate AUM in each vintage-category pair. In total, we have 4,219 funds in our
analysis and an aggregate of $4.1 trillion in assets under management. There is clear
business cycle variation in when funds funds get started as well as in their size (AUM).
Buyout is the largest category by AUM, followed by Real Estate, and then Venture Cap-
ital. The last column of the table shows the quartile of the price/dividend ratio on the
stock market, which we use to estimate vintage effects. The table reports the average
pd-quartile across of the four vintages (quarters) in the calendar year.
    10 Onepossible limitation of the Preqin data is it is substantially sourced by FOIA requests made to pub-
lic pensions, who may have differential pricing terms in side letters and "Most Favored Nation" clauses.
However, Da Rin and Phalippou (2017) suggests that public pensions are not statistically different from
other investors in their access to these clauses. Burgiss data is sourced instead from a more representative
set of institutional investors.


                                                     24
    Figure 9 shows the average cash-flow profile in each category for distribution events,
pooling all funds and vintages together and equally weighting them. For this graph, we
combine all monthly cash-flows into one yearly cash-flow for each fund, and then average
across funds within the category. The first 15 orange bars are for the first 15 years since the
first capital call. The last bar (in green) represents the discounted sum of cash flows that
occur after year 15.11 The literature often treats PE vehicles as lasting for about ten years.
While we observe that the majority of distribution cash-flows occur between years 5 and
10, cash flows after year 10 account for a substantial portion of the total cash received by
LPs, and we therefore incorporate them in our analysis.12 All cash flows are net of fees
imposed by the GPs.
    Figure 10 zooms in on the four investment categories of most interest to us: LBO, VC,
RE, and IN. The figure shows the average cash-flow profile for each vintage. Since there
are few LBO and VC funds prior to 1990 and few RE and IN funds prior to 2000, we start
the former two panels with vintage year 1990 and the latter two panels with vintage year
2000. The figure shows that there is substantial variation in cash-flows across vintages,
even within the same investment category. This variation will allow us to identify vintage
effects. The figure also highlights that there is a lot of variation in cash-flows across calen-
dar years. VC funds started in the mid- to late-1990s vintages realized very high average
cash-flows around calendar year 2000 and a sharp drop thereafter. Since the stock market
also had very high cash-flow realizations in the year 2000 and a sharp drop thereafter, this
type of variation will help the model identify a high stock market beta for VC funds. This
is an important distinction with other methods, such as the PME, which assume constant
risk exposure and so would attribute high cash flow distributions in this period to excess
returns. Appendix Figure D.1 shows cash-flow profiles for the remaining fund categories.
  11 We  discount at the risk free rate produced by the Asset Pricing model. For infrastructure, we have a
few outliers in years 14 and 15. To avoid overfitting in the OLS model, we discount these cash flows (but
do not discard them) to the thirteenth year, which improves ease of interpretability but does not affect our
conclusion.
   12 Industry publications have also noted the increasing lifespan of private equity funds. For instance, a

Preqin report from 2016 remarks: "The average lifespan of funds across the whole private capital industry
is increasing beyond the typical 10 years... older funds of vintages 2000-2005 still hold a substantial $204bn
worth of investments, equating to 7.2% of total unrealized assets" (Preqin, 2016). We also estimate our
results on a subsample of funds which only distribute 10% or less of their cash after 10 years, and find
comparable results.




                                                     25
4.2   Factor Estimation in OLS and Elastic Net
We compare the results of two estimation approaches, run separately for each fund cate-
gory. The first is a two-factor model (bond and aggregate stock dividend strips) estimated
by OLS; recall equation (6). The second is an Elastic Net model estimated on the full set
of fifteen factors (bonds strips, and dividend and capital gains strips for: aggregate stock
index, small stocks, growth stocks, value stocks, REITs, infrastructure stocks, and natu-
ral resource stocks); recall equations (7) and (8). The estimated parameters are the factor
                           k , and how these exposures shift by vintage (pd quartile), cap-
exposures across horizon, bh
tured by the ak               k    k
              t . Their sum, at + bh , measures the number of units of factor strip k with
maturity h that the PE-replicating portfolio buys.
   This Elastic Net approach has the main benefit that it results in substantial dimension
reduction of our estimation problem (through its two regularization terms), which is es-
sential in estimating a large number of parameters across a variety of horizons, factors,
and vintage states. Absent this dimensionality reduction, we simply would be unable
to estimate an asset pricing model with a rich set of possible factors given the limited
number of PE fund observations. The end result is a parsimonious replicating portfolio
consisting of long positions in a modest number of strips (factor-horizon combinations).
   Figure 11 contrasts our resulting factor exposures along the dimension of horizon bh
obtained through both the 2-factor OLS model (left) and the Elastic Net model using the
full set of factors (right). Each row corresponds to one of the four main PE categories.
Appendix Figure D.2 contains these estimates for the other four PE categories. Appendix
Figures D.3 and D.4 contain these estimates for the PD-quartile effects at .


Buyout    In Panel A of Figure 11 , we find substantial stock exposures throughout most
of the life of the fund. The replicating portfolio contains short positions in bonds, excep-
tion for the middle years (7-12) and the terminal cash flow represented by year 16. This
terminal cash exposure is captured by a mix of stock and bond strips.
   The Elastic Net model on the right differs in several respects. First, all positions are
positive, which ensures that PE cash flows are replicable through long-only positions.
Second, the two factors in the OLS model for find little weight in the Elastic Net model.
This suggests that other cross-sectional factors better capture the systematic risk in Buy-
out funds. The regularization in the Elastic Net approach ensures sufficient dimension
reduction in order to produce a sparse portfolio of replicating positions. We uncover a
pattern of dividend strip (solid lines) and capital gain strip (dotted lines) exposures that


                                             26
is rich and complex. While we have not constrained our estimation to require that ad-
jacent years have similar exposures, we frequently find that factors have some periodic
tendencies with rising and falling exposures over the fund's life cycle.
   Early on in fund life, PE fund cash flows tend to look more like aggregate stocks,
value stocks, and small stocks. Closer to to the end of the fund life, we estimate a much
more substantial growth exposure. This suggests that the early cash flows, when portfolio
companies have been purchased and are either quickly re-sold or harvested for operating
profits, have exposures which look like small, value, and general stock market. By the
end of the fund life, the exposure looks closer to the capital realization of growth stocks.
This overall pattern generally corresponds to Buyout fund activities which consist of pur-
chasing a broad range of companies, restructuring the operations, harvesting some initial
cash flows (for instance through dividend recapitalization), and ultimately reselling these
assets on public markets. We also find some moderate evidence for non-standard divi-
dend cash flows (such as from REITs around year 8, and infrastructure in years 9-11 of
fund life). To minimize over-fitting, we rely on a cross-validation exercise in which we
use a leave-out sample to fit 1 and 2 parameters.
   The takeaway from the analysis on Buyout funds is that these vehicles do not simply
take on bond and equity exposure in the cross-section, as is commonly assumed. Our
best estimate for fund cash flow fit features a much richer factor exposure structure across
different equity factor categories and horizons. This factor exposure is relevant for LPs
who invest in Buyout vehicles. Portfolio management of PE within institutional investor
portfolios should take into account the rich risk and return dynamics of PE funds.


Venture Capital    We see further evidence of the importance of considering a broad cross-
section of factor exposures in Panel B of Figure 11 , which examines Venture Capital funds.
Our OLS 2-factor model in the left panel places some positive weight on the equity div-
idend factor both early and late in fund life, but finds that a bond position best fits cash
distributions for the most active middle part of the funds' life.
   Instead, our Elastic Net model (right panel) indicates that the single factor which con-
tributes most to the fit of VC cash flows for the first nine years of fund life is gains strips
on growth stocks. VC cash flows are akin to the cash flows obtained from selling firms
in the bottom quintile of the book-to-market distribution. Appendix Figure D.3 suggests
that this loading is even higher in periods when the market has a higher pd ratio.
   Our findings for VC funds carry an important economic intuition. While Buyout funds


                                              27
acquire a range of companies which may differ in their underlying factor exposures; VC
funds concentrate on early-stage and rapidly expanding entrepreneurial companies and
distribute little cash prior to their exits from these funds. Further VC funds, unlike Buyout
(or Real Estate, or Infrastructure funds) typically harvest few cash flows during fund
operations prior to deal exits. Correspondingly, we find that the bulk of VC fund cash
flow exposure can be accounted for by growth gains strips.


Real Estate       Panel C repeats our estimation for Real Estate funds. Stock dividend strips
have a positive loading throughout fund horizon in the OLS model. Bond positions are
negative except for some of the middle years. Again, our Elastic Net model picks up ad-
ditional cross-sectional exposures which crowd out the exposure to aggregate stock and
bond market strips from the two-factor model. Reassuringly, REIT dividends and REIT
gains strips are important components of the replicating portfolio. The early cash flow
distributions also load on value and small stock gain strips. In the later years, REPE fund
cash flows are exposed to the same risk as infrastructure dividends strips and growth
gains strips. These results suggest that Real Estate funds take on a distinct factor expo-
sure profile from Buyout and VC funds, while sharing at least some of the same factor
exposures.


Infrastructure Panel D studies Infrastructure funds. Here, too, we find a strong role
for sector-specific factors, such as infrastructure dividend strips, natural resource gains
strips, and REIT gains strips which point to the role of underlying asset characteristics
in driving the fund-level asset pricing profile.13 Interestingly, the infrastructure category
tends to place greater weight on dividend strips, as opposed to capital gains strips; sug-
gesting that the cash flows in this sector are more like dividends than like realized prices.


Take-aways        These rich dynamics across horizon, price-to-dividend ratios, and factors
have important asset pricing implications. The risk loadings on PE funds broadly cannot
be assumed to be static either in the time-series or across fund age (maturity). Rather, a
broad set of risk factor exposures is relevant across all PE fund categories. We provide
the first systematic analysis of the asset pricing properties of these some of these alterna-
tive fund categories (RE, IN, NR), and find that they carry important sector-specific asset
exposures. These exposures are frequently concentrated in the first half of the fund's
  13 Similarly,
              Natural Resource funds, which we examine in the Appendix, have greater natural resource
strip exposure.


                                                 28
life. Our estimation approach allows us to translate these complex risk dynamics into the
expected return for different fund categories and to revisit the question of performance
evaluation. We turn to expected returns next.


4.3   Expected Return
With the replicating portfolio of zero-coupon bonds and dividend strips in hand (expres-
sions are detailed in Appendix A), we can calculate the expected return on PE funds
in each investment category using equation (2). Figure 12 plots the time-series of the
expected return for the four main PE categories. It aggregates over all of the different
horizon effects and annualizes the resulting expected return as per equation (4). The left
panels of this figure are for the 2-factor OLS model; the right panels for the Elastic Net
model with 15 factors. Appendix Figure D.5 reports the results for other 4 PE categories.
Generally, the Elastic Net delivers expected returns that look more reasonable in levels
and dynamics than the two-factor OLS model.
   Time variation in the factor exposures coming through dependence on the pd-quartile
of the vintage combines with time variation in expected returns on dividend and gain
strips driven by the state variables of the VAR to generate time variation in the expected
return on PE funds. The annualized expected returns that investors can anticipate on
their PE investments as compensation for systematic risk has seen large variation over
time, with a declining pattern at low frequencies. The low-frequency decline is inherited
from a low-frequency decline in strip expected returns; recall Figure 8.
   At higher frequencies we note the low expected return around the year 2000, when the
stock market peaked, and an increase in risk premia during the Great Recession. Since
then, expected returns have lowered substantially, especially for Buyout, VC, and Infras-
tructure. In the RE category, we observe higher expected returns since the Great Recession
than in the other categories.


4.4   Performance Evaluation
Next, we turn to performance evaluation. Figure 13 plots the histogram of Risk-Adjusted
Profits (RAP) for the two-factor OLS (gray) and 15-factor Elastic Net (yellow) models
for Buyout, VC, RE, and IN. The four alternate PE categories are shown in Figure D.6.
Recall from equation (5) that the RAP for each fund compares the realized cash flow
distributions against the realized payoffs from the replicating portfolio, as well as the


                                            29
difference in the purchase price of the replicating portfolio and the $1 commitment in the
PE fund. A kernel density is estimated from the discrete histogram.
   In Buyout, RE, and IN, the entire profit distribution is shifted to the left under the
Elastic Net model. PE funds are less profitable on a risk-adjusted basis once we account
for a richer cross-section of factor exposures through our Elastic Net model. As a result,
an LP using traditional approaches (TVPI) and even a flexible two-factor model would
attribute a fund's performance to outperformance, which the Elastic Net model would
instead attribute much of the profit as compensation for risk.
   This reduction in apparent outperformance is strongest in the Buyout category. While
the risk-adjusted profits are positive under the two-factor model, they are negative on
average in our benchmark Elastic Net model, at -21 cents per dollar invested. This average
RAP masks substantial cross-sectional dispersion. Around a quarter of funds outperform
by at least 10% in the full model. We find a similar pattern in VC: the average RAP for
VC funds with our full elastic net model is is -11 center per dollar invested; also about a
quarter of VC funds generate greater than 10 cents in RAP.
   The results for RE look similar to those for Buyout. The extra risk exposure shifts the
RAP distribution to the left. Average RAP is -17 cents and 22% of funds have a RAP
greater than 10%. The average IN fund fares slightly better with an average RAP of -10
cents and 27% of funds generating more than 10 cents in risk-adjusted profit.
   Figure 14 plots the average RAP by vintage for both the OLS (left) and Elastic Net
(right) models. Appendix Figure D.7 plots these estimates for alternate fund categories.
While the general time-series for profits are similar across both sets of models, there are
also notable differences. For instance, in the Buyout category, we observe positive profits
continuing through the most recent vintages in the OLS model. By contrast, our Elas-
tic Net model estimates positive profits for a few historic vintages, but largely negative
average profits for vintages since 1995.
   While we observe extremely high profits for VC funds originated in the mid-1990s,
these profits fall by a factor of two in the Elastic Net model. Recent VC vintages have
generated negative RAPs. Real estate funds started just before the Great Recession (2004-
2006) have performed very poorly, losing 30 cents on a risk-adjusted basis. The last vin-
tage we consider in this graph (2010) is faring much better.




                                            30
4.5   Model Comparison
It is instructive to benchmark our results across other approaches pursued in the litera-
ture. Figure 15 graphically compares the results from the Elastic Net model for our main
PE categories against two commonly used PE fund performance metrics: IRR and PME.
Appendix Figure D.8 repeats the analysis for the additional categories. The left panels
plot fund-level IRR against our fund-level RAP measure; the right panels plot fund-level
PME against fund-level RAP. The key takeaway from this comparison is a similar rank-
ing of fund performance. Our measure of RAP generally correlates between 70% and 90%
with the IRR and PME measures in the cross-section of funds. The correlation is higher
with the PME than with the IRR measure in the Buyout and VC categories for which we
have the most data. This is reasonable as the PME approach also incorporates a role for
public market assets. The similarity lends credibility to our measure of RAP. The mea-
sures are not identical, however, so that there are funds which conventional measures
assess to be high-performing but our estimates suggest only offer fair (or even too little)
compensation for factor risk exposure.
   Table 2 compares average outperformance. Panel A shows results from Preqin, our
primary data source. We repeat our analysis on the Burgiss data set, which has broader
coverage of 7,193 PE funds, in Panel B. We show complete results from Burgiss in Ap-
pendix F. We discuss the Preqin results first. The first three rows of Panel A reflect stan-
dard measures to evaluate PE funds: the TVPI, IRR, and PME. The next two rows display
our two-factor OLS and 15-factor Elastic Net models. The columns report the R2 from the
factor model estimation, the average RAP, and the cross-sectional standard deviation of
the RAP. We focus on the four main fund categories.
   For Buyout funds, the two-factor Elastic Net model has an R2 of 0.156, and an average
risk-adjusted profit of 29 cents per dollar invested. Relative to the average PME of 36
cents, the lower RAP estimate reflects the refined equity exposure estimate, compared
with the PME which assumes that all funds have an equity beta of one.
   Next, we add additional factors and estimate the impact on model fit and RAP. For
Buyout, the model fit of the Elastic Net improves to 0.160. In addition to the improve-
ment in model fit, we observe substantially different profit estimates. The average RAP
for the Buyout category is -17.6 cents for the Elastic Net model compared with 29.1 for
the two-factor model. Under the richer model of systematic risk, we obtain a lower es-
timate of risk-adjusted outperformance. In other words, while the cash flow estimation
improves modestly when adding more equity factors, the systematic risk exposure of the


                                            31
PE funds can now be replicated more cheaply and so results in a substantially lower esti-
mate of PE fund profit. The Elastic Net model also results in a tighter distribution (lower
cross-sectional standard deviation) of RAP. The last row reports the results for a model
where the cash flows of all funds in a particular fund category-vintage pair are aggre-
gated, and then an Elastic Net model is estimated on the aggregate cash flows. It gener-
ally shows higher R2 , suggesting that there is substantial idiosyncratic risk in individual
fund returns (just like there is in individual stocks). The average RAP estimates obtained
on aggregated fund cash flows are similar. To better assess the role of idiosyncratic risk;
in Appendix E we perform our analysis on public equities. We find similarly moderate R2
when we fit dividend strips against individual stocks; but substantially higher R2 when
we fit our model on portfolios.
    The message for the other fund categories is similar. Richer risk adjustment results is
much lower average RAPs and a tighter distribution. The full-factor Elastic Net results in
an average RAP that is 23 cents lower than that predicted by the two-factor OLS model
for VC funds, 14 cents lower for RE funds, and 39 cents for IN funds. We also note the
much wider cross-sectional dispersion in VC fund performance compared to the other PE
categories.
    Next, we examine the persistence of the various performance metrics, defined as the
correlation between profits across the different measures between adjacent funds from the
same PE firm. We use fund vintages to examine the autocorrelation of returns between the
current fund and the immediately preceding fund in the sequence. In the first three rows
of Panel A, we report persistence for the traditional performance metrics such as TVPI,
IRR, and PME. Consistent with prior research (Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan, and Stucke,
2014), we find substantial persistence in performance across funds originated within the
same firm across time. However, we tend to observe less persistence when we include
additional factor controls. For example, the persistence of PME for VC funds is 0.43 while
the persistence according to the Elastic Net model is only 0.15. Similarly, the persistence
of REPE funds falls from 0.40 to 0.20. This result sheds new light on the puzzle of ex-
cess persistence in PE fund outperformance. A portion of this persistence is due to some
firms specializing in strategies that have a common risk factor exposure across the funds
under their management. Accounting for this factor exposure lowers the measure of per-
sistence.14
  14 We also examine the persistence of factor exposure across funds within the same firm family and find
persistence in factor exposures estimated on the first fund started by firms, and subsequent funds estimated
through separate regressions. This also suggests our factor exposure measure results in a robust measure



                                                    32
    Panel B of Table 2 repeats the analysis on the Burgiss data which has more expan-
sive coverage in general, but especially in the VC and infrastructure categories. Examin-
ing this data set allows us to address possible sample selection issues in the Preqin data
set. Reassuringly, we find very similar results across the two data sets. In particular,
we find that average RAPs are generally estimated to be negative using our full-factor
approach. The model fit for aggregated cash flows (last row) tends to be higher in the
Burgiss than in the Preqin data. In the VC category, Burgiss has better coverage of certain
high-performing funds which do not report to Preqin. Indeed, we find that average TVPI
if 53 cents in Burgiss and 35 cents in Preqin. However, we continue to find negative es-
timates of risk-adjusted profits for VC: -7.4 cents in Burgiss versus -11.4 cents in Preqin.
Similarly, the better coverage of infrastructure PE funds does not overturn the finding of
negative average RAP. In fact the average RAP from the Elastic Net model is -21 cents in
Burgiss compared to -10 cents in Preqin.
    Our pervasive finding of negative average RAP stands in contrast to previous lit-
erature in private equity which has generally found evidence of fund outperformance
(Brown, Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan, and Robinson, 2015; Kaplan and Sensoy, 2015; Harris,
Jenkinson, and Kaplan, 2014). The difference is made apparent when comparing standard
performance metrics in the first three rows, which tend to show more favorable perfor-
mance statistics. Even the two-factor model generally shows positive profits. Our more
negative conclusion about excess returns in the private equity industry is a natural conse-
quence of risk-adjustment due to cross-sectional factor exposure. Similar risk adjustments
in the mutual fund (Fama and French, 2010) or hedge fund space (Fung, Hsieh, Naik, and
Ramadorai, 2008) tend to substantially lower outperformance. We find the same is true
for private equity funds, a point that has surprisingly not been made before. We also
find evidence for substantial cross-sectional dispersion in RAPs, as well as sizable persis-
tence in risk-adjusted performance over time. This suggests that there may be a subset of
PE managers that consistently delivers outsized returns. This finding is consistent with
Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014, 2016) who find that a small right
tail of mutual fund managers consistently outperforms, although the earlier mutual fund
literature has been skeptical of skill in any part of the fund distribution (Fama and French,
2010).
    Similar findings of limited excess returns across different categories of delegated asset
managers are suggestive of similar economic forces at work. First, investors may find it
of fund risk attributes.



                                             33
difficult to replicate complex factor strategies on their own, and so may be willing to pay
managers to generate factor strategies. Second, superior performance tends to be associ-
ated with higher fund flows, leading to increased capital commitments which diminish
returns in the presence of decreasing returns to scale, along the lines of Berk and Green
(2004). As the PE industry has grown substantially, there may be insufficient economies of
scale to adequately manage a growing asset base to generate the same outsize returns of
previous periods. Finally, delegated asset managers charge sizable management and per-
formance fees especially when financial products are more opaque and complex (C´
                                                                               el´
                                                                                 erier
and Vall´
        ee, 2015) as they are in PE. This lowers post-fee returns for investors further.



5    Conclusion
We provide a novel valuation method for private equity cash-flows that decomposes the
cash-flow at each horizon into a systematic component that reflects exposure to various
sources of aggregate risk, priced in listed securities markets, and an idiosyncratic compo-
nent which reflects the risk-adjusted profit to the PE investor. The systematic component
represents a portfolio of stock and bond strips paying safe or risky cash flows at horizons
over which PE funds make cash flow distributions. A state-of-the-art no-arbitrage asset
pricing model estimates prices and expected returns for these strips, fitting the time series
of bond yields and stock prices, including dividend strips. It provides the first estimates
of the term structure of risk and return in the cross-section of equity factors.
    Using both OLS and Elastic Net approaches, we estimate rich heterogeneity in PE
fund risk exposures across horizons, in the cross-section, and in the time-series. PE funds'
risk exposure is best modeled not only using bonds and the aggregate stock market, but
is improved with the addition of sector-specific equity factor exposures. The estimated
exposures are sensible given the nature of underlying nature of PE assets, and indicate an
important role for growth and small stocks in Venture Capital and for REITs in real estate
funds. In the time series, we find that expected returns on PE funds have been declining
substantially since the 1980s and especially since the Great Recession, reflecting declining
risk premia in public markets.
    On average, PE funds considerably underperform their replicating portfolio bench-
mark, suggesting that while PE funds offer investors access to complex risk exposures,
they do so at a more expensive price than offered in public markets. While our resulting
profit measures correlate well with existing measures of outperformance in the cross-


                                             34
section of funds, they suggest both lower average performance and less performance per-
sistence.
   Our analysis highlights the value of a methodological advance in the assessment of
risk and return for unlisted assets, which are an increasing component of the total in-
vestable universe for many institutional investors. While Private Equity is an especially
important application of our approach, given its size, our method can be applied more
broadly to study the asset pricing characteristics of any other cash-flowing asset that is not
listed on the capital markets. Individual real estate or infrastructure investment projects
are a key application left for future work.




                                              35
References
Ammar, S. B., and M. Eling, 2015, "Common risk factors of infrastructure investments,"
  Energy Economics.

Andonov, A., R. Kr¨
                  aussl, and J. Rauh, 2018, "The Subsidy to Infrastructure as an Asset
  Class," Working Paper 25045, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ang, A., B. Chen, W. N. Goetzmann, and L. Phalippou, 2017, "Estimating Private Equity
  Returns from Limited Partner Cash Flows," Netspar Discussion Paper No. 06/2014-021;
  Said Business School WP 2014-8.

Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi, 2003, "A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Structure
  Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  50, 745­787.

Berk, J. B., and R. C. Green, 2004, "Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational
  Markets," Journal of Political Economy, 112(6), 1269­1295.

 ¨
Bokberg, A., J. Carrellas, A. Chau, and C. Duane, 2019, "Private markets come of age
  McKinsey Global Private Markets Review," working paper, McKinsey Global Institute.

Borovicka, J., and L. P. Hansen, 2014, "Examining Macroeconomic Models through the
  Lens of Asset Pricing," Journal of Econometrics, 183(1), 67­90.

Brown, G., R. Harris, T. Jenkinson, S. N. Kaplan, and D. Robinson, 2015, "What Do Differ-
  ent Commercial Data Sets tell Us About Private Equity Performance?," Working Paper
  University of North Carolina Kenan Institute.

Campbell, J. Y., 1991, "A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns," Economic Journal,
  101, 157­179.

       , 1993, "Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 83(3), 487­511.

       , 1996, "Understanding Risk and Return," The Journal of Political Economy, 104(2),
  298­345.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1991, "Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A
  Bird's Eye View," Review of Economic Studies, 58, 495­514.


                                             36
C´
 el´
   erier, C. M., and B. Vall´
                            ee, 2015, "The Motives for Financial Complexity: An Empirical
  Investigation," SSRN, (2289890).

Cochrane, J. H., 2005, "The risk and return of venture capital," Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, 75, 3­52.

Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi, 2006, "Decomposing the Yield Curve," Working Paper,
  University of Chicago.

Cochrane, J. H., and J. Saa-Requejo, 2000, "Beyond Arbitrage: 'Good deal' asset price
  bounds in incomplete markets," Journal of Political Economy, 108, 79­119.

Cox, J., J. Ingersoll, and S. Ross, 1985, "An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model of
  Asset Pricing," Econometrica, 53, 363­384.

Da Rin, M., and L. Phalippou, 2017, "The importance of size in private equity: Evidence
  from a survey of limited partners," Journal of Financial Intermediation, 31, 64­76.

Dai, Q., and K. J. Singleton, 2000, "Specification Analysis of Affine Term Structure Mod-
  els," Journal of Finance, 55, 1943­1978.

Driessen, J., T.-C. Lin, and L. Phalippou, 2012, "A new method to estimate risk and re-
  turn of nontraded assets from cash flows: The case of private equity funds," Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 47(3), 511­535.

Duffie, D., and R. Kan, 1996, "A Yield Factor Model of Interest Rates," Mathematical Fi-
  nance, 6, 379­406.

Ewens, M., C. M. Jones, and M. Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, "The Price of Diversifiable Risk in
  Venture Capital and Private Equity," Review of Financial Studies, 26, 1854­1889.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1992, "The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns," The
  Journal of Finance, 47(2), 427­465.

       , 2010, "Luck versus Skill in the Cross-section of Mutual Fund Returns," The Journal
  of Finance, 65(5), 1915­1947.

Fung, W., D. A. Hsieh, N. Y. Naik, and T. Ramadorai, 2008, "Hedge Funds: Performance,
  Risk, and Capital formation," The Journal of Finance, 63(4), 1777­1803.



                                               37
Gompers, P. A., and J. Lerner, 1997, "Risk and Reward in Private Equity Investments: The
  Challenge of Performance Assessment," Journal of Private Equity, 1, 5­12.

Gu, S., B. Kelly, and D. Xiu, 2018, "Empirical Asset pricing via Machine Learning," Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25398.

Haddad, V., E. Loualiche, and M. Plosser, 2017, "Buyout activity: The impact of aggregate
  discount rates," The Journal of Finance, 72(1), 371­414.

Hansen, L. P., and J. Scheinkman, 2009, "Long-Term Risk: An Operator Approach," Econo-
  metrica, 77 (1), 177­234.

Harris, R. S., T. Jenkinson, and S. N. Kaplan, 2014, "Private Equity Performance: What Do
  We Know?," Journal of Finance, 69(5).

Harris, R. S., T. Jenkinson, S. N. Kaplan, and R. Stucke, 2014, "Has Persistence Persisted
  in Private Equity? Evidence from Buyout and Venture Capital Funds," .

Kacperczyk, M., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp, 2014, "Time-Varying Fund
  Manager Skill," Journal of Finance, 69, 1455­1484.

       , 2016, "Rational Attention Allocation over the Business Cycle," Econometrica, 84,
  571­626.

Kaplan, S., and B. Sensoy, 2015, "Private Equity Performance: A Survey," Annual Review
  of Financial Economics, 7, 597­614.

Kaplan, S. N., and A. Schoar, 2005, "Private equity performance: Returns, persistence,
  and capital flows," Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1791­1823.

Koijen, R. S. J., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2017, "The Cross-Section and Time-
  Series of Stock and Bond Returns," Journal of Monetary Economics, 88, 50­69.

Korteweg, A., and S. Nagel, 2016, "Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Venture Capital," Jour-
  nal of Finance, 71(3), 1437­1470.

Korteweg, A., and M. Sorensen, 2010, "Risk and return characteristics of venture capital-
  backed entrepreneurial companies," Review of Financial Studies, 23(10), 3738­3772.

       , 2017, "Skill and Luck in Private Equity Performance," Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, 0.

                                             38
Kozak, S., S. Nagel, and S. Santosh, 2017, "Shrinking the Cross Section," National Bureau
  of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24070.

Lettau, M., and J. Wachter, 2011, "The Term Structures of Equity and Interest Rates,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 101 (1), 90­113.

Ljungqvist, A., and M. Richardson, 2003, "The cash flow, return and risk characteristics
  of private equity," Working Paper, NYU Stern.

Lustig, H., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and A. Verdelhan, 2013, "The Wealth-Consumption
  Ratio," Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 3(1), 38­94., Review of Asset Pricing Studies.

Metrick, A., and A. Yasuda, 2010, "The economics of private equity funds," Review of
  Financial Studies, 23(6), 2303­2341.

Peng, L., 2001, "Building a Venture Capital Index," Working Paper.

       , 2016, "The risk and return of commercial real estate: A property level analysis,"
  Real Estate Economics, 44(3), 555­583.

Phalippou, L., and O. Gottschalg, 2009, "The performance of private equity funds," Re-
  view of Financial Studies, 22(4), 1747­1776.

Preqin, 2016, "The 2016 Preqin Global Private Equity and Venture Capital Report," Preqin,
  London, UK.

Robinson, D. T., and B. A. Sensoy, 2011, "Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and
  Cash Flow Liquidity in Private Equity," Working Paper.

Sagi, J. S., 2017, "Asset-level risk and return in real estate investments," Working Paper,
  UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School.

Sorensen, M., and R. Jagannathan, 2015, "The Public Market Equivalent and Private Eq-
  uity Performance," Financial Analysts Journal, 71(4), 43­50.

Sorensen, M., N. Wang, and J. Yang, 2014, "Valuing private equity," Review of Financial
  Studies, 27(7), 1977­2021.

van Binsbergen, J., M. Brandt, and R. Koijen, 2012, "On the Timing and Pricing of Divi-
  dends," American Economic Review, 102(4), 1596­1618.



                                                 39
van Binsbergen, J. H., W. H. Hueskes, R. Koijen, and E. B. Vrugt, 2013, "Equity Yields,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 110(3), 503­519.

van Binsbergen, J. H., and R. Koijen, 2017, "The Term Structure of Returns: Facts and
  Theory," Journal of Financial Economics, 124(1), 1.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2019, "Why Are REITs Currently So Expensive?," Real Estate Eco-
  nomics, 47(1), 18­65.

Wachter, J., 2005, "Solving Models with External Habit," Finance Research Letters, 2, 210­
  226.

Woodward, S., 2009, "Measuring Risk for Venture Capital and Private Equity Portfolios,"
  Working Paper.




                                             40
                    FIGURE 1: Dynamics of the Nominal Term Structure of Interest Rates
The figure plots the observed and model-implied 1-, 4-, 20-, 40-quarter nominal bond yields.

                           Nom. yield 1-qtr bond                                                 Nom. yield 1-yr bond
               15                                                                   15
                                                      model                                                                 model
                                                      data                                                                  data
  % per year




                                                                       % per year
               10                                                                   10


                5                                                                    5


                0                                                                    0
                    1980      1990      2000        2010                                 1980      1990      2000         2010

                           Nom. yield 5-year bond                                               Nom. yield 10-year bond
               15                                                                   15
                                                      model                                                                 model
                                                      data                                                                  data
  % per year




               10                                                                   10


                5                                                                    5


                0                                                                    0
                    1980      1990      2000        2010                                 1980      1990      2000         2010




                                                                41
                                             FIGURE 2: Long-term Yields and Bond Risk Premia
The top panels plot the average bond yield on nominal (left panel) and real (right panel) bonds for maturities ranging from 1 quarter
to 200 quarters. The bottom left panel plots the nominal bond risk premium in model and data. The bottom right panel decomposes
the model's five-year nominal bond yield into the five-year real bond yield, the five-year inflation risk premium and the five-year real
risk premium.

                                           Avg. nom. yield                                                                        Avg. real yield
                     8                                                                                      5

                                                                                                            4
  percent per year




                     6                                                                   percent per year
                                                                                                            3
                     4
                                                                                                            2
                     2
                                                                                                            1

                     0                                                                                      0
                         0          100           200          300      400                                     0          100           200          300          400
                                          maturity in quarters                                                                   maturity in quarters
                                Risk Premium 5-yr nom. bond                                                          Decomposing 5-yr nom. bond yield
                                                                                                   15
                              model                                                                                                                         ynom
                     4        data                                                                                                                          yreal
                                                                                                   10
  % per year




                                                                                   % per year




                                                                                                                                                            exp infl
                                                                                                                                                            IRP
                     2
                                                                                                            5

                     0                                                                                      0


                             1980         1990        2000       2010                                               1980         1990        2000       2010




                                                                              42
                      FIGURE 3: Equity Risk Premia and Price-Dividend Ratios (part 1)
The figure plots the observed and model-implied equity risk premium on the overall stock market, small stocks, growth stocks, and
value stocks, in the left panels, as well as the corresponding price-dividend ratio in the right panels. The model is the blue line, the
data are the red line.

                              Equity risk premium                                        Price-Dividend Ratio on Equity
                30
  % per year




                20                                                          50
                10
                 0
               -10                                                           0
                     1980      1990 2000 2010                                        1980 1990 2000 2010
                            Small stock risk premium                                    Price-Dividend Ratio on Small
                40
  % per year




                20                                                         100
                 0                                                          50
               -20                                                           0
                     1980      1990 2000 2010                                        1980 1990 2000 2010
                             Growth risk premium                                        Price-Dividend Ratio on Growth
                40
  % per year




                                                                           100
                20
                                                                            50
                 0
               -20                                                           0
                     1980      1990 2000 2010                                        1980 1990 2000 2010
                              Value risk premium                                        Price-Dividend Ratio on Value
                40
  % per year




                                                                           100
                20                                                                     model
                                                                            50         data
                 0
               -20                                                           0
                     1980      1990      2000       2010                             1980        1990        2000        2010



                                                                  43
                     FIGURE 4: Equity Risk Premia and Price-Dividend Ratios (part 2)
The figure plots the observed and model-implied equity risk premium on REIT stocks, infrastructure stocks, and natural resource
stocks, in the left panels, as well as the corresponding price-dividend ratio in the right panels. The model is the blue line, the data are
the red line.

                       REITs risk premium                                           Price-Dividend Ratio on REITs
               30                                                             30
  % per year




               20
                                                                              20
               10
                0                                                             10
               -10
                                                                                0
                     1980     1990      2000        2010                               1980        1990        2000        2010

                        Infra risk premium                                          Price-Dividend Ratio on Infra
               30
  % per year




               20                                                             40
               10
                0                                                             20

               -10
                                                                                0
                     1980     1990      2000        2010                               1980        1990        2000        2010

                            NR risk premium                                           Price-Dividend Ratio on NR
               40
                                                                              30                                            model
  % per year




               20                                                                                                           data
                                                                              20
                0                                                             10

               -20                                                              0
                     1980     1990      2000        2010                               1980        1990        2000        2010




                                                                   44
                  FIGURE 5: Zero Coupon Bond Prices and Dividend Strip Prices
The figure plots the model-implied prices on zero-coupon Treasury bonds in the first panel, and price-dividend ratios for dividend
strips on the overall stock market, small stocks, growth stocks, value stocks, REIT market stocks, infrastructure stocks, and natural
resources stocks in the next seven panels, for maturities of 4, 20, and 40 quarters. The prices/price-dividend ratios are expressed in
levels and each claim pays out a single cash flow.

                 Zero-coupon Bond Prices                                           Dividend Strip Prices - Stock Market

  1                                                                       1

  0                                                                       0
          1980      1990       2000      2010                                     1980      1990       2000      2010
              Dividend Strip Prices - Small                                          Dividend Strip Prices - Growth

  1                                                                       1

  0                                                                       0
          1980      1990       2000       2010                                    1980      1990       2000       2010
              Dividend Strip Prices - Value                                           Dividend Strip Prices - REITS

  1                                                                       1

  0                                                                       0
          1980     1990        2000        2010                                   1980     1990        2000       2010
          Dividend Strip Prices - Infrastructure                                    Dividend Strip Prices - Nat. Res.
                                               One-year
  1                                                                       1
                                               Five-year
                                               Ten-year
  0                                                                       0
          1980        1990        2000        2010                                1980        1990        2000         2010




                                                                 45
                             FIGURE 6: Short-run Cumulative Dividend Strips
The left panel plots the model-implied price-dividend ratio on a claim that pays the next eight quarters of dividends on the aggregate
stock market. The right panel plots the share that this claim represents in the overall value of the stock market. The data are from van
Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2012) and available from 1996.Q1-2009.Q3.

              8-quarter Cum. Dividend Strip PD                                       8-quarter Cum. Dividend Strip Share
  10                                                                     0.15
                                                                                                                             model
  9.5                                                                                                                        data

    9

  8.5
                                                                          0.1
    8

  7.5

    7
                                                                         0.05
  6.5

    6

  5.5        model
             data
    5                                                                       0
            1980        1990        2000        2010                                1980        1990        2000         2010




                                                                  46
                                                  FIGURE 7: Strip Expected Returns by Horizon
The figure plots the model-implied average risk premia on nominal zero-coupon Treasury bonds in the first panel, and on dividend
strips on the overall stock market, small stocks, growth stocks, value stocks, REITs, infrastructure stocks, and natural resource stocks
in the next seven panels, for maturities ranging from 1 to 64 quarters.
percent per annum




                                                                                    percent per annum
                              Average zero-coupon bond risk premium                                                   Average Market div strip risk premium
                                                                                                        15
                    10
                                                                                                        10
                    5                                                                                   5
                    0                                                                                   0
                         0   10        20       30         40       50    60                                 0   10         20       30         40      50           60
                                          maturity in quarters                                                                 maturity in quarters
percent per annum




                                                                                    percent per annum
                                  Average Small div strip risk premium                                                Average Growth div strip risk premium
                    15                                                                                  15
                    10                                                                                  10
                    5                                                                                   5
                    0                                                                                   0
                         0   10        20       30         40       50    60                                 0   10         20       30         40       50          60
                                          maturity in quarters                                                                 maturity in quarters
percent per annum




                                                                                    percent per annum




                                  Average Value div strip risk premium                                                 Average REIT div strip risk premium
                    15                                                                                  15
                    10                                                                                  10
                    5                                                                                   5
                    0                                                                                   0
                         0   10        20        30         40       50   60                                 0   10         20       30         40      50           60
                                          maturity in quarters                                                                 maturity in quarters
percent per annum




                                                                                    percent per annum




                                  Average Infra div strip risk premium                                                  Average NR div strip risk premium
                    15                                                                                  15
                    10                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                    Spot risk premium
                    5                                                                                   5                                           Futures risk premium
                    0                                                                                   0
                         0   10        20         30         40     50    60                                 0   10         20         30         40       50        60
                                            maturity in quarters                                                                 maturity in quarters




                                                                               47
                                     FIGURE 8: Strip Expected Returns in the Time Series
The figure plots the model-implied time series of risk premia on nominal zero-coupon Treasury bonds in the first panel, and on
dividend and capital gains strips on the overall stock market, small stocks, growth stocks, value stocks, REITs, infrastructure stocks,
and natural resource stocks in the next seven panels. The maturity for each strip that is plotted is 5 years (20 quarters).


                                     Exp ret 5-yr Bond                                                                             Exp ret Stock Mkt Strip
15
                                                                                                      20                                                                         5yr div strip
                                                                                                                                                                                 5yr gain strip
10                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                      10
 5
                                                                                                      5

 0                                                                                                    0
 1970    1975   1980   1985   1990         1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020        1970   1975   1980   1985   1990        1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020

                                  Exp ret Small Strip                                                                               Exp ret Growth Strip
40                                                                                                    30
                                                                              5yr div strip                                                                                      5yr div strip
30                                                                            5yr gain strip                                                                                     5yr gain strip
                                                                                                      20
20

10                                                                                                    10

 0                                                                                                    0
 1970    1975   1980   1985   1990         1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020        1970   1975   1980   1985   1990        1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020

                                  Exp ret Value Strip                                                                                Exp ret REIT Strip
40
                                                                              5yr div strip           20                                                                         5yr div strip
                                                                              5yr gain strip                                                                                     5yr gain strip
20                                                                                                    15

                                                                                                      10
 0
                                                                                                      5

-20                                                                                                   0
  1970   1975   1980   1985   1990         1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020        1970   1975   1980   1985   1990        1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020

                              Exp ret Infrastructure Strip                                                                               Exp ret NR Strip
                                                                                                      40
20                                                                            5yr div strip                                                                                      5yr div strip
                                                                              5yr gain strip          30                                                                         5yr gain strip
15
                                                                                                      20
10
                                                                                                      10
 5
                                                                                                      0
 0
 1970    1975   1980   1985   1990         1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020        1970   1975   1980   1985   1990        1995          2000   2005   2010   2015        2020




                                                                                                 48
                                                                           FIGURE 9: Distribution Cash-flow Profiles


                                                              Buyout                   Venture Capital                        Real Estate                     Infrastructure
                                                0.25
Distribution Amount Relative to $1 Commitment




                                                0.20
                                                0.15
                                                0.10
                                                0.05
                                                0.00
                                                           Restructuring                  Fund of Funds                       Debt Fund                   Natural Resources
                                                0.25
                                                0.20
                                                0.15
                                                0.10
                                                0.05
                                                0.00
                                                       5          10         15       5          10          15           5         10      15            5           10        15
                                                                                                          Cash Flows by Age

                                                                                                                                             Future Cash Flow        Actual Cash Flow




                                                                                                      49
                                                                                          FIGURE 10: Cash-flows by Vintage
                                                                        Panel A: Buyout                                                                                                              Panel B: Venture Capital
Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested




                                                                                                                                  Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested
                                                                                                         Vintage                                                                                                                          Vintage
                                               0.15                                                         1990      2003                                                                                                                   1990      2003
                                                                                                            1991      2004                                                       0.4                                                         1991      2004
                                                                                                            1992      2005                                                                                                                   1992      2005
                                                                                                            1993      2006                                                                                                                   1993      2006
                                               0.10                                                         1994      2007                                                                                                                   1994      2007
                                                                                                            1995      2008                                                                                                                   1995      2008
                                                                                                            1996      2009                                                                                                                   1996      2009
                                                                                                            1997      2010                                                       0.2                                                         1997      2010
                                                                                                            1998      2011                                                                                                                   1998      2011
                                               0.05                                                         1999      2012                                                                                                                   1999      2012
                                                                                                            2000      2013                                                                                                                   2000      2013
                                                                                                            2001      2014                                                                                                                   2001      2014
                                                                                                            2002                                                                                                                             2002
                                               0.00                                                                                                                              0.0

                                                 1990    1995    2000     2005     2010    2015                                                                                   1990        1995   2000   2005     2010   2015
                                                                  Panel C: Real Estate                                                                                                               Panel D: Infrastructure
Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested




                                                                                                                                  Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested




                                                                                                                   Vintage
                                                                                                                      2000                                                                                                                          Vintage
                                                                                                                      2001                                                       0.10
                                               0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2003
                                                                                                                      2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2004
                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                      2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2007
                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008
                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05                                                                  2009
                                               0.05                                                                   2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2010
                                                                                                                      2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2011
                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2012
                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013
                                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2014
                                                                                                                      2013
                                               0.00                                                                   2014                                                       0.00

                                                  2000          2005             2010             2015                                                                                 2000          2005          2010            2015




                                                                                                                             50
                                                  FIGURE 11: Factor Exposure over Fund Horizon

                                          2-Factor                                                                           Elastic Net

                                                                 Panel A: Buyout
                        Factor Exposure by Horizon                                                     Factor Exposure by Horizon
                                                                                               0.008

                                                                                               0.006




                                                                               b Coefficient
                 0.05
b Coefficient




                                                                                               0.004

                 0.00                                             Bond                         0.002
                                                                  Stock

                                                                                               0.000
                -0.05                                                                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                 Years from Fund Inception
                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                Bond       Infra                 REIT    Stock         Dividend   Gain
                                    Years from Fund Inception                                                     Growth     Natural Resources     Small   Value


                                                              Panel B: Venture Capital
                        Factor Exposure by Horizon                                                    Factor Exposure by Horizon
                 0.08
                                                                                               0.03
                                                                               b Coefficient



                 0.04
b Coefficient




                                                                                               0.02

                 0.00                                             Bond                         0.01
                                                                  Stock

                -0.04                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                Years from Fund Inception
                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                Dividend    Gain        Growth     Natural Resources     Small    Value
                                    Years from Fund Inception                                                                             Infra      REIT                  Stock


                                                               Panel C: Real Estate
                        Factor Exposure by Horizon                                                     Factor Exposure by Horizon
                 0.10
                                                                                               0.015
                                                                               b Coefficient




                 0.05
b Coefficient




                                                                                               0.010


                 0.00                                             Bond
                                                                                               0.005
                                                                  Stock

                                                                                               0.000
                -0.05                                                                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                 Years from Fund Inception
                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                Dividend    Gain        Growth     Natural Resources     Small    Value
                                    Years from Fund Inception                                                                             Infra      REIT                  Stock


                                                              Panel D: Infrastructure
                      Factor Exposureby Horizon                                                         Factor Exposure by Horizon
                0.2                                                                            0.0020
                                                                               b Coefficient




                                                                                               0.0015
b Coefficient




                0.1                                                                            0.0010
                                                                  Bond                         0.0005
                                                                  Stock
                0.0
                                                                                               0.0000
                                                                                                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                  Years from Fund Inception
                        1    2   3   4     5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13          51                                      Bond       Infra                 REIT    Stock         Dividend   Gain
                                         Years from Fund Inception                                                Growth     Natural Resources     Small   Value
                                                             FIGURE 12: Expected Returns by Vintage

                                                 2-Factor                                                                                 Elastic Net

                                                                             Panel A: Buyout
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                               Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                                     0.25

                   0.20                                                                                     0.20
Expected Return




                                                                                         Expected Return
                   0.15                                                                                     0.15

                   0.10                                                                                     0.10

                   0.05                                                                                     0.05

                   0.00                                                                                     0.00

                  -0.05                                                                                    -0.05
                       1980               1990           2000      2010                                         1980               1990           2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                  Vintage

                                                                          Panel B: Venture Capital
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                               Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                                     0.25

                   0.20                                                                                     0.20
Expected Return




                                                                                         Expected Return




                   0.15                                                                                     0.15

                   0.10                                                                                     0.10

                   0.05                                                                                     0.05

                   0.00                                                                                     0.00

                  -0.05                                                                                    -0.05
                       1980               1990           2000      2010                                         1980               1990           2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                  Vintage

                                                                           Panel C: Real Estate
                         Expected Return by Vintage                                                               Expected Return by Vintage
                  0.35                                                                                     0.35
                  0.30                                                                                     0.30
Expected Return




                                                                                         Expected Return




                  0.25                                                                                     0.25
                  0.20                                                                                     0.20
                  0.15                                                                                     0.15
                  0.10                                                                                     0.10
                  0.05                                                                                     0.05
                  0.00                                                                                     0.00
                      1980               1990            2000      2010                                        1980               1990            2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                  Vintage

                                                                          Panel D: Infrastructure
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                               Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                                     0.25

                   0.20                                                                                     0.20
Expected Return




                                                                                         Expected Return




                   0.15                                                                                     0.15

                   0.10                                                                                     0.10

                   0.05                                                                                     0.05

                   0.00                                                                                     0.00

                  -0.05                                                                                    -0.05
                       1980               1990           2000      2010             52                          1980               1990           2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                  Vintage
                 FIGURE 13: Profit Comparison

  2-Factor                                      Elastic Net
 Panel A: Buyout                          Panel B: Venture Capital




Panel C: Real Estate                       Panel D: Infrastructure




                             53
                                                                            FIGURE 14: Profits Over Time

                                              2-Factor                                                                                               Elastic Net

                                                                                           Panel A: Buyout
                    Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                                     Average Fund-level profit by Vintage
             1.00                                                                                                     0.75


             0.75                                                                                                     0.50
RAP Profit




                                                                                                        RAP Profit
                                                                                                                      0.25
             0.50

                                                                                                                      0.00
             0.25
                                                                                                                     -0.25
             0.00
                                                                                                                     -0.50
                     1985         1990           1995             2000           2005       2010                              1985         1990          1995             2000           2005   2010
                                                        Vintage                                                                                                 Vintage

                                                                                        Panel B: Venture Capital
                    Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                                    Average Fund-level profit by Vintage
              2.5

              2.0                                                                                                     1.0

              1.5
RAP Profit




                                                                                                        RAP Profit




                                                                                                                      0.5
              1.0
                                                                                                                      0.0
              0.5

              0.0                                                                                                    -0.5

             -0.5
                1980                      1990                       2000                   2010                        1980                      1990                      2000                2010
                                                        Vintage                                                                                               Vintage

                                                                                         Panel C: Real Estate
                    Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                                    Average Fund-level profit by Vintage


                                                                                                                      0.1
              0.2
                                                                                                                      0.0
RAP Profit




                                                                                                        RAP Profit




              0.0                                                                                                    -0.1

                                                                                                                     -0.2
             -0.2
                                                                                                                     -0.3
                                1995               2000                   2005              2010                                        1995               2000                   2005          2010
                                                     Vintage                                                                                                 Vintage

                                                                                        Panel D: Infrastructure
                    Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                                    Average Fund-level profit by Vintage
              1.0                                                                                                     0.5


              0.5
RAP Profit




                                                                                                        RAP Profit




                                                                                                                      0.0

              0.0

                                                                                                                     -0.5
             -0.5


                         1995                  2000                      2005               2010   54                            1995                 2000                       2005           2010
                                                        Vintage                                                                                               Vintage
                                      FIGURE 15: Elastic Net Alternative Approach Comparison

                                                                                                 Panel A: Buyout
                  RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.69                                                     RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: 0.79

            0.3

                                                                                                                            6
            0.2




                                                                                                                  K-S PME
Fund IRR




                                                                                                                            4
            0.1


            0.0                                                                                                             2


           -0.1                                                                                                             0
                             -1              0                           1                   2                3                           -1              0                        1                   2             3
                                                   RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                   RAP from Elastic Net Model


                                                                                   Panel B: Venture Capital
                   RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.57                                                    RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: 0.87
                                                                                                                            6

            0.50

                                                                                                                            4
            0.25
                                                                                                                  K-S PME
Fund IRR




            0.00                                                                                                            2


           -0.25
                                                                                                                            0
                                       0                                 2                         4                                                 0                              2                      4
                                                      RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                RAP from Elastic Net Model


                                                                                             Panel C: Real Estate
                 RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.7                                                       RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: 0.68




           0.1                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                  K-S PME
Fund IRR




                                                                                                                            1
           0.0



                                                                                                                            0
                            -1.0           -0.5                    0.0                 0.5             1.0                                -1.0           -0.5                  0.0               0.5           1.0
                                                  RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                    RAP from Elastic Net Model


                                                                                       Panel D: Infrastructure
                  RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.74                                                     RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: 0.74
                                                                                                                            3


           0.08
                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                  K-S PME
Fund IRR




           0.04

                                                                                                                            1
           0.00

                                                                                                             55
                       -1                         0                                1                                                 -1                         0                            1
                                                  RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                    RAP from Elastic Net Model
                                                 TABLE 1: Summary Statistics

                                                      Panel A: Fund Count
Vintage   Buyout    Venture Capital   Real Estate    Infrastructure   Restructuring   Fund of Funds   Debt Fund   Natural Resources   Total     PD Ratio
 1981       0             1               0               0                 0              0             0               0             1           1
 1982       0             3               0               0                 0              0             0               0             3           1
 1983       0             1               0               0                 0              1             0               0             2           1
 1984       0             3               0               0                 0              0             0               0             3           1
 1985       4             6               0               0                 0              0             0               0            10          1.6
 1986       2             7               0               0                 0              3             0               0            12          1.6
 1987       5             5               0               0                 0              0             0               0            10          1.7
 1988       7             4               0               0                 0              1             0               0            12          1.5
 1989       3             5               0               0                 0              0             0               1             9           2
 1990       7             8               0               0                 1              2             0               0            18          1.4
 1991       2             4               0               0                 2              1             0               0             9           2
 1992       9             12              1               0                 2              0             0               1            25          2.0
 1993       9             11              0               0                 0              2             0               0            23          2.2
 1994       15            12              1               1                 1              1             0               1            32          2.1
 1995       14            17              2               0                 0              5             0               1            39           3
 1996       20            21              3               1                 3              1             0               0            51          3.3
 1997       23            26              6               0                 2              4             0               1            63           4
 1998       40            32              3               1                 1              11            0               3            91           4
 1999       31            47              2               0                 3               9            1               1            94           4
 2000       33            84              6               0                  3             17            2               0            145          4
 2001       21            55              2               0                  5             19            0               1            103         3.9
 2002       24            29              3               1                  3             13            1               2            76          3.8
 2003       18            20              7               1                  4             12            1               1            64          3.8
 2004       27            33              11              4                  2             19            1               2            99           4
 2005       55            49              19              0                  6             33            2               5            169          4
 2006       71            59              32              4                 11             51            1               4            233         4.0
 2007       72            72              35              6                 13             48            1               7            254         3.9
 2008       65            62              31              2                 11             61            5               8            246         2.7
 2009       27            26              12              6                  8             30            2               3            114         1.8
 2010       39            39              28              8                  8             38            4               10           174         3.0
 2011       53            49              46              9                 12             64            2               10           248         3.0
 2012       63            44              36              4                 12             54            3               12           231          3
 2013       63            53              59              10                20             66            15               7           295          3
 2014       68            67              46              12                16             67            12              14           302          3
 2015       72            76              73              13                18             72            16               7           348          3
 2016       91            72              59              14                10             78            13              17           355          3
 2017       47            60              61              14                 7             39            20               7           256          3

                                                    Panel B: Fund AUM ($m)
Vintage   Buyout    Venture Capital   Real Estate    Infrastructure   Restructuring   Fund of Funds   Debt Fund   Natural Resources    Total
 1981         0            0               0              0                   0             0             0               0               0
 1982         0           55               0              0                   0             0             0               0              55
 1983         0            0               0              0                   0            75             0               0              75
 1984         0           189              0              0                   0             0             0               0              189
 1985      1,580          74               0              0                   0             0             0               0            1,654
 1986        59           293              0              0                   0          1,510            0               0            1,862
 1987      1,608        1,061              0              0                   0             0             0               0            2,669
 1988      2,789          463              0              0                   0             0             0               0            3,252
 1989        761          305              0              0                   0             0             0              160           1,226
 1990       2,457        1,125             0              0                  153          1,906           0                0           5,641
 1991        242          431              0              0                  329            0             0                0           1,002
 1992       1,150        1,320             0              0                   59            0             0              184            2,713
 1993       3,192        1,438             0              0                    0           597            0                0            5,281
 1994       6,882        1,413            488            861                  93           140            0              658           10,535
 1995       9,169        2,645            523             0                   0           1,172           0              205          13,714
 1996       7,435        3,820          1,851           1,013              1,600           242            0               0           16,062
 1997     23,633        6,308           3,642             0                1,700         1,337            0              480          37,100
 1998     38,956        8,441           3,461           1,671                52          10,879           0            2,262          65,722
 1999     34,297        17,093          2,293             0                3,133          9,248          109              42          66,215
 2000      56,299       37,802          6,757             0                3,320         13,570          730               0          118,478
 2001      23,856       23,852           3,225            0                7,461         11,942           0            1,375           71,711
 2002      23,705        7,391           5,507           950               1,844         10,043          100             845          50,385
 2003      31,264        6,670          3,435            734               5,105          8,767          366             150          56,491
 2004     32,855        8,419           6,269           2,725              2,580          5,808          215           2,721          61,592
 2005     102,231       16,280          25,523            0                5,830         23,252          412           6,353          179,881
 2006     215,875       37,285          42,442          7,354              22,928        41,728          778           2,372          370,762
 2007     176,849       24,198          44,657          9,773              40,486        45,660          400           11,795         353,818
 2008     165,982       31,839          37,789          3,645              26,158        39,493        4,697           23,333         333,186
 2009      38,738        8,880           9,451          9,480              11,170        11,544          195            2,628          92,086
 2010      30,612       21,457          20,125          9,690              11,855        20,662        1,684           10,202         126,287
 2011      97,669       23,747          48,951          9,783              19,237        26,915        1,720           10,638         239,820
 2012      94,732       29,566          23,417          11,142             23,943        40,384          733           22,946         247,243
 2013      88,022       26,026          65,703          19,300             25,660        20,013        16,333          12,192         274,519
 2014     126,182       35,863          32,206          26,005             21,792        37,191         5,638          24,499         309,376
 2015     115,376       31,294          75,627          19,149             34,845        52,430        12,421          14,091         355,895
 2016     165,779       36,433          45,416          35,056             11,368        47,705        10,721          18,064         370,810
 2017     112,820       25,659          52,750          11,430              9,609        18,539        15,942           8,567         255,704




                                                                      56
                                                                              TABLE 2: Model Comparison

                                                                                         Panel A: Preqin
                                              Buyout                                      VC                                        Real Estate                             Infrastructure
     Model                      R2   Profit   SD Profit   Persistence    R2     Profit   SD Profit   Persistence    R2     Profit    SD Profit    Persistence    R2     Profit   SD Profit   Persistence
     TVPI                         -  0.512     (0.756)    0.31             -     0.35     (1.886)    0.39             -   0.119        (0.513)    0.27             -     0.125    (0.673)    0.18
     IRR (%)                      -   12.6      (13.1)    0.25             -      8.5      (22.4)    0.25             -    7.9          (13.8)    0.26             -      9.3       (12)     -0.46
     PME                          -  0.358     (0.669)    0.22             -     0.24     (1.587)    0.43             -   -0.04        (0.443)    0.40             -     0.155    (0.571)    0.10
     Two-factor OLS            0.158 0.385     (0.503)    0.19          0.045   0.115     (1.423)    0.13          0.187 -0.031        (0.443)    0.14          0.094    0.292    (0.803)    -0.08
57




     Two-factor Elastic Net    0.156 0.291     (0.484)    0.21          0.043   0.102      (1.42)    0.14          0.184 0.139         (0.445)    0.08          0.089    0.188    (0.598)    0.17
     Full factors              0.160 -0.176    (0.481)    0.24          0.060   -0.114    (1.371)    0.15          0.200 -0.172        (0.392)    0.18          0.090   -0.102    (0.612)    0.01
     Elastic Net, Aggregated    0.23 -0.084    (0.386)    -              0.19   -0.051    (0.911)    -              0.26 -0.098        (0.324)    -              0.12   -0.165    (0.419)    -

                                                                                         Panel B: Burgiss
                                              Buyout                                      VC                                        Real Estate                             Infrastructure
     Model                      R2   Profit   SD Profit   Persistence    R2     Profit   SD Profit   Persistence    R2     Profit    SD Profit    Persistence    R2     Profit   SD Profit   Persistence
     TVPI                         -   0.53     (0.916)    0.26             -    0.532     (1.931)    0.40             -     0.023      (0.575)    0.34             -     0.188    (0.671)    0.45
     Two-factor Elastic Net    0.125 0.248     (0.606)    0.17          0.049   0.131      (1.45)    0.24          0.096   0.033       (0.466)    0.46          0.115    0.044    (0.522)    0.29
     Elastic Net                0.13 -0.187    (0.625)    0.19           0.07   -0.074    (1.399)    0.27           0.11   -0.196       (0.48)    0.41           0.13   -0.207    (0.489)    0.32
     Elastic Net, Aggregated   0.31 -0.113     (0.364)    -              0.27   -0.047    (0.977)    -              0.13   -0.142      (0.445)    -              0.23   -0.182    (0.319)    -
A      Appendix: Asset Pricing Model
A.1       Risk-free rate
The real short yield yt,1 , or risk-free rate, satisfies Et [exp{mt+1 + yt,1 }] = 1. Solving out this Euler equation,
we get:

                                                                     1          1
                                        yt,1   = y$
                                                  t,1 - Et [ t+1 ] - 2 e  e + e  t
                                                                                2

                                                                            1
                                               = y0 (1) + eyn - e  + e  2 1 zt .                                (14)
                                                 $        1             1
                                      y0 (1)    y0,1 - 0 - e   e  + e   2 0 .                                   (15)
                                                          2

where we used the expression for the real SDF

                     m t +1     = m$
                                   t +1 +  t +1
                                           1                              1
                                = -y$t,1 - 2 t t - t  t+1 + 0 + e  zt + e   t+1
                                                                          2


                                           1            1    1                1
                                = -yt,1 - e e + e  2 t - t t - t - e  2  t+1
                                           2                 2

The real short yield is the nominal short yield minus expected inflation minus a Jensen adjustment minus
the inflation risk premium.


A.2       Nominal and real term structure
Proposition 1. Nominal bond yields are affine in the state vector:

                                                                   A$  B$
                                                      y$
                                                       t ( ) = -
                                                                    
                                                                      -  zt ,
                                                                        

where the coefficients A$     $
                         and B satisfy the following recursions:

                                                               1                         1
                               A$
                                 +1
                                              $
                                          = -y0,1 + A$
                                                     +           B$
                                                                          B$
                                                                             - B$
                                                                                         2 0 ,                  (16)
                                                               2
                               $                  $               $        1
                              B  +1       =      B       - eyn - B        2 1 ,                                 (17)

                $          $
initialized at A0 = 0 and B0 = 0.

Proof. We conjecture that the t + 1-price of a  -period bond is exponentially affine in the state:

                                               log( Pt$        $
                                                      +1, ) = A + B
                                                                   $
                                                                               z t +1


and solve for the coefficients A$        $
                                 +1 and B +1 in the process of verifying this conjecture using the Euler




                                                               58
equation:

                      Pt$
                        , +1   = Et [exp{m$          $
                                          t+1 + log Pt+1, } ]
                                                 1
                               = Et [exp{-y$                       $
                                           t,1 - 2 t t - t  t+1 + A + B
                                                                       $
                                                                           z t +1 } ]

                                         $           1
                               = exp{-y0,1 - eyn zt - t t + A$  + B
                                                                     $
                                                                       zt } ×
                                                     2
                                                    $            1
                                  Et exp{-t  t+1 + B          2  t +1 } .


We use the log-normality of  t+1 and substitute for the affine expression for t to get:

                                                             1                          1
       Pt$
         , +1
                        $
                = exp -y0,1 - eyn zt + A$
                                         + B
                                            $
                                                      zt +     B$
                                                                       B$
                                                                          - B$
                                                                                       2 ( 0 + 1 z t ) .
                                                             2

Taking logs and collecting terms, we obtain a linear equation for log( pt ( + 1)):

                                    log Pt$
                                          , +1    =    A$      $
                                                         +1 + B +1         zt ,


where A$                       $
        +1 satisfies (16) and B +1 satisfies (17). The relationship between log bond prices and bond yields
is given by - log Pt$        $
                    , /  = y t, .

    Define the one-period return on a nominal zero-coupon bond as:

                                      b,$          $           $
                                     rt +1, = log Pt+1, - log Pt, +1


    The nominal bond risk premium on a bond of maturity  is the expected excess return corrected for
a Jensen term, and equals negative the conditional covariance between that bond return and the nominal
SDF:

                               b,$      $     1     b,$                     b,$
                          Et r t +1, - yt,1 + 2 Vt rt+1,     = -Ct m $
                                                                     t+1 , rt+1,

                                                                      $      1
                                                             =       B      2 t

    Real bond yields, yt, , denoted without the $ superscript, are affine as well with coefficients that follow
similar recursions:

                                                1         1      1
                          A  +1   = -y0,1 + A + B  B - B  2 0 -  2 e ,                                     (18)
                                                2
                                                        1
                          B +1    = -eyn + (e + B )  -  2 1 .                                              (19)

For  = 1, we recover the expression for the risk-free rate in (14)-(15).




                                                      59
A.3         Stock Market
                                                          Ptm      m
                                                            + 1 + Dt + 1
We define the real return on equity as Rm
                                        t +1 =                 Ptm       ,   where Ptm is the end-of-period price on the equity
market. A log-linearization delivers:

                                               m      m     m     m   m       m
                                              rt +1 = 0 +  dt+1 + 1 pdt+1 - pdt .                                            (20)

                                                 m = E[r m ], the unconditional mean dividend growth rate
The unconditional mean log real stock return is r0       t

           t+1 ], and pd = E[ pdt ] is the unconditional average log price-dividend ratio on equity. The
is µm = E[dm            m       m

                        m and  m are defined as:
linearization constants 0     1

                                          m                                                         m
                         m         e pd                  m                         m         e pd
                         1 =          m
                                                 < 1 and 0 = log e pd + 1 -                   m
                                                                                                        pdm .                (21)
                                  e pd + 1                                                 e pd + 1

       Our state vector z contains the (demeaned) log real dividend growth rate on the stock market, dm
                                                                                                      t +1 -
µm ,   and the (demeaned) log price-dividend ratio pdm - pdm .

                                                   pdm
                                                     t ( )    =       pdm + e pd zt ,
                                                      dm
                                                       t      = µm + edivm zt ,

where e pd (edivm ) is a selector vector that has a one in the fifth (sixth) entry, since the log pd ratio (log
dividend growth rate) is the fifth (sixth) element of the VAR.
       We define the log return on the stock market so that the return equation holds exactly, given the time
series for {dm     m
             t , pdt }. Rewriting (20):


                     m        m                        m                             m                     1
                    rt +1 - r 0   =           (edivm + 1 e pd )  - e pd zt + edivm + 1 e pd               2  t +1 .
                             m
                            r0    = µm + 0
                                         m            m
                                           - pdm (1 - 1 ).

       The equity risk premium is the expected excess return on the stock market corrected for a Jensen term.
By the Euler equation, it equals minus the conditional covariance between the log SDF and the log return:

                        Ptm         m
                           + 1 + Dt + 1
        1   = E t Mt + 1                = Et exp{m$                  m
                                                   t +1 +  t +1 + r t +1 }
                               Ptm
                                   1
            =   Et exp -y$                                             m            m
                            t,1 - 2 t t - t  t+1 + 0 + e zt+1 + r0 + ( edivm + 1 e pd ) zt+1 - e pd zt

                       $         1             m               m
            =   exp -y0  (1) -  t  t + 0 + r0    + (edivm + 1    e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt
                                 2
                                          m                                    1
                ×Et exp{-t  t+1 + edivm + 1 e pd + e                          2  t +1

                   m        $                m
            = exp r0 + 0 - y0 (1) + (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt
                        1        m                                m                    m                               1
                × exp     e    + 1 e pd + e               edivm + 1 e pd + e - edivm + 1 e pd + e                      2 t
                        2 divm




                                                                  60
Taking logs on both sides delivers:

          m        $                m
         r0 + 0 - y0 (1) + (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt                                               (22)
                    1        m                        m                                     m             1
                +     e    + 1 e pd + e       edivm + 1 e pd + e               =    edivm + 1 e pd + e    2 t
                    2 divm
                                            m,$     $     1     m,$                          m,$
                                       Et r t +1 - yt,1 + 2 Vt rt+1            = -Ct m $
                                                                                       t+1, rt+1


The left-hand side is the expected excess return on the stock market, corrected for a Jensen term, while
the right-hand side is the negative of the conditional covariance between the (nominal) log stock return
and the nominal log SDF. We refer to the left-hand side as the equity risk premium in the data, since it is
implied directly by the VAR. We refer to the right-hand side as the equity risk premium in the model, since
it requires knowledge of the market prices of risk.
    Note that we can obtain the same expression using the log real SDF and log real stock return:

                    m            1    m                           m
               Et r t +1 - yt,1 + Vt rt+1            = -Ct mt+1, rt +1
                                 2
                                    m                                m
                                   r0 - y0 (1)       +      (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn - e 1/2 1 zt
         1         m                 m                              m
        + (edivm + 1 e pd ) (edivm + 1 e pd ) =             edivm + 1 e pd    1/2 (t - 1/2       e )
         2

We combine the terms in 0 and 1 on the right-hand side and plug in for y0 (1) from (15) to get:

                  m        $    1                         1         m                 m                     m
                 r0 + 0 - y0,1 + e  e                    + (edivm + 1 e pd ) (edivm + 1 e pd ) + e  edivm + 1 e pd
                                2                         2
           m                                                      m                      1
+ (edivm + 1 e pd + e )  - e pd - eyn zt         =        edivm + 1 e pd     1/2 t + e  2 0 + e 1/2 1 zt

This recovers equation (22).


A.4      Dividend Strips
A.4.1     Affine Structure for Price-Dividend Ratio on Equity Strip
Proposition 2. Log price-dividend ratios on dividend strips are affine in the state vector:

                                        pd         d     m   m
                                         t, = log Pt, = A + B zt ,


where the coefficients Am     m
                         and B follow recursions:

                                                               1
                      Am       =   Am
                                     + µ m - y0 (1) +            (e   + Bm
                                                                           )  (edivm + Bm
                                                                                          )
                        +1
                                                               2 divm
                                               m           1          1
                                   - (edivm + B  )  2 0 -  2 e  ,                                               (23)
                       m                       m                          m                  1
                      B +1     = (edivm + e + B  )  - eyn - (edivm + e + B  )  2 1 ,                            (24)

                m = 0 and Bm = 0.
initialized at A0          0




                                                               61
Proof. We conjecture the affine structure and solve for the coefficients Am        m
                                                                           +1 and B +1 in the process of
verifying this conjecture using the Euler equation:

                                     m
                                    Dt +1
     Ptd
       , +1    = Et Mt+1 Ptd+1,        m  = Et exp{m$                  m        d
                                                     t +1 +  t +1 +  d t +1 + p t +1 (  ) }
                                    Dt
                                     1
               =    Et exp{-y$                                          m                   m
                               t,1 - 2 t t - t  t+1 + 0 + e zt+1 + µ + edivm zt+1 + A + B zt+1 }
                                                                                                m


                          $               1
               =    exp{-y0 (1) - eyn zt - t t + 0 + e zt + µm + edivm zt + Am               m
                                                                                          + B  zt }
                                          2
                                                    m              1
                    ×Et exp{-t  t+1 + (edivm + e + B  )  2  t +1 .

We use the log-normality of  t+1 and substitute for the affine expression for t to get:

                                        $
                   Ptd
                     , +1       = exp{-y0 (1) + 0 + µ m + A m                 m
                                                             + ( edivm + e + B )  - eyn zt
                                     1               m                    m
                                   + (edivm + e + B    )  (edivm + e + B    )
                                     2
                                                   m     1
                                   - (edivm + e + B  )  2 ( 0 + 1 z t ) }

Taking logs and collecting terms, we obtain a log-linear expression for pd
                                                                         t (  + 1):


                                              pd
                                               t, +1   =   Am      m
                                                             +1 + B +1 zt ,


where:

                                             $             1
                Am          =     Am
                                    + µ m - y0 (1) + 0 +     (e   + e + Bm
                                                                           )  (edivm + e + Bm
                                                                                              )
                  +1
                                                           2 divm
                                                 m     1
                                 - (edivm + e + B  )  2 0 ,
                    m                       m                          m         1
                   B +1     = (edivm + e + B  )  - eyn - (edivm + e + B  )  2 1 .

We recover the recursions in (23) and (24) after using equation (15).

    Like we did for the stock market as a whole, we define the strip risk premium as:

                                 d,$      $     1     d,$                      d,$
                            Et r t +1, - yt,1 + 2 Vt rt+1,      = -Ct m $
                                                                        t+1 , rt+1,
                                                                                m     1
                                                                = (edivm + e + B  )  2 t

    The risky strips for REITs, infrastructure, small stocks, growth stocks, and natural resources are defined
analogously.




                                                           62
A.4.2        Expected Holding Period Return over k-horizons on Dividend Strips
The expected return on a dividend strip that pays the realized nominal dividend k quarters hence and that
is held to maturity is:

                               $
                              Dt
                        Et      $
                                 +k
                               Dt
Et [ R t  t + k ]   =                 -1
                             Ptd
                               ,k
                                                                 k                                k
                                                                                     1
                    = exp - Am    m
                             k - Bk zt + Et                     dt+s + t+s          + Vt
                                                                                     2            dt+s + t+s        -1                  (25)
                                                              s =1                              s =1
                                                                                            k
                                                                                                           k
                    = exp - Am    m
                             k - Bk zt + k ( µm + 0 ) + ( edivm + e )                       s          zt + (edivm + e ) (edivm + e )
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                           s =1


These are the building blocks for computing the expected return on a PE investment.


A.4.3        Dividend Futures: Price and Return
The price of a dividend futures contract which delivers one quarter worth of nominal dividends at quarter
t +  , divided by the current dividend, is equal to:

                                                            Ftd
                                                              ,                  $
                                                              $
                                                                     = Ptd
                                                                         , exp  yt, ,
                                                             Dt

where Ptd
        , is the spot price-dividend ratio. Using the affine expressions for the strip price-dividend ratio
and the nominal bond price, it can be written as:

                                                Ftd
                                                  ,
                                                 $
                                                       = exp Am   $     m   $
                                                               - A + ( B - B ) zt ,
                                                Dt

      The one-period holding period return on the dividend future of maturity  is:

                                                                                        $    $
                                          f ut,d       Ftd
                                                         +1, -1             Ftd
                                                                              +1, -1 / Dt+1 Dt+1
                                       Rt+1, =                       -1 =                              -1
                                                           Ftd
                                                             ,                 Ftd     $
                                                                                 ,  / Dt
                                                                                                 $
                                                                                                Dt

It can be written as:

                                      f ut,d                        $
                        log 1 + Rt+1,              =       Am               m    $
                                                             -1 - A  -1 - A  + A  + µ m +  0
                                                               m      $                           m   $
                                                           +( B -1 - B -1 + edivm + e ) zt+1 - ( B - B ) zt


      The expected log return, which is already a risk premium on account of the fact that the dividend future
already takes out the return on an equal-maturity nominal Treasury bond, equals:

                                       f ut,d                         $
                     Et log 1 + Rt+1,                  =     Am               m    $
                                                               -1 - A  -1 - A  + A  + µ m +  0
                                                                  m      $                       m   $
                                                             + ( B -1 - B -1 + edivm + e )  - ( B - B ) zt




                                                                         63
Given that the state variable zt is mean-zero, the first row denotes the unconditional dividend futures risk
premium.


A.5      Capital Gain Strips
A capital gain strip is a strip that pays the realized ex-dividend stock price Ptm
                                                                                 +k at time t + k. For conve-
nience, we scale this payout by the current stock price Ptm . In other words, the claim pays off the realized
                                                               Ptm
                                                                 +k
cumulative capital gain between periods t and t + k,            Ptm .
    By value additivity of the dividend strips, the time-t price of this claim is today's stock price minus the
prices of the dividend strips of horizons 1, · · · , k:



          Ptm -    Ptd             d    m
                     ,1 + · · · + Pt,k Dt            Ptd                              k
                                                       ,1 + · · · + Pt,k
                                                                                                 m       m
                                                                                       =1 exp{ A + ( B ) zt }
                                            = 1-                           = 1-
                        Ptm                              Ptm / Dt
                                                                m
                                                                                        exp{ pdm + e pdm zt }

    The expected return on the capital gains strip is given by

                                                       Ptm                              Ptm      m      m
                                                                                          + k / Dt + k Dt + k
           Et Ptm
                +k                              Et       +k
                                                        Ptm                     Et        Ptm / Dt
                                                                                                 m     Dt m
                                  =                                     =
Ptm -    Ptd             d    m              k          m    m
                                              =1 exp{ A +( B ) zt }                  k          m    m
                                                                                      =1 exp{ A +( B ) zt }
           ,1 + · · · + Pt,k Dt        1-             m
                                               exp{ pd +e pdm zt }
                                                                             1-               m
                                                                                       exp{ pd +e pdm zt }

                                       Et exp{e pdm (zt+k - zt ) + d$                  $
                                                                    t + k + · · · +  d t +1 }
                                  =
                                                              k          m    m
                                                               =1 exp{ A +( B ) zt }
                                                         1-            m
                                                                exp{ pd +e pdm zt }

                                       Et exp{e pdm (zt+k - zt ) + k (µm + 0 ) + k
                                                                                  =1 ( edivm + e ) zt+ }
                                  =
                                                                           k          m    m
                                                                            =1 exp{ A +( B ) zt }
                                                                    1-              m
                                                                             exp{ pd +e pdm zt }

                                       exp k (µm + 0 ) + e pdm (k - I ) + (edivm + e ) k
                                                                                        =1 (  )
                                                                                                 z + 1V
                                                                                                  t  2
                                  =
                                                                              k          m     m
                                                                               =1 exp{ A +( B ) zt }
                                                                        1-
                                                                                exp{ pdm +e pdm zt }


where

                           k                                                     k      
          V   = e pdm        -1  (   -1 )        e pdm + (edivm + e )             n-1 n-1                       (edivm + e )
                           =1                                                   =1 n =1


A.6      Covariance PE with stock and bond returns
The covariance of PE fund returns with stock returns and with bond returns is given by the covariance
of the PE fund's replication portfolio return with stock and bond returns. The return on the replicating
portfolio is the weighted average of the return on the strips that make up the portfolio. The weights are
described in equation (2), where wi is a 1 × HK vector with generic element wi        i
                                                                             t,h,k = qt,h ( k ) Pt,h ( k ). The
weights sum to one. We focus on the one-period, conditional stock beta it,m and bond beta it,b of PE fund




                                                              64
i. For the bond beta, we focus on the beta with the nominal five-year bond ( = 20).

                                               HK i                            HK i
                      Ct ( r t
                             i , rm )
                               +1 t +1
                                         Ct (  h                       m
                                                 ,k wt,h,k rt+1,h,k , rt+1 )   h ,k wt,h,k Ct (rt+1,h ( k ), rt+1 )
                                                                                                              m
           it,m   =                    =                                     =
                        Vt ( r t m )
                                 +1                 Vt ( r t
                                                           m )
                                                             +1                          Vt ( r t
                                                                                                m )
                                                                                                  +1
                      HK i
                      h ,k wt,h,k estrip,k,h         edivm + e + 1
                                                                 me
                                                                    pd
                  =
                                   me
                       edivm + e + 1  pd             edivm + e + 1
                                                                 me
                                                                    pd

                      HK i                               $
                      h ,k wt,h ( k ) estrip,k,h        B20
           it,b   =
                                  $        $
                                 B20      B20

For example, the three factor model for Real Estate PE funds implies that:

                                                               $
                                          estrip,1,h    =     Bh
                                                                       m
                                          estrip,2,h    = edivm + e + Bh
                                                                          reit
                                          estrip,3,h    = edivreit + e + Bh

As another example, the three-factor model for VC funds implies:

                                                          $
                                       estrip,1,h   =    Bh
                                                                       small
                                       estrip,2,h   = edivsmall + e + Bh
                                                                              growth
                                       estrip,3,h   = edivgrowth + e + Bh

Similar expressions are obtained for the other fund categories and for models with fewer or more risk
factors.




                                                              65
B        Point Estimates Baseline Model
B.1      VAR Estimation
In the first stage we estimate the VAR companion matrix by OLS, equation by equation. We start from an
initial VAR where all elements of  are non-zero. We zero out the elements whose t-statistic is less than
1.96. We then re-estimate  and zero out the elements whose t-statistic is less than 1.96. We continue this
procedure until the  matrix no longer changes and all remaining elements have t-statistic greater than
1.96. The resulting VAR companion matrix estimate, , is listed below.

  0.90   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.21    0.00     0.00   0.02    0.00    0.01    0.00   -0.02   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.07   0.00    0.95     0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00     0.83   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
 -4.77   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.96    0.00   -0.07    0.00   0.00    0.65   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00    0.37    0.02    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    -3.66    0.00   0.00    0.00    0.89    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    1.97     0.00   0.07    0.00    0.09    0.00   -0.07   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.08    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.92    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   -0.05   0.00    0.00    0.00   0.05    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
 -9.33   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.87   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00    -6.72   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
 -3.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.54   0.00   0.00   0.93    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00   -0.21   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.31    0.00    0.00    0.00   -0.15   0.00   0.00   0.00   -0.26   0.00   0.83   -0.36   0.00    0.00
  0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00   0.04   0.49    0.00    0.00
  0.00   2.73   -10.68    0.00   0.58    0.00    0.00   -0.72   0.00    0.00   0.00   0.00   -0.36   0.00   0.00   0.00    0.67   -0.31
  0.00   0.00    6.90     0.00   -0.49   0.00   -0.09    0.56   0.00    0.00   0.05   0.00   0.22    0.00   0.00   0.00    0.29    0.43




                                                                  66
                                                                                                                           1
    The Cholesky decomposition of the residual variance-covariance matrix,  2 , multiplied by 100 for read-
ability is given by:

  0.25    0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00       0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
  0.04    0.67     0.00      0.00      0.00    0.00       0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
  0.03    0.06     0.17      0.00      0.00    0.00       0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -0.01    -0.01   -0.08      0.09      0.00    0.00       0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -1.42    1.11    -1.22     -0.61      8.08    0.00       0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -0.03    -0.07    0.11     -0.14     -0.17    2.13       0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -0.82    0.91    -1.17     -0.59      5.42    0.80       7.46    0.00   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
  0.29    -0.06    0.04     -0.15      0.03    0.62      -1.51    3.21   0.00      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -0.58    0.70    -0.93     -0.76      6.39    0.97       0.34    0.51   4.45      0.00       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -0.08    0.09     0.07     -0.10     -0.42    0.52      -0.08   -0.07   -0.59     1.89       0.00    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -2.31    1.64    -1.69     -0.10     10.10    -0.06      0.77    0.89   0.10     -0.07       8.57    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
  0.17    -0.02    0.73      0.04     -0.70    3.09       0.24    0.37   -0.89     0.51      -4.72    4.95       0.00       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -1.62    1.40    -1.29     -0.97      8.18    -1.25     -1.48   -0.66   -1.09     0.74       0.57    -0.17      4.55       0.00      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
  0.03    -0.18   -0.12     -0.04     -0.28    3.03      -0.01    0.15   0.75     -0.38      -0.32    -0.09     -2.85       2.68      0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 -0.14    0.38    -0.26     -0.94      3.48    0.65       0.35    1.23   4.49      0.17       0.24    0.38       0.36      -0.17      6.69    0.00     0.00   0.00
  0.00    0.09    -0.13     -0.10     -0.03    -0.27      0.54   -0.65   -0.66     0.85      -0.22    0.00      -0.24       0.41     -1.67    3.51     0.00   0.00
 -1.36    -0.00   -2.79      0.31      8.34    -0.49      2.22    1.02   1.26     -3.25       0.78    1.24      -2.37       0.04     -1.25    1.12     8.64   0.00
  0.17    0.83     0.58     -0.76     -1.09    2.45      -0.70   -0.66   -0.74     3.33      -0.18    -0.36      1.64      -0.38      1.13    -1.07   -6.20   4.48


    The diagonal elements report the standard deviation of the VAR innovations, each one orthogonalized
to the shocks that precede it in the VAR, expressed in percent per quarter.


B.2       Market Price of Risk Estimates
The market prices of risk are pinned down by the moments discussed in the main text. Here we report and
discuss the point estimates. Note that the prices of risk are associated with the orthogonal VAR innovations
  N (0, I ). Therefore, their magnitudes can be interpreted as (quarterly) Sharpe ratios. The constant in
the market price of risk estimate 0 is:

 -0.23    0.53      -0.44    -0.06     -0.18     0.68     0.00    0.35    0.00       0.34     0.00     -0.12        0.00     0.03    0.00     0.66    0.00    0.18


    The matrix that governs the time variation in the market price of risk is estimated to be 1 =:

   61.3      0.0        0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   0.0       11.0       0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   0.0       0.0       -54.1        -250.3     0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   53.5      -7.2       0.0           0.3      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   -6.0      4.0        5.9           9.2      -0.2      4.6      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
 -104.1     -17.5      -89.1        -161.6     -1.0      -0.0    -1.9    0.0      0.0       7.7      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   0.0       0.0        0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
  101.0      -3.6      -70.6         -31.5     2.3       -7.7    -0.4    0.0     -1.8       -3.4     0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   0.0       0.0        0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
  159.7      -6.0       -6.1          -7.2     1.6      -10.8     1.2    0.0     -1.5       -5.3     0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   0.0       0.0        0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
 -110.8      1.0       31.2          -93.5     0.3       -5.9     1.2    0.0      0.6       -3.7     -2.7     0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   0.0       0.0        0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   47.0      -7.4      -31.9         -67.8     1.6      -16.7     1.1    -7.8    -0.1       10.7     -0.3     0.0     -2.4     0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   0.0       0.0        0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
   2.0       -3.2      -18.0          3.1      7.7       1.7     -0.2    0.6     -3.3       0.6      0.4      0.0     -6.8     0.0     -3.9     2.8    0.0    0.0
   0.0       0.0        0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
  111.3      57.1     -103.1         -50.7     2.5       -7.4    -1.2    -3.9     0.1       -1.5     1.5      0.0     -3.3     0.0      0.0    -0.0    -1.1   2.5




                                                                                67
    The first four elements of 0 and the first four rows of 1 govern the dynamics of bond yields and bond
returns. The price of inflation risk is allowed to move with the inflation rate. The estimation shows that the
price of inflation risk is negative on average (0 (1)=-0.23), indicating that high inflation states are bad states
of the world. The market price of inflation risk becomes larger (less negative) when inflation is higher than
average (1 (1, 1)=61.26). The price of real GDP growth risk is positive (0 (2)=0.53), indicating that high
growth states are good states of the world. The price of growth risk increases when GDP growth is above
average (1 (2, 2)=11.00). The price of level risk (the shock to short rates that is orthogonal to inflation and
real GDP growth) is estimated to be negative (0 (3)=-0.44), consistent with e.g., the Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross
(1985) model. The price of level risk is allowed to change with both the level of interest rates, as in those
simple term structure models, and also with the slope factor to capture the fact that bond excess returns
are predictable by the slope of the yield curve (Campbell and Shiller, 1991). When interest rate levels are
unusually high and the term structure steepens, the price of level risk becomes more negative (1 (3, 3)=-
54.14and 1 (3, 4)=-250.30), and expected future bond returns increase. The positive association between
the slope and future bond returns is consistent with the bond return predictability evidence (Cochrane and
Piazzesi, 2006). The price of (orthogonal) slope risk is estimated to be slightly negative on average (0 (4)=-
0.06). Since the spread between the five-year bond yield and the short rate is the fourth element of the state
vector, and the short rate is the third element of the state vector, the five year bond yield can be written as:

                                                                          $
                                                                         A20  B$
                                y$       $
                                 t,20 = y0,20 + ( eyn + eyspr ) zt = -       - 20 zt
                                                                         20    20

A necessary and sufficient condition to match the five-year bond yield dynamics is to allow for the first four
elements of the fourth row of 1 to be non-zero.
    The last eight elements of 0 and last eight rows of 1 govern stock pricing. We assume that the
market prices of risk associated with the price-dividend ratios are zero, since those variables only play a
role as predictors. The only exception is the price-dividend ratio on the stock market. The evidence from
dividend strip spot and futures prices and the evidence on strip future returns helps us identify the market
prices of risk associated with the pd ratio (fifth element of t ).
    The risk prices in the 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, 14th, 16th, and 18th rows of t are chosen to match the
observed mean and dynamics of the equity risk premium in model, as shown in Appendix A, and data, as
implied by the VAR. We only free up those elements of the 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, 14th, 16th, and 18th rows
of 1 that are strictly necessary to allow the equity risk premia in the model to move with the same state
variables as they do in the VAR. These rows of of t are also influenced by our insistence on matching the
entire time series of the price-dividend ratio on the stock market, real estate, infrastructure, small, growth,
natural resource, and value stocks.




                                                        68
C      Shock-exposure and Shock-price Elasticities
Borovicka and Hansen (2014) provide a dynamic value decomposition, the asset pricing counterparts to im-
pulse response functions, which let a researcher study how a shock to an asset's cash-flow today affects
future cash-flow dynamics as well as the prices of risk that pertain to these future cash-flows. What results
is a set of shock-exposure elasticities that measure the quantities of risk resulting from an initial impulse at
various investment horizons, and a set of shock-price elasticities that measure how much the investor needs
to be compensated currently for each unit of future risk exposure at those various investment horizons. We
now apply their analysis to our VAR setting.


C.1      Derivation
Recall that the underlying state vector dynamics are described by:

                                                                    1
                                                z t +1 =  z t +  2  t +1

The log cash-flow growth rates on stocks, REITs, and infrastructure stocks are described implicitly by the
VAR since it contains both log returns and log price-dividend ratios for each of these assets. The log real
dividend growth rate on an asset i  {m, reit, in f ra} is given by:

                                  i              i       i      i    i       i
                            log( Dt +1 ) - log( Dt ) =  dt+1 = A0 + A1 zt + A2  t+1 ,

                                                     1
                   divi , and A2 = edivi  .
       i =µ , A =e
where A0                       i         2
           m   1
    Denote the cash-flow process Yt = Dt . Its increments in logs can we written as:

                             y t +1 - y t =  0 +  1 z t + z t  3 z t +  0  t +1 + z t  1  t +1               (26)

with coefficients 0 = A0
                       i ,  = Ai ,  = 0,  = Ai , and  = 0.
                           1   1 3       0   2       1
    The one-period log real SDF, which is the log change in the real pricing kernel St , is a quadratic function
of the state:
                   log(St+1 ) - log(St ) = mt+1 = B0 + B1 zt + B2  t+1 + zt B3 zt + zt B4  t+1
             $                                                                                   1
where B0 = -y0           1
               (1) + 0 - 2 0 0 , B1 = -eyn + e  - 0 1 , B2 = -0 + e  2 , B3 = - 2
                                                                                1
                                                                                  1 1 , and
B4 = -1 .
    We are interested in the product Yt = St Dt . Its increments in logs can be written as in equation (26),
with coefficients 0 = A0
                       i + B ,  = Ai + B ,  = B ,  = Ai + B , and  = B .
                            0 1    1    1 3    3  0   2    2      1   4
    Starting from a state z0 = z at time 0, consider a shock at time 1 to a linear combination of state variables,
h  1 . The shock elasticity (z, t) quantifies the date-t impact:

                                                                  -1
                                     ( z, t ) =  h I - 2~ 2,t           ~ 0,t + ~ 1,t z


where the ~ matrices solve the recursions


                                          ~ 0, j+1       = ^ 1, j 1/2 + 0


                                                             69
                                                        ~ 1, j+1       = 2 ^ 3, j 1/2 + 1

                                                        ~ 2, j+1       =     1/2        ^ 3, j 1/2
                                                                                        

The ^ and ~ coefficients follow the recursions:


                        ~ 0, j+1   = ^ 0, j + 0

                        ~ 1, j+1   = ^ 1, j  + 1

                        ~ 3, j+1   =      ^ 3, j  + 3

                        ^ 0, j+1
                                   = ~ 0, j+1 - 1 log I - 2      ~ 2, j+1           + 
                                                                                       1~
                                                                                                I - 2~ 2, j+1        -1
                                                                                                                          ~
                                                  2                                    2 0, j+1                             0, j+1
                                                                                   -1 ~
                        ^ 1, j+1   = ~ 1, j+1 +    ~ 0, j+1 I - 2~ 2, j+1             1, j+1

                        ^ 3, j+1
                                   = ~ 3, j+1 + 1 ~      I - 2~ 2, j+1                -1   ~
                                                                                           
                                                2 1, j+1                                     1, j+1




starting from ^ 0,0 = 0, ^ 1,0 = 01× N , ^ 2,0 = 0 N × N , and where I is the N × N identity matrix.
    Let   g ( z, t )   be the shock-exposure elasticity (cash-flows Y = D) and                         sg ( z, t )   the shock-value elasticity,
then the shock-price elasticity            p ( z, t )   is given by


                                                          p ( z, t )   =   g ( z, t ) - sg ( z, t ).


    In an exponentially affine framework like ours, the shock price elasticity can also directly be derived
                 -1
by setting Yt = St  or yt+1 - yt = -mt+1 , with coefficients in equation (26) equal to 0 = - B0 , 1 = - B1 ,
3 = - B3 , 0 = - B2 , and 1 = - B4 .
    The shock-price elasticity quantifies implied market compensation for horizon-specific risk exposures.
In our case, these risk compensations are extracted from a rich menu of observed asset prices matched by a
reduced form model, rather than by constructing a structural asset pricing model. The horizon-dependent
risk prices are the multi-period impulse responses for the cumulative stochastic discount factor process.


C.2       Results
Figure C.1 plots the shock-exposure elasticities of the six dividend growth processes -on the market (blue),
small stocks (cyan), growth (magenta), value (yellow), REITs (red), infrastructure (green), and natural re-
source stocks (black)- to a one-standard deviation shock to inflation (top left), real per capital GDP growth
(top second), the short rate (top third), the slope factor (top fourth), the price-dividend ratio on the market
(top fifth), the dividend growth rate on the market (top right), the dividend growth rate on small stocks
(bottom left), the dividend growth rate on growth stocks, on value stocks, on REITs, on infrastructure, and
the dividend growth rate on natural resource stocks (bottom right). The shock exposure elasticities are
essentially impulse-responses to the original (i.e., non-orthogonalized) VAR innovations. They describe
properties of the VAR, not of the asset pricing model. Since our private equity cash-flows are linear com-
binations of these dividends, the PE cash flow exposures to the VAR shocks will be linear combinations of
the plotted shock exposure elasticities of these three dividend growth rates.



                                                                             70
                                            FIGURE C.1: Shock Exposure Elasticities
The figure plots the shock-exposure elasticities of dividend growth on the market, dividend growth of REITs, dividend growth of
infrastructure shocks, dividend growth of small stocks, dividend growth of growth stocks, and dividend growth of natural resource
stocks to a one-standard deviation shock to inflation (top left), real GDP growth (top second), the short rate (top third), the slope factor,
the price-dividend ratio on the market, dividend growth rate on the market (top right), dividend growth rate on small stocks (bottom
left), dividend growth on growth stocks (bottom second), dividend growth on value stocks, on REITs, on infrastructure stocks, and
                                                                                                                                                               1
dividend growth of natural resource stocks (bottom right). The shock exposures are to the non-orthogonalized VAR innovations  2 .

               Inflation                GDP growth                 Short rate                  Slope                     PD mkt                   Divgr mkt
  0.06                      0.04                        0.1                       0.04                                                0.04

  0.04                                                                            0.02                         0                      0.03
                            0.02                       0.05
  0.02                                                                                0                                               0.02

     0                                                                            -0.02                     -0.05                     0.01
                               0                          0
  -0.02                                                                           -0.04                                                  0

  -0.04                     -0.02                      -0.05                      -0.06                      -0.1                     -0.01
          0            50           0            50            0           50             0            50           0           50            0          50


              Divgr small               Divgr growth               Divgr value                Divgr reit                Divgr infra               Divgr NR
  0.08                      0.06                                                  0.04                      0.06                      0.08
                                                        0.1                                                                                           market
  0.06                                                                                                                                0.06            reit
                            0.04                       0.08
                                                                                  0.02                      0.04                                      infra
  0.04                                                                                                                                0.04            small
                                                       0.06
                            0.02                                                                                                                      growth
  0.02                                                 0.04                                                                           0.02            NR
                                                                                      0                     0.02                                      value
                               0                       0.02
     0                                                                                                                                   0
                                                          0                                                    0
  -0.02                     -0.02                                                 -0.02                                               -0.02
          0            50           0            50            0           50             0            50           0           50            0          50



     There is interesting heterogeneity in the cash flow exposures of the seven risky assets to the VAR shocks.
For example, the top left panel shows that infrastructure and to a lesser extent small stock cash flows
increase in the wake of a positive inflation shock, while the dividend growth responses for the aggregate
stock market and especially for REITs, growth stocks, and natural resource stocks are negative. This points
to the inflation hedging potential of infrastructure assets and the inflation risk exposure of REITs, growth
stocks, natural resource stocks, and the market as a whole. The second panel shows that REIT and small
stock dividend growth responds positively to a GDP growth shock, while cash flow growth on the market
and on growth stocks (ironically) respond negatively. It is well known that the market portfolio as a whole
is fairly growth-oriented. NR stocks have strong exposure to GDP growth especially at longer horizons.
All cash flows except NR respond negatively to an increase in interest rates in the long-run. The response
of REIT and small stock cash flows is positive in the short run. REIT cash flows are rents which can be
adjusted upwards when rates increase, which typically occurs in a strong economy (see the GDP panel).


                                                                                 71
Value stocks also have very strong short-run GDP exposure. Small and growth stocks have a lot more
interest rate level risk exposure than the other asset classes, while NR cash flows are a great interest rate
hedge. The market dividend growth shows a substantial positive response to a steepening yield curve.
Slope exposure is even larger for growth stocks. When the slope steepens, which tends to happen during
recessions, NR cash flows fall. The bottom panels show that the dividend growth shock to the market is
nearly permanent, while the other five cash flow shocks are mean-reverting. A positive innovation in REIT
cash flows is associated with a decline in cash flows on growth firms. This makes sense given the value-like
behavior of REITs (Van Nieuwerburgh, 2019). A positive shock to infrastructure cash flows has strong and
often long-lasting positive effects on the other five cash flow series (bottom middle panel). Positive growth
stock cash flow innovations have strongly persistent positive effects for NR cash flows. NR cash flows have
few spillovers on the other stock segments.

                                         FIGURE C.2: Shock Price Elasticities
The figure plots the shock-price elasticities to a one-standard deviation shock to the inflation factor (top left), real GDP growth (top
second), short rate (top third), the slope factor, the price-dividend ratio on the market, the dividend growth rate on the market
(top right), the dividend growth rate on small stocks (bottom left), the dividend growth rate on growth stocks, on value stocks on
REITs, on infrastructure stocks, and on natural resources stocks (bottom right). The shocks whose risk prices are plotted are the
                                            1
(non-orthogonalized) VAR innovations  2 .


            Infl shock              GDP gr shock             Short rate shock              Slope shock               PD mkt shock          Divgr mkt shock
-0.21                    0.55                        -0.23                      0.23                     0.02                       0.67


-0.22                    0.54                        -0.24                      0.22                     0.01                       0.66

                                                     -0.25
-0.23                    0.53                                                   0.21                        0                       0.65

                                                     -0.26
-0.24                    0.52                                                    0.2                     -0.01                      0.64
                                                     -0.27
-0.25                    0.51                                                   0.19                     -0.02                      0.63
        0           50          0               50           0          50             0           50            0           50            0         50


    Divgr small shock    Divgr growth shock    Divgr value shock      Divgr reit shock      Divgr infra shock      Divgr NR shock
0.24                  0.44                 0.35                  0.41                  0.54                   0.57

                         0.43
0.23                                                 0.34                        0.4                     0.53                       0.56

                         0.42
0.22                                                 0.33                       0.39                     0.52                       0.55
                         0.41

0.21                                                 0.32                       0.38                     0.51                       0.54
                          0.4

  0.2                    0.39                        0.31                       0.37                      0.5                       0.53
        0           50          0               50           0          50             0           50            0           50            0         50



     Figure C.2 plots the shock-price elasticities to a one-standard deviation shock to each of the same (non-
orthogonalized) VAR innovations. Shock price elasticities are properties of the SDF process, and therefore
depend on the estimated market price of risk parameters. They quantify the compensation investors de-
mand for horizon-dependent risk exposures. The price of inflation risk is negative, consistent with increases


                                                                      72
in inflation being bad states of the world. GDP growth risk is naturally priced positively, and more so at
longer horizons. Level risk is negatively priced, consistent with standard results in the term structure lit-
erature that consider high interest rate periods bad states of the world. The price of level risk becomes
less negative at longer horizons. The price of slope risk is positive, consistent with the findings in Koijen,
Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2017). All cash-flow shocks in the bottom six panels naturally have positive
risk prices since increases in cash-flow growth are good shocks to the representative investor. The highest
risk price is associated with shocks to the aggregate stock market, followed by infrastructure shocks, then
growth shocks. Compensation for exposure to the various dividend shocks varies little with the horizon.




                                                     73
D                                                        Additional Results

                                                                          FIGURE D.1: Cash-Flows by Vintage, Alternate Categories
                                                                  Panel A: Fund of Funds                                                                                                 Panel B: Debt Funds
                                                                                                                                                                     0.12
Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested




                                                                                                                      Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested
                                               0.06                                                    Vintage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vintage
                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                     0.09                                           2002
                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003
                                                                                                          2003
                                               0.04                                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005
                                                                                                          2005
                                                                                                                                                                     0.06                                           2006
                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007
                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008
                                                                                                          2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                               0.02                                                       2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                          2010                                                       0.03                                           2011
                                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2012
                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2013
                                                                                                          2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2014
                                               0.00                                                       2014                                                       0.00

                                                  1990    1995          2000   2005    2010     2015                                                                       2000   2005         2010      2015

                                                                   Panel C: Restructuring                                                                                         Panel D: Natural Resources
                                                                                                                      Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested
Capital Distribution Relative to $1 Invested




                                               0.12                                                    Vintage                                                                                                  Vintage

                                                                                                          2000                                                                                                      2001
                                                                                                          2001                                                       0.2                                            2002
                                                                                                          2002                                                                                                      2003
                                                                                                          2003                                                                                                      2004
                                               0.08                                                       2004                                                                                                      2005
                                                                                                          2005                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                          2006                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                          2007                                                       0.1                                            2008
                                                                                                          2008                                                                                                      2009
                                               0.04                                                       2009                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                          2010                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                          2011                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                          2012                                                                                                      2013
                                                                                                          2013                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                               0.00                                                       2014
                                                                                                                                                                       2000       2005         2010      2015
                                                  2000           2005           2010          2015




                                                                                                                 74
                                  FIGURE D.2: Factor Exposure for other Categories by Fund Horizon

                                                               Panel A: Restructuring
                       Factor Exposure by Horizon                                                       Factor Exposure by Horizon

                 0.2




                                                                                b Coefficient
                                                                                                0.010
b Coefficient




                 0.1
                                                                                                0.005
                 0.0                                               Bond
                                                                   Stock

                -0.1                                                                            0.000
                                                                                                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                  Years from Fund Inception
                -0.2
                         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                   Bond       Infra                 REIT    Stock         Dividend   Gain
                                 Years from Fund Inception                                                        Growth     Natural Resources     Small   Value


                                                                Panel B: Debt Fund
                        Factor Exposure by Horizon                                                      Factor Exposure by Horizon
                                                                                                0.012

                                                                                b Coefficient   0.009
                 0.05
b Coefficient




                                                                                                0.006
                 0.00                                              Bond                         0.003
                                                                   Stock

                                                                                                0.000
                -0.05                                                                                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                  Years from Fund Inception
                          1   2    3   4     5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14                                             Bond       Infra                 REIT    Stock         Dividend   Gain
                                           Years from Fund Inception                                              Growth     Natural Resources     Small   Value


                                                              Panel C: Fund of Funds
                        Factor Exposure by Horizon                                                      Factor Exposure by Horizon

                 0.04
                                                                                b Coefficient




                                                                                                0.010
b Coefficient




                 0.02
                                                                                                0.005
                 0.00                                              Bond
                                                                   Stock

                -0.02                                                                           0.000
                                                                                                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                -0.04                                                                                             Years from Fund Inception
                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                  Bond       Infra                 REIT    Stock         Dividend   Gain
                                  Years from Fund Inception                                                       Growth     Natural Resources     Small   Value


                                                            Panel D: Natural Resources
                      Factor Exposure by Horizon                                                        Factor Exposure by Horizon

                0.2                                                                             0.008
                                                                                b Coefficient




                                                                                                0.006
b Coefficient




                0.1                                                                             0.004
                                                                   Bond                         0.002
                                                                   Stock

                0.0                                                                             0.000
                                                                                                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                  Years from Fund Inception
                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                    Dividend    Gain        Growth     Natural Resources     Small    Value
                                 Years from Fund Inception                                                                                Infra      REIT                  Stock

                                                                           75
                                                  FIGURE D.3: Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile

                                           2-Factor                                                                                   Elastic Net

                                                                           Panel A: Buyout
                         Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                       Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile
                 0.050




                                                                                       a Coefficient
                                                                                                       0.010
                 0.025
a Coefficient




                                                                                                       0.005
                 0.000

                -0.025                                                                                 0.000
                                                                                                                        1                  2                  3                  4
                                                                                                                                               PD Quartile
                -0.050                                                                                          Growth        Infra        Natural Resources (NR)       REIT Gain        Value
                                1             2                  3    4                                         Growth Gain   Infra Gain   REIT                         Stock Gain       Value Gain
                                                   PD Quartile



                                                                     Panel B: Venture Capital
                         Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                       Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile
                 0.050
                                                                                                       0.003
                                                                                       a Coefficient




                 0.025                                                                                 0.002
a Coefficient




                                                                                                       0.001
                 0.000
                                                                                                       0.000
                                                                                                                        1                  2                  3                  4
                -0.025                                                                                                                         PD Quartile
                                1             2                  3    4                                                            Growth Gain     Natural Resources (NR)
                                                   PD Quartile



                                                                          Panel C: Real Estate
                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                         Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile
                 0.02
                                                                                                       0.0075
                                                                                       a Coefficient




                 0.01
                                                                                                       0.0050
                 0.00
a Coefficient




                                                                                                       0.0025
                -0.01
                                                                                                       0.0000
                -0.02                                                                                                    1                 2                   3                     4
                                                                                                                                               PD Quartile
                -0.03
                               1             2                   3    4                                                              Growth Gain       REIT Gain      Stock
                                                  PD Quartile
                                                                                                                                     REIT              Small Gain     Value


                                                                     Panel D: Infrastructure
                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile
                                                                                       a Coefficient




                 0.03                                                                                  1e-03
a Coefficient




                 0.00                                                                                  5e-04


                -0.03                                                                                  0e+00
                                                                                                                        1                  2                  3                      4
                                                                                                                                               PD Quartile
                -0.06                                                                                           Bond          Infra                       NR Gain       Small            Stock Gain
                               1             2                   3    4
                                                                                  76                            Growth        Infra Gain                  REIT          Small Gain       Value
                                                  PD Quartile
                                                                                                                Growth Gain   Natural Resources (NR)      REIT Gain     Stock            Value Gain
                                                   FIGURE D.4: Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile

                                           2-Factor                                                                                      Elastic Net

                                                                      Panel A: Restructuring
                       Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                          Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile
                                                                                                       0.0125
                 0.1                                                                                   0.0100




                                                                                       a Coefficient
                                                                                                       0.0075
a Coefficient




                 0.0                                                                                   0.0050
                                                                                                       0.0025
                -0.1                                                                                   0.0000
                                                                                                                         1                   2                  3                       4
                                                                                                                                                 PD Quartile
                              1             2                    3     4                                                     Bond        Growth Gain    REIT        Small Gain     Value
                                                  PD Quartile
                                                                                                                             Growth      Infra          Small       Stock


                                                                      Panel B: Fund of Funds
                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile

                 0.02
                                                                                       a Coefficient



                                                                                                       0.010
                 0.01
a Coefficient




                 0.00                                                                                  0.005

                -0.01
                                                                                                       0.000
                -0.02                                                                                                   1                   2                   3                       4
                                                                                                                                                 PD Quartile
                               1             2                   3     4                                                      Growth Gain        REIT Gain   Stock Gain         Value
                                                   PD Quartile



                                                                           Panel C: Debt Fund
                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                         Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile
                 0.02
                                                                                                       0.0075
                                                                                       a Coefficient




                 0.01
                                                                                                       0.0050
                 0.00
a Coefficient




                                                                                                       0.0025
                -0.01
                                                                                                       0.0000
                -0.02                                                                                                    1                   2                  3                       4
                                                                                                                                                 PD Quartile
                -0.03
                               1             2                   3     4                                                              Growth Gain      REIT Gain        Stock
                                                   PD Quartile
                                                                                                                                      REIT             Small Gain       Value


                                                                     Panel D: Natural Resources
                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile                                                        Factor Exposure by P/D Quartile

                                                                                                       0.009
                                                                                       a Coefficient




                 0.00
                                                                                                       0.006
a Coefficient




                -0.02                                                                                  0.003

                                                                                                       0.000
                -0.04                                                                                                   1                   2                   3                       4
                                                                                                                                                 PD Quartile
                               1             2                   3     4
                                                                                  77                            Growth Gain                NR Gain       Small           Stock Gain         Value Gain
                                                   PD Quartile
                                                                                                                Natural Resources (NR)     REIT Gain     Small Gain      Value
                                    FIGURE D.5: Expected Returns by Vintage for Additional Categories

                                                 2-Factor                                                                                     Elastic Net

                                                                               Panel A: Restructuring
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                                   Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                                         0.25
                   0.20                                                                                         0.20
                   0.15                                                                                         0.15
Expected Return




                                                                                             Expected Return
                   0.10                                                                                         0.10
                   0.05                                                                                         0.05
                   0.00                                                                                         0.00
                  -0.05                                                                                        -0.05
                  -0.10                                                                                        -0.10
                  -0.15                                                                                        -0.15
                  -0.20                                                                                        -0.20
                  -0.25                                                                                        -0.25
                       1980               1990           2000           2010                                        1980               1990           2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                      Vintage

                                                                               Panel B: Fund of Funds
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                                   Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                                         0.25

                   0.20                                                                                         0.20
Expected Return




                                                                                             Expected Return




                   0.15                                                                                         0.15

                   0.10                                                                                         0.10

                   0.05                                                                                         0.05

                   0.00                                                                                         0.00

                  -0.05                                                                                        -0.05
                       1980               1990           2000           2010                                        1980               1990           2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                      Vintage

                                                                                Panel C: Debt Fund
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                                   Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                                         0.25

                   0.20                                                                                         0.20
Expected Return




                                                                                             Expected Return




                   0.15                                                                                         0.15

                   0.10                                                                                         0.10

                   0.05                                                                                         0.05

                   0.00                                                                                         0.00

                  -0.05                                                                                        -0.05
                       1980               1990           2000           2010                                        1980               1990           2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                      Vintage

                                                                          Panel D: Natural Resources
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                                   Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                                         0.25

                   0.20                                                                                         0.20
Expected Return




                                                                                             Expected Return




                   0.15                                                                                         0.15

                   0.10                                                                                         0.10

                   0.05                                                                                         0.05

                   0.00                                                                                         0.00

                  -0.05                                                                                        -0.05
                      1980                    1990               2000            2010   78                          1980               1990           2000    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                      Vintage
   FIGURE D.6: Profit Comparison for Alternate Categories

    2-Factor                                  Elastic Net
Panel A: Restructuring                    Panel B: Fund of Funds




 Panel C: Debt Fund                      Panel D: Natural Resources




                            79
                                               FIGURE D.7: Profits Over Time for Additional Categories

                                                   2-Factor                                                                                         Elastic Net

                                                                                     Panel A: Restructuring
                 Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                                   Average Fund-level profit by Vintage
             3

                                                                                                                  1.0

             2
RAP Profit




                                                                                                    RAP Profit
                                                                                                                  0.5

             1
                                                                                                                  0.0


             0                                                                                                   -0.5

                  1990                1995              2000               2005         2010                             1990             1995             2000            2005    2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                                            Vintage

                                                                                     Panel B: Fund of Funds
                        Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                            Average Fund-level profit by Vintage
                                                                                                                  0.6

                 0.50
                                                                                                                  0.3
RAP Profit




                                                                                                    RAP Profit




                 0.25
                                                                                                                  0.0
                 0.00
                                                                                                                 -0.3
             -0.25

                                                                                                                 -0.6
                                            1990                    2000                2010                                              1990                      2000           2010
                                                          Vintage                                                                                         Vintage

                                                                                      Panel C: Debt Fund
                        Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                             Average Fund-level profit by Vintage


                 0.50
                                                                                                                  0.00

                 0.25
RAP Profit




                                                                                                    RAP Profit




                                                                                                                 -0.25
                 0.00


             -0.25                                                                                               -0.50


             -0.50
                                     2001               2004               2007         2010                                          2001               2004              2007    2010
                                                         Vintage                                                                                          Vintage

                                                                                   Panel D: Natural Resources
                   Average Fund-level profit by Vintage                                                                 Average Fund-level profit by Vintage
             2.0                                                                                                  1.5

             1.5                                                                                                  1.0
RAP Profit




                                                                                                    RAP Profit




             1.0                                                                                                  0.5

                                                                                                                  0.0
             0.5

                                                                                                                 -0.5
             0.0

                         1990               1995           2000             2005        2010   80                           1990             1995            2000           2005   2010
                                                        Vintage                                                                                           Vintage
                            FIGURE D.8: Elastic Net Model Comparison for Additional Categories

                                                                                       Panel A: Restructuring
                   RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.65                                                     RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: 0.67
            0.15
                                                                                                                             4
            0.10
                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                   K-S PME
Fund IRR




            0.05
                                                                                                                             2
            0.00
                                                                                                                             1
           -0.05
                       -1                            0                                       1                                       -1                           0                                         1
                                                   RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                    RAP from Elastic Net Model


                                                                                       Panel B: Fund of Funds
                   RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.59                                                     RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: 0.69

                                                                                                                             3
            0.10


                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                   K-S PME
Fund IRR




            0.05



            0.00                                                                                                             1



           -0.05
                             -1.0          -0.5                   0.0                  0.5              1.0                               -1.0            -0.5                  0.0                   0.5          1.0
                                                   RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                    RAP from Elastic Net Model


                                                                                         Panel C: Debt Fund
                  RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.7                                                         RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: -0.23

           0.04

                                                                                                                             1.4
           0.03
                                                                                                                   K-S PME
Fund IRR




                                                                                                                             1.2
           0.02


           0.01                                                                                                              1.0


                                 -0.50         -0.25                            0.00             0.25                                          -0.50             -0.25                         0.00             0.25
                                                  RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                      RAP from Elastic Net Model


                                                                                   Panel D: Natural Resources
                  RAP from Elastic Net Model against IRR. Correlation: 0.72                                                      RAP from Elastic Net Model against PME. Correlation: 0.79

                                                                                                                             4

            0.1
                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                   K-S PME
Fund IRR




                                                                                                                             2
            0.0

                                                                                                                             1
           -0.1
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                              81
                            -1                           0                                   1                                            -1                          0                                     1
                                                  RAP from Elastic Net Model                                                                                     RAP from Elastic Net Model
E    Validation on Public Equities
To benchmark out methodology against existing approaches, we attempt a direct com-
parison between our strip approach to valuation and the return factor approach of Fama
and French (1992). We sort stocks based on their Fama and French (1992) factor exposure,
and find that portfolios with high factor exposure in the preceding period, also have high
factor exposure as measured using our strip approach.
    We first sort stocks into portfolios based on a rolling 60-month regressing using the
Fama and French (1992) factors. We select CRSP stocks which pay out dividends on at
least 60% of periods to ensure a more comparable sample against Buyout deals.15 In each
quarter, we sort all stocks into portfolios on the basis of their factor exposure. We generate
five portfolios sorted along HML, five portfolios sorted along SMB, and five portfolios
sorted along exposure to the excess market return (Mkt) in each quarter of our sample.
    Next, we look forward for the subsequent 15 years of data, matching our sample selec-
tion in Private Equity. We normalize the price of each portfolio to $1 in the initial period,
following our approach in PE, and measure the equal-weighted portfolio price quarterly
for the subsequent 15 years.
    In Figure E.1 we plot the results of our factor methodology approach, as in equation 7,
on the subsequent 15 years of portfolio prices. In picking factors, we allow for a bond strip
exposure that varies across fund life; and two cross-sectional factor exposures matched to
the portfolios. For the HML-sorted portfolio, we pick a value dividend and value growth
gains strip and allow these to vary across the HML portfolios. We plot the outcome of the
value gains strip across portfolios, which should correspond most closely to the realized
price of the value portfolio. Similarly, for the SMB analysis, we allow for small stock
dividend and gains factors which vary across the SMB portfolios; and for the Mkt plot
we allow for stock dividend and stock gains strips across Excess Return factor-sorted
portfolios.
    Across each of the factor exposures we analyze, we find a strong and monotonic re-
lationship between our factor-specific gains strips and Fama and French (1992) factor
exposure. This exposure is not driven by any mechanical relationship. The Fama and
French (1992) factor exposure is estimated on the 5-year period before we begin our anal-
ysis; while the gains strip exposure is estimated on the 15 year period after this Fama
and French (1992) exposure is estimated. Further, the Fama and French (1992) approach
estimates factor exposure on the basis of stock returns regressed against factor returns.
 15 Our   results are not affected by this assumption.

                                                         82
Our approach measures exposure on the basis of stock prices regressed against realized
payoffs of growth gains strips. This exercise suggests that approach lines up with conven-
tional measures of factor exposure when we have available data, but has the additional
advantage of generalizability to cases in which prices are not observed. We estimate R2 ,
at the individual stock level, of around 0.25, but around 0.84­0.88 at the portfolio level.

           FIGURE E.1: Application of Strip Methodology on Public Equities

                                                            Panel A: HML-Sorted Portfolios
                                                      Factor Exposure by HML Quartile
                                                      Individual Stock R^2: 0.258. Portfolio R^2: 0.88
                       Value Gain Coefficient




                                                0.2



                                                0.1



                                                0.0
                                                              1




                                                                                2




                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                           4




                                                                                                               5
                                                                                           HML Quartile

                                                             Panel B: SMB-Sorted Portfolios
                                                      Factor Exposure by SMB Quartile
                                                      Individual Stock R^2: 0.259. Portfolio R^2: 0.865
                                                0.5
                       Small Gain Coefficient




                                                0.4

                                                0.3

                                                0.2

                                                0.1

                                                0.0
                                                              1




                                                                                2




                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                           4




                                                                                                               5




                                                                                           SMB Quartile

                       Panel C: Excess Market Return-Sorted Portfolios
                                                      Factor Exposure by Mkt Quartile
                                                      Individual Stock R^2: 0.257. Portfolio R^2: 0.838
                                                0.6
                       Stock Gain Coefficient




                                                0.4



                                                0.2



                                                0.0
                                                              1




                                                                                2




                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                           4




                                                                                                               5




                                                                                            Mkt Quartile




                                                                                      83
F                         Burgiss

                                          FIGURE F.1: Expected Returns for Fund Categories in Burgiss
                                             Panel A: Buyout                                                        Panel B: Venture Capital
                          Expected Return by Vintage                                                   Expected Return by Vintage
                   0.25                                                                         0.25

                   0.20                                                                         0.20
Expected Return




                                                                             Expected Return
                   0.15                                                                         0.15

                   0.10                                                                         0.10

                   0.05                                                                         0.05

                   0.00                                                                         0.00

                  -0.05                                                                        -0.05
                       1980               1990           2000    2010                               1980               1990           2000     2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                      Vintage

                                          Panel C: Real Estate                                                       Panel D: Infrastructure
                         Expected Return by Vintage                                                    Expected Return by Vintage
                  0.35                                                                          0.25
                  0.30                                                                          0.20
Expected Return




                                                                             Expected Return




                  0.25
                                                                                                0.15
                  0.20
                                                                                                0.10
                  0.15
                                                                                                0.05
                  0.10
                  0.05                                                                          0.00

                  0.00                                                                         -0.05
                      1980               1990            2000    2010                               1980               1990           2000     2010
                                                       Vintage                                                                      Vintage




                                                                        84
             FIGURE F.3: Fund-Level Profits in Burgiss

Profit Histogram                                   Profits over Time

                          Panel A: Buyout




                      Panel B: Venture Capital




                        Panel C: Real Estate




                       Panel D: Infrastructure




                                85
