                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES A ONE-SIZE-FITS-ALL MINIMUM WAGE CAUSE FINANCIAL STRESS
                          FOR SMALL BUSINESSES?

                                        Sudheer Chava
                                        Alexander Oettl
                                        Manpreet Singh

                                      Working Paper 26523
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26523


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




We thank Ajay Agrawal, Ashwini Agrawal (discussant), Tania Babina, Emek Basker, Andrew
Ellul, Bart Hamilton (discussant), Shane Johnson (discussant), Sari Kerr, Filippo Mezzanotti,
Ramana Nanda, Paige Ouimet, Roberto Pinto (discussant), Antoinette Schoar, Elena Simintzi
(discussant), Scott Stern, Peter Thompson, Liu Yang, Miao (Ben) Zhang (discussant), conference
participants at 2019 NBER Summer Institute, 2019 Labor and Finance Conference, 2019 SFS
Cavalcade, 2019 European Finance Association Conference, 2019 American Finance Association
Conference, 2019 Midwest Finance Association Conference, 2018 Colorado Finance Summit,
2018 UT Dallas Finance Conference and 2018 Workshop on Workforce Development Initiatives
and seminar participants at Deakin University, Georgia Tech, Melbourne Business School and
University of New South Wales for comments that helped to improve the paper. This research
was funded in part by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The contents of this publication
are solely the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sudheer Chava, Alexander Oettl, and Manpreet Singh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does a One-Size-Fits-All Minimum Wage Cause Financial Stress for Small Businesses?
Sudheer Chava, Alexander Oettl, and Manpreet Singh
NBER Working Paper No. 26523
December 2019
JEL No. G33,G38,J30

                                         ABSTRACT

Do increases in federal minimum wage impact the financial health of small businesses? Using
intertemporal variation in whether a state's minimum wage is bound by the federal rate and
credit-score data for approximately 15.2 million establishments for the period 1989­2013, we
find that increases in the federal minimum wage worsen the financial health of small businesses
in the affected states. Small, young, labor-intensive, minimum-wage sensitive establishments
located in the states bound to the federal minimum wage and those located in competitive and
low-income areas experience higher financial stress. Increases in the minimum wage also lead to
lower bank credit, higher loan defaults, lower employment, a lower entry and a higher exit rate
for small businesses. The results are robust to using nearest-neighbor matching and geographic
regression discontinuity design. Our results document some potential costs of a one-size-fits-all
nationwide minimum wage, and we highlight how it can have an adverse effect on the financial
health of some small businesses.

Sudheer Chava                                   Manpreet Singh
Scheller College of Business                    Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology                 Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street NW                    800 West Peachtree Street NW
Atlanta, GA 30308                               Atlanta, GA 30308
sudheer.chava@scheller.gatech.edu               manpreet.singh@scheller.gatech.edu

Alexander Oettl
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street NW
Atlanta, GA 30308
and NBER
alexander.oettl@scheller.gatech.edu




An online apendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26523
1        Introduction

The existence of a mandated minimum wage has been the focus of substantial debate by aca-

demics and policymakers.1 This debate centers on a few crucial questions: Should there be a

mandated minimum wage? If so, what is the ideal minimum wage? Should a minimum wage

policy be implemented at the federal, state, or local level? What is the impact of a minimum

wage on employment and wages? And, who ultimately bears the cost of minimum wage in-

creases: firms or consumers? In this paper, we contribute to this debate by analyzing the impact

of federal minimum wage increases on the financial health of small businesses. By doing this,

we shed some additional light on the costs of one-size-fits-all federal minimum wage increases.

        We focus on the financial health of small businesses, as they are a vital component of the

U.S. economy, accounting for almost 50% of the non-farm GDP. The opening and closing of

small businesses that have fewer than 10 employees account for more than 70% of job gains

and losses in 2018 (Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)). Wages comprise a significant fraction of

the costs faced by many small businesses. An increase in labor costs due to an increase in the

minimum wage may not cause financial stress to a firm if it has the flexibility to immediately

adjust its capital-to-labor ratio or pass on the increased costs to its customers. Or, alternately,

the firm can maintain profit margins by reducing other costs or by increasing productivity. But,

a firm's inability to do so may impact profit margins and financially stress the firm.

        Although labor market conditions vary substantially with geography (e.g., availability, pro-

ductivity, the bargaining power of workers) and despite the significant geographic differences in

the economic conditions (e.g., local product market competition), 14 states in the U.S. have a

minimum wage rate equal to the federal rate.2 In this paper, we study the impact of one-size-

fits-all federal minimum wage increases on the financial health of small establishments located

in states where the effective minimum wage is equal to the federal rate (the bounded states)

relative to those in states where wage rates are higher than the federal rate (the unbounded

states). Further, we study how firm-level, industry-level, and local economic conditions that
    1
    See Belman and Wolfson (2014) for a survey of the vast literature on the minimum wage.
    2
    In addition, 2 states have rates below the federal rate, and 5 states have no state minimum wage requirement.
Since 1981, seven federal changes occurred during 1990­1991, 1996­1997, and 2007­2009. Under the provisions
of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), employers have to pay workers the highest minimum wage prescribed
by federal, state, and local law.



                                                       1
may impact the ability of these businesses to pass on the increased labor costs to consumers,

moderate or amplify these wage increases.

    We use intertemporal variation in whether a state's minimum wage is bound by the federal

minimum wage and the Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) Paydex Credit Score data for approxi-

mately 15.2 million establishments for 1989­2013. Paydex Score is a dollar-weighted numerical

indicator of how a firm paid its bills based on trade experiences reported to D&B through its

4,000 trade exchange participants in the U.S. It evaluates the likelihood that a business will

make payments to suppliers or vendors on time, hence it can affect the availability of credit and

interest rates for small businesses (Barrot and Nanda, 2019). We find that a dollar increase in

the federal minimum wage corresponds to an almost 1.0-point reduction in an establishment's

Paydex Credit Score in a bounded state compared to a similar establishment in an unbounded

state. This 1.0-point reduction implies a delay of 1-2 days beyond the typical payment terms

of 30 days. In our sample, the median establishment will delay its payment by five days, on

average, beyond the payment terms.

    Further, we observe large threshold effects wherein an establishment's 1.0-point decline in

credit score from 80 points (i.e., payment within terms) to 79 points (i.e., payment two days

beyond terms) that arises from an increase in the federal minimum wage corresponds to an

increase in the exit probability by 2.2 percentage points (pp) or a 25% increase from the 8.5%

unconditional annual exit probability.3

    One potential concern in identifying the effect of federal minimum wage changes is that

two of the three increases were enacted during the recession years, i.e., 1990-1991 and 2007-

2009. Broadly, the concern is whether our results can be attributed to the business cycles

at the national level or the business cycles in the bounded states rather than the minimum

wage increases themselves. However, mitigating this concern, we find that the bounded and

unbounded states followed similar business cycles before and after the federal minimum wage

increases. Further, the unbounded states seem to be affected more by the downturns in the

overall economy.

    More broadly, if the federal government's decision to adjust minimum wages is affected by, or
   3
     Note that customer­supplier may renegotiate the terms of credit after an increase in the federal minimum
wage. Unfortunately, we do not observe such data. We may underestimate our effect on Paydex Score, if customer
firms have renegotiated the terms beyond 30 days.


                                                      2
correlated with, some other observable and unobservable differences in the economies of bound

versus unbound states, we may not be able to identify our effect. We control for the various

state, county, and ZIP code-level observable characteristics in the regressions. We also use

them in matching methods to identify the right control group. Further we use state×year and

county×year fixed effects in various cross-sectional tests to ensure that different unobservable

local economic conditions in the bounded versus unbounded states are not driving our results.

   The aforementioned credit score results are robust to using the nearest neighbor matching

method. In our matching method, we use the credit score one year before the minimum wage

increase, and we exactly match establishments in the bounded states (the treatment group)

with the set of possible control establishments within the same NAICS4 industry group in the

unbounded states (the control group). Next, for the exactly matched control sample based

on one year before credit score, we compute the Euclidean distance between the treatment

and control samples based on establishment-, state-, county- and ZIP code-level observable

characteristics. We use (a) establishment-level variables such as sales, employees, employee-to-

sales ratio and sales growth; (b) state-level variables such as GSP and population (both its level

and growth), state political partisanship; (c) county-level variables such as unemployment rate

(both its level and growth); and (d) ZIP code­level variables such as aggregate sales growth,

personal income, and house prices (both its level and growth). Also, our results are robust if

we exactly match on credit scores three years before the minimum wage increases.

   To our baseline results, we also implement geographic regression discontinuity design. We

follow Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010) and control for local economic conditions by analyzing

establishments located in contiguous state-border counties. The underlying assumption for

this identification strategy is that the adjacent counties at state borders have similar economic

conditions in all aspects other than their respective minimum wages. In our estimation, we

include county-pair × year fixed effects, and we also control for time-varying establishment-

, state-, county-, and ZIP code-level observable characteristics. We find consistent results

for establishments in the bordering county of the bounded states: After controlling for time-

varying observable characteristics and time-varying county-pair specific unobservables, a one

dollar increase in the federal minimum wage decreases a firm's Paydex Score by 0.53 additional

points compared to establishments located in the bordering county of the unbounded state.

                                                3
    We also analyze the dynamics of the impact of minimum wage. Before the federal minimum

wage increases, we observe parallel trends in the average Paydex Score for establishments in

both bounded and unbounded states. Within two years of a federal minimum wage increase,

there is a sharp decline in the Paydex Score for establishments in bounded states. Finally,

we observe that the difference between the Paydex Score for establishments in the bounded

and unbounded states converges over the next three to five years. These results suggest that

establishments that managed to survive are stronger on some dimensions or may be able to pass

on some of these extra labor costs to customers over a longer period. Further, our results are

robust to (a) states switching from bounded to unbounded, (b) time-varying, industry-specific

unobservables, and (c) different industry samples.

    So far, we have established the negative impact of one-size-fits-all federal minimum wage

increases on the financial health of the affected small establishments. Affected establishments

may not experience any financial stress if they can immediately pass on these increased wage

costs entirely to their customers. On the other hand, any constraints faced by small businesses in

passing on their wage costs may impact their financial health. In line with some small businesses

facing constraints, we find that establishments within the same industry, those located in the

more competitive counties, and those located in the low-income ZIP codes find it challenging to

pass on their increased labor costs, hence they experience a more significant decrease in their

credit score.

    We also find that small and young establishments, which are more likely to have financial

constraints, experience a more significant decrease in their credit scores. Establishments that

are labor intensive (i.e., they have high labor costs) and those that have an ex ante lower Paydex

Score seem to find it more difficult to absorb minimum wage increases and hence experience a

more significant decline in their credit scores4 .

    Similarly, we find that this negative impact is more pronounced in industries that employ

more minimum wage workers (e.g., restaurants, retail), but it is not limited to these industries.
   4
     In our cross-sectional tests, we absorb state×year or sometime county×year fixed effects. So, all our cross-
sectional regressions incorporate time-varying unobservables at the state or county level that may be associated
with the timing of federal minimum wage change. While some large firms may cut down job hours, or close
locations to rebalance their workforce (Gopalan, Hamilton, Kalda, and Sovich, 2018), our sample is restricted to
small businesses and excludes multi-establishment firms. The scope of our analysis is also limited by the lack of
detailed data on worker hours. Our estimates can be considered a lower bound in case some businesses cut work
hours to maintain the labor costs.


                                                       4
One possible explanation may include a spillover effect on other sectors. Barrot and Nanda

(2019) find that accelerated payments by the federal government to small business contractors

can have a significant positive impact on employment. However, it is difficult to document

spillover effects on suppliers or vendors because of limitations on data on the input­output

matrix and on the network of a firm's vendors and suppliers for the very small firms that we

analyze.

   Next, we test the implications of lower credit scores on loans granted. Using data from the

Small Business Administration (SBA) for almost one million small business guaranteed loans,

we find that for a one dollar increase in the federal minimum wage, the loan amount reduces by

9% more for establishments in bounded states compared to those in unbounded states, where

the median loan size is $100,000. We also find that establishments located in bounded states

are 12% more likely to default on bank loans compared to those in unbounded states around

the federal minimum wage increases.

   We conduct a county­industry­level entry­exit analysis by calculating the exit and entry

rates of businesses within each county for each NAICS5 industry. We find significant increases

in the exit rates and significant reductions in the entry rates for counties in the bounded states

one year after the federally mandated minimum wage increase. The results are dominated by

restaurants, businesses with no Paydex scores and those employing fewer than 10 workers. Our

results are consistent with Luca and Luca (2018), who find that a minimum wage increase leads

to higher exit rates for restaurants that have a lower rating.

   Finally, we test whether the financial burden on businesses has any aggregate real implica-

tions. We utilize publicly available county­industry­level employment and establishment data

from the BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) database. We find that

aggregate employment declines significantly more for restaurants (9.5%) and for retail busi-

nesses (8.2%) in bounded states. Also, the negative effect is prominent in counties with lower

personal income. We find similar results for the aggregate number of establishments. Overall,

our results document the unintended effect of a federally imposed uniform rule that increases the

minimum wage in areas where businesses may not be able to absorb the increased cost of labor

and thereby experience financially stressed or may even default on debt and cut employment.

   Our study is related to the recent work that examines the effect of minimum wages on the

                                                5
entry and exit of restaurants (Aaronson, French, Sorkin, and To, 2018; Luca and Luca, 2018).

Consistent with the above studies, we do find that the increase in minimum wages leads to a

higher exit risk for affected small businesses. However, we can characterize the effect based on

the firm, the geography and the industry's ability to absorb higher wage costs or to pass on the

costs to consumers. Further, we provide comprehensive evidence on the impact of one-size-fits-

all federal minimum wage increases on a large number of industries. We can also provide direct

evidence of financial stress, i.e., credit score data, for 15 million small businesses in the U.S.

       We contribute to the voluminous literature on the effect of minimum wages on employment

(Katz and Krueger, 1992; Card and Krueger, 1994; Neumark and Wascher, 2000; Card and

Krueger, 2000; Dube, Lester, and Reich, 2010; Giuliano, 2013; Sorkin, 2015; Meer and West,

2015; Cengiz, Dube, Lindner, and Zipperer, 2019).5 Our study is related to Clemens and Wither

(2019), who use the cross-sectional variation of bounded versus unbounded states to identify the

effect of the federal minimum wage increase during the great recession on the employment and

income of low-skilled workers. Our paper is also related to the effect of labor costs in general and

the effect of minimum wage policies, in particular on firm outcomes such as firm profitability

(Draca, Machin, and Van Reenen, 2011; Mayneris, Poncet, and Zhang, 2018; Harasztosi and

Lindner, 2019) and firm investment (Gustafson and Kotter, 2018; Cho, 2016). Our paper adds

to the literature that analyzes the interactions between labor costs and firm outcomes.6 Our

results also highlight how increases in minimum wages can hurt the financial health of small

businesses.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. We discuss our empirical methodology and iden-

tification concerns in Section 2. Section 3 describes our data and provides summary statistics.

Our main empirical results are presented in Section 4, and we conclude in Section 5.
   5
      For wage dispersion, see Dinardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996); Lee (1999); MaCurdy (2015); David, Manning,
and Smith (2016). For price levels, see Aaronson (2001); Aaronson and French (2007). For personal finance, see
Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012); Tonin (2011); Agarwal, Ambrose, and Diop (2018).
    6
      Increases in the firing costs of workers adversely affects firm leverage (Serfling, 2016), corporate investment,
and growth (Bai, Fairhurst, and Serfling, 2018). Others examine how firing costs enhance employees' innovative
efforts and encourage firms to invest in risky, but potentially mold-breaking projects (Acharya, Baghai, and
Subramanian, 2014). Similarly, reduction in labor unemployment risks allows firms to increase leverage by
mitigating workers' exposure to unemployment risk (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).




                                                          6
2      Identification Challenges and Empirical Specifications

In this section, we discuss threats to identifying the impact of minimum wage changes on the

health of small businesses and our empirical strategy to ameliorate these concerns.


2.1    Empirical Setting and Identification Challenges

While the FLSA mandates broad minimum wage coverage, states are able to set separate

minimum wage rates that differ from those federally mandated. Under the provisions of the

FLSA, employers must pay workers the highest minimum wage as prescribed by either federal,

state, or local law. Adjusting state minimum wage rates is typically done in one of two ways:

(a) legislatively scheduled rate increases that may include one or several increments, and (b) a

measure of inflation to index the value of the minimum wage to the general change in prices.

    A natural starting point for empirical examination of the impact of minimum wages is to

exploit the staggered state-level minimum wage changes in a difference-in-differences setup.

However, estimates in this framework are likely to be biased, as the introduction of state-

level minimum wage increases are likely to occur at non-random times and may be correlated

with local economic conditions. For example, Allegretto, Dube, Reich, and Zipperer (2017)

show that states that increase minimum wages have different business cycle severity, increased

income inequality, and differing composition of their labor force.

    However, not all states voluntarily increase their minimum wages. After the introduction

of higher federal minimum wage requirements7 , states with effective minimum wages below the

federal minimum are bound and must immediately match the federal minimum wage. For this

study, we will refer to states with minimum wage rates that are higher than the federal rate

as unbound (i.e., not bound to the federal minimum wage rate), and we refer to states with

effective minimum wages equal to the federal rate as bound (i.e., bound to the federal rate).

    In this study, we utilize this bounding feature to examine the differential effect of federal

minimum wage increases on the financial health of establishments located in bounded states
   7
     Since July 24, 2009, the federal government has mandated a nationwide minimum wage of $7.25 per hour.
As of January 2019, 29 states and the District of Columbia have minimum wage rates above the federal rate of
$7.25 per hour, with rates ranging from $7.50 to $13.25. Two states have minimum wage rates below the federal
rate, and five states have no state minimum wage requirement. The remaining 14 states have minimum wage
rates equal to the federal rate (source: the National Conference of State Legislatures).



                                                     7
versus unbounded states. There have been three series of federal minimum wage increases over

the past three decades: 1990­1991, 1996­1997, and 2007­2009.8 During those same periods,

there have been numerous changes in state minimum wage policies. At the beginning of our

sample in 1990, the federal minimum wage was $3.80 per hour. In Figure 1, we graphically

show for each state the percentage of years that a given state was bounded in our sample by

the federal minimum wage. Notice that the federal minimum wage is always bounded in states

such as Alabama, Georgia, Texas, and many others. This means that employers in these states

have always had their minimum wage rates defined by federal laws rather than state laws. Our

strategy exploits the fact that an increase in the federal minimum wage rate affects states with

minimum wage rates equal to or less than the federal minimum wage (i.e., bound states) more

directly than states with higher minimum wages.

       In any given year, the exact number of states with a minimum wage rate above the federal

rate may vary depending on the interaction between the federal rate and the mechanisms in

place to adjust the state minimum wage. Before 1987, Alaska and the District of Columbia were

the only two states that consistently had minimum wage rates that exceeded the federal rate.

Since 1987, many states have adopted higher minimum wage rates, resulting in a divergence

between the average state minimum wage and the federal rate. Because the federal and state

minimum wage rates change at different times and in different increments, the share of the

labor force for which the federal rate is the binding wage floor has changed over time, with

many states alternating between being bound and unbound over time.

       Figure 2 demonstrates this variation over time: The bars show for a given year the number

of states with an average minimum wage above the average federal minimum wage. The dashed

line plots the average federal minimum wage (in nominal dollars), and the solid line plots the

average minimum wage in unbounded states.9

       In our baseline analysis, we apply a difference-in-differences estimation to quantify the dif-
   8
     The law for the 1990­1991 increase was enacted on November 17, 1989, with the federal minimum wage
increasing in two waves from $3.35 to $3.80 on April 1, 1990, and to $4.25 on April 1, 1991. For the 1996­97
change, the law was enacted on August 20, 1996, and the federal minimum wage was again increased in two waves
from $4.25 to $4.75 on October 1, 1996, and to $5.15 on September 1, 1997. The most recent federal minimum
wage change was enacted on May 25, 2007, and rates were increased from $5.15 in three waves to $5.85, $6.66,
and $7.25, effective July 24, 2007, July 24, 2008, and July 24, 2009, respectively.
   9
     We limit our analysis to the 1989-2013 based on the availability of Paydex score data.




                                                     8
ferential impact of the federal minimum wage changes on the financial health of establishments

located in bounded states versus unbounded states. We do so by estimating the following

equation:


          Yit = 1 Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t + 2 Bounds,t-1 + Xi,t-1 + i + t +             ist ,    (1)


where subscripts i, s, t index establishments, states, and years, respectively. Our dependent

variable, Yit , is the average Paydex Score, which is our measure for an establishment's financial

health. The Paydex Score is a business credit score generated by Dun & Bradstreet (D&B)

that captures an establishment's payment performance (i.e., whether it pays its bills on time),

and it assigns each establishment a numerical score from 1 to 100, with 100 signifying a perfect

payment history. We explain this variable in more detail in our data section, Section 3. The

expression M W (F )t measures the nominal dollar increase in the federal minimum wage in

year t, and it equals zero in years with no increases. The indicator Bounds,t-1 is a dummy

variable equal to 1 if, at the beginning of fiscal year t, the establishment's state s has a minimum

wage less than or equal to the federal minimum wage. We include establishment fixed effects, i ,

to control for time-stable unobserved heterogeneity at the establishment level, and we include

year fixed effects, t , to control for time-specific macro-level shocks. In addition, we include

a full set of establishment-level control variables (Xi,t-1 ) in our regressions: size (measured

as Log(sales)), age (Log(age)), the number of employees (Log(employees)), and sales growth.

These variables are winsorized at their 1st and 99th percentiles.

   As all of our identifying variation is within-establishment due to the inclusion of i , we can

interpret our main coefficient of interest, 1 , as the differential effect of a federally mandated

minimum wage increase for bounded firms above and beyond the effects of bounding on an

establishment's performance (as captured by 2 ). Our standard errors are clustered at the

state level.

   One critical assumption behind this specification is that it can only identify the causal effect

of minimum wage increases to the extent that the Paydex score of establishments in bound and

unbound states evolves similarly (i.e., we observe parallel trends) before the time of the federal

minimum wage adjustment. We conduct various tests to verify this assumption.

   In addition, two waves of federal government­mandated minimum wage increases occurred

                                                 9
during recession years (1990-1991 and 2007-2009). This overlap may confound our analysis if the

economies of firms (and thus their financial health) in bounded states are more correlated with

the US economy as a whole. As such, our results may be measuring recessionary effects rather

than minimum wage effects if heterogeneity exists between firms in bounded and unbounded

states. To mitigate this concern, we examine the extent to which business cycles vary for

bounded and unbounded states around the time of minimum wage changes. We measure state-

specific business cycles using the State Leading Index provided by FRED.10 For January of

each year, we consider five years before the first federal minimum wage increase in our data set

(1990) to five years after the most recent federal minimum wage increase (2007). We estimate

the following regression model at the state level for the years 1985 to 2012:

                                     5                       5
                        SLIst =            j BDs,t-j +           j U BDs,t-j + s +      st ,                    (2)
                                   j =-5                 j =-5

where our dependent variable, SLIst , is the mean State Leading Index for state s during year

t. The variable BDs,t is defined as Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t and U BDs,t is defined as

(1 - Bounds,t-1 ) × M W Dummy (F )t . The indicator M W Dummy (F )t equals 1 if there is an

increase in the federal minimum wage in year t, and zero otherwise. We control for state-specific

unobserved heterogeneity through the inclusion of state fixed effects (s ).

       Figure 3 plots the OLS regression coefficients of Equation (2) with 95% confidence intervals.

The solid line with circles plots the regression coefficients for bounded states, while the dashed

line with diamonds plots the coefficients for unbounded states. The bold, dashed line indicates

the period immediately before the federal minimum wage change.

       We find that the bounded and unbounded states followed similar business cycles before and

after federal minimum wage changes. Further, if anything, we see that the amplitude of business

cycle swings are slightly more pronounced in unbounded states than in bounded states. As such,

these results provide some reassurance that we can separately discern between minimum wage

effects and effects that arise from economic recessions.
  10
      The State Leading Index measures the current and future economic situation of a given state. The leading
index for each state predicts the 6-month growth rate of the state's coincident index. In addition to the coincident
index, the models include other variables that lead the economy: state-level housing permits (1 to 4 units),
state initial unemployment insurance claims, delivery times from the Institute for Supply Management (ISM)
manufacturing survey, and the interest rate spread between the 10-year Treasury bond and the 3-month Treasury
bill.


                                                        10
         We provide additional robustness to these results by controlling for various state-, county-

, and ZIP code-level observable characteristics that may be correlated with both the timing

of minimum wage enactments and firm health. We present results that directly control for a

battery of local economic conditions in Section 4.1.2. Further, some bound and unbound states

may increase their state-level minimum wages in response to a federal minimum wage increase.

We discuss these changes in Section 4.1.3. Section 4.1.4 presents results from a nearest­neighbor

matching estimator. We present results from a geographic border discontinuity design in Section

4.1.5, where we control for time-varying county-pair specific unobservables by including county-

pair × year fixed effects. And last, we estimate more stringent specifications that include state

× year and county × year fixed effects in various cross-sectional results presented in Section

4.2.

         In summary, conditional on a variety of approaches, we show that after an increase in the

federal minimum wage, firms in unbounded states serve as an appropriate counterfactual to

firms in bounded states, ameliorating concerns about our identification strategy.



3         Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1        Data Sources and Sample Selection

We use establishment-level data for all the establishments in the U.S. from the National Estab-

lishment Time-Series (NETS) Database (Walls & Associates, 2014).11 This database provides

an annual record for a large part of the U.S. economy that includes establishment-level employ-

ment counts, sales figures, establishment failure, market segment, corporate affiliations, and

historical D&B credit and payment ratings.

         This database covers almost 50 million U.S. businesses. Among these firms, 15 million

firms have data on their Paydex scores over 25 years (1989­2013). We exclude establishments

with only one employee (which omits almost 3 million businesses). From the remaining 12.79

million establishments, we further remove non­stand­alone businesses ( i.e., we omit 900,000

establishments affiliated with large firms). In addition, we exclude 3.8 million establishments
    11
     Walls & Associates converts Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) archival establishment data into a time-series database
of establishment information.



                                                      11
in finance, real estate, utilities, and firms in professional services that are less likely to employ

minimum wage workers.12 Finally, to construct our measure of lagged sales growth (which is

one of our control variables in our baseline specification), we need at least three observations,

and therefore we lose an additional 3 million establishments. However, our results are robust if

we include these businesses in our sample (see Section 4.1.3). As such, our final sample consists

of 4.4 million small businesses that survived for three years or more.13


3.2      Summary Statistics

We next provide the summary statistics of our dataset. We first describe our primary variable

of interest, i.e., Paydex Score, then how it relates to various firm characteristics. Last, we

provide summary statistics on state and federal minimum wage changes.


3.2.1      Paydex Score

The Paydex Score is a business credit score assigned by D&B to an establishment. It is a dollar-

weighted numerical indicator of how a firm paid its bills based on trade experiences reported to

D&B through its trade exchange program. D&B acquires its trade data from over 12,000 trade

exchange participants globally in 35 markets, of which 4,200 are located in the U.S.

       The Paydex score compares payments to terms of sale. It is dollar-weighted, and it is

calculated based on the overall manner of payments reported to D&B. The score rates the

likelihood that a business will make payments to suppliers or vendors on time. Like a personal

credit score, it is primarily used to measure the financial risk to lenders, and it can affect the

premiums and interest rates that companies pay when it comes to financing bank loans or credit

cards for small businesses.
  12
      Specifically, we omit establishments in the following industries: utilities (NAICS 22), finance and insurance
(NAICS 52), real estate (NAICS 53), professional services and management of companies (NAICS 54, 55),
educational services (NAICS 61), health care (NAICS2 62), religious organizations (NAICS 813), and public
administration (NAICS 92).
   13
      Crane and Decker (2019) show that the NETS database imputes employment data for some small estab-
lishments. The imputation practice must vary systematically geographically for the imputation to materially
affect our results. However, Crane and Decker (2019) do not find that this imputation varies systematically with
geography. They also do not explore imputation practices in the NETS database for credit information, which
is our main dependent variable. Figure IA2 shows that our results are robust to establishments with more than
10 employees, reducing any concerns that the systematic imputation of credit scores may be driving our results.
We discuss these results further in Section 4.2.2.




                                                        12
      In addition to lenders, the Paydex score is used by vendors, who often deliver goods and

services and invoice a business for payment afterward. As a result, vendors have some financial

risk of not being paid. The Paydex score is one metric that such suppliers can use to determine

whether a new client or business partner might present possible risks going forward. Poor scores

may make suppliers reluctant to do business or may limit the size and scope of the services

they are willing to agree to.

      Figure 4 presents a histogram of observations (left-axis) in each Paydex group, while the

circle dots represent the mean Paydex (right-axis) score in each bucket of our sample. Note

that a score of 80 and above means that the business makes its payments on time or in advance.

A perfect score of 100 implies the business makes payments one month in advance of when they

are due. From the NETS dataset, we observe the minimum and maximum Paydex score for

a given establishment over a given year. We take the mean of the two measures and create

the Average Paydex Score. In our sample, the median of Average Paydex Score is about 76.5,

which implies that the median business makes payments five days after the terms, where the

term is typically 30 days.14


3.2.2     Establishment Characteristics

Table 1, Panel A, provides the summary statistics of our establishment sample. From our 4.4

million small businesses with Paydex scores, we obtain just over 31 million establishment-year

observations. While the Paydex Score is available for only 42.9% of our total observations, we

report information on the approximately 41 million establishment­year observations of firms

that do not have Paydex scores. We do not utilize these data, but we present them here for

comparison. Based on observable establishment characteristics, establishments with Paydex

Score have lower exit rates, more sales,and more employees. In addition, these establishments

are older and more labor intensive (with more employees per million sales), and they compete

in more concentrated industries as measured by a higher HHI index (defined at the 5­digit

NAICS level).
 14
      See https://www.dandb.com/glossary/paydex/ for more information.




                                                   13
3.2.3    Minimum Wage

Table 1, Panel B, reports the summary statistics on federal and state minimum wages and

their growth rate. We find that the average annual state minimum wage is about $5.50 per

hour, which is above the federal minimum wage, i.e., $5.25 per hour. This is especially true for

unbounded states. Note that, whenever the federal government decides to change the minimum

wage, the average level of change or growth is much higher for bounded states than unbounded

states. For example, the median %M W (S ) is about 6.0% for bounded states but only 3.0%

for unbounded states.



4     Results

4.1     Do Increases in the Federal Minimum Wage Affect Small Business Pay-
        dex Scores?

In this subsection, we discuss our baseline Paydex results (Section 4.1.1) for Equation (1). We

show that our results are robust to the inclusion of controls for local economic conditions (Sec-

tion 4.1.2), for variations in the baseline model (Section 4.1.3). We construct a nearest-neighbor

matched sample (Section 4.1.4) and utilize bordering county discontinuity tests (Section 4.1.5)

to further addresses endogeneity concerns. In addition, we conduct tests for pre- and post-

minimum wage change dynamics (Section 4.1.6).


4.1.1    Baseline Results

We begin our analysis by plotting the average Paydex Score for establishments in bounded states

and unbounded states around the years before and after federal minimum wage increases. Figure

5 plots the average score with a 95% confidence interval. The solid line with circled data points

plots the average Paydex Score for establishments located in bounded states, while the dashed

line with diamond data points plots the average of the Paydex Score for unbounded states. The

bold dashed line indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum wage change.

As can be seen, the average Paydex Score for bounded and unbounded states followed parallel

trends before the minimum wage enactment. Second, within two years of a federal minimum



                                               14
wage increase, there is a sharp decline in the Paydex Score for establishments in bounded

states. Finally, we observe that the difference between the Paydex Score for establishments in

the bounded and unbounded states converges after three to five years. One possible reason may

be that stronger establishments survive and may be able to pass on the increased labor cost to

their customers. We explore this issue in Section 4.1.6.

   It should be noted that these results do not take in to account firm-specific and time-

specific unobserved heterogeneity that may lead to lower credit scores for establishments lo-

cated in bounded states. To account for this potential unobserved heterogeneity we estimate

our difference-in-differences Equation (1). Note that the interaction term, 1 , as captured

by Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t , identifies the differential effect of federally mandated minimum

wage increases over and above the effect of state-level variation caused by a change in the

state-determined minimum wage and the changing status of the focal state from bound to un-

bound (or vice versa). As previously discussed in Section 2.1, the number of states that are

bound by the federal minimum wage changes across time. In addition, we also control for

establishment fixed effects and year fixed effects to ensure that identification arises only from

within-establishment variation after controlling for macroeconomic trends. We report these

results in Table 2.

   In Columns (1)­(3), we estimate the regression equation without establishment controls,

while Columns (4)­(6) report results with a full set of establishment-level control variables

(Xi,t-1 ) in our regressions: size (measured as ln Sales), age (ln Age), number of employees

(ln Employees), and sales growth, all of which are winsorized at their 1st and 99th percentiles.

Columns (1) and (4) report results for a minimum Paydex score during the year, while Columns

(2) and (5) report results for a maximum Paydex score during the year. In Columns (3) and (6),

we report results for an average score during the year, measured as the mean of the minimum

and maximum score during the year.

   Our preferred specification presented in Column (6). It shows a point estimate of -0.73,

implying that for a dollar increase in the federal minimum wage, establishments in bounded

states experience a reduction in their average Paydex Score by 0.73 points relative to changes

in the Paydex Score of establishments in unbounded states. The median establishment in our

sample has a Paydex Score of 76.5, which implies that the median establishment pays bills an

                                               15
average of five days beyond the term. As such, a reduction in the Paydex Score by 0.73 points

to 75.77 points implies a delay of 6 days beyond the term (or a 20% increase in delay).


4.1.2   Is the Impact of Federal Minimum Wage Increases on Paydex Scores Driven

        by Local Economic Conditions?

The decision by state governments to set their minimum wages at (or above) the federal level

may not be random. States that increase their minimum wages tend to differ in their business

cycle severity, their economic inequality, and the composition of their labor force (Allegretto,

Dube, Reich, and Zipperer, 2017). In this section, we test for state-level variables that may

affect a state's decision to keep minimum wages at the federal level.

   Table IA1 reports the results of our regression of the bound dummy on state-level economic

conditions and political partisanship. We find that states with large populations and states

with Democratically controlled senates are more likely to keep state minimum wages above

the federal minimum wage. Hence, in later results, we explicitly control for these state-level

variables. In addition, counties and ZIP codes in unbounded and bounded states may differ

in other economic conditions such as unemployment rate, per capita income, house prices, and

aggregate demand. These factors may influence the credit score of establishments located in

bounded states and as such it will be critical to control for these factors as well.

   In this section, we report results for regression estimates in which we control for various

state-, county-, and ZIP code-level observable characteristics. In Table 3, we present results

that are robust to the inclusion of various state-, county- and ZIP code-level control variables.

In Column (1), we control for lagged state-level economic conditions by including both the level

of and growth in GSP and population. After controlling for state economic conditions, the

negative effect increases from -0.73 to -0.83 and remains statistically significant. In Column

(2), we control for state-level political partisanship, and we find consistent results. In Column

(3), we include the county-level lagged unemployment rate, labor force participation, and con-

temporaneous changes in the county-level unemployment rate. We find that establishments

located in counties with a high unemployment rate (in terms of its level and changes) have

low credit scores. The effect of the minimum wage diminishes to -0.67 but remains statistically

significant.

                                                16
    In Columns (4)­(6), we control for ZIP code-level controls, including aggregate sales growth,

personal income (lagged level and growth), and house prices (lagged level and growth), respec-

tively. We find that an establishment's credit score is positively correlated with these variables.

In Column (7), we show complete robustness to various local economic factors by including

all state-, county- and ZIP code- level controls.15 Although the number of observations is sig-

nificantly reduced as a result of missing covariate data, we continue to find a significant and

negative effect of minimum wage changes on credit scores of establishments in bounded states.

As a further robustness check, in Section 4.1.4, we use these variables to create a matched

control sample.


4.1.3    Robustness Tests

In this section, we test the robustness of our main result reported in Column (6) of Table 2

to various potential confounding factors. We present the results of these robustness checks in

Table 4.

    One potential concern with the interpretation of the results presented so far is that they

may be driven by the entry of numerous small, unhealthy firms into bounded states. To account

for this, we interact all establishment controls with the bound dummy, and we report results

in Column (1). We find that the negative effect declines from -0.73 to -0.70 but remains

statistically significant. In order to address this issue further, in Section 4.1.4, we use nearest-

neighbor matching to construct counterfactual establishments.

    Another potential concern may be that industry-specific, time-varying, unobserved hetero-

geneity in an establishment's Paydex Score is driving our results. We address this concern by

including NAICS4 × year fixed effects in Column (2) instead of year fixed effects in our baseline

specification. Our results are robust to the inclusion of these fixed effects.

    In order to address any concerns about the construction of our sample, in Column (3),

we include all the establishments that we omit from our baseline. We make use of 90 million

observations for 15 million establishments. Although the magnitude falls by 0.10 points, it

remains significant. In Column (4), we include all the industries that we omitted from our
  15
     We calculate aggregate sales growth using NETS data. For personal income we use publicly available IRS
ZIP code-level individual income data, and we use Zillow's house price index at the ZIP code-level.



                                                    17
baseline sample, and we find similar results.

       In our baseline specification, we excluded multi­establishment firms since they are typically

larger, they are different from single­establishment firms, and they are less likely to be affected

by minimum wage increases. In Column (5), we include multi-establishment businesses, and we

find that our negative effect reduces the magnitude but remains statistically significant at the

1% level. In Column (6), we report results for businesses connected with multiple­establishment

firms. We find an almost insignificant effect on their credit scores.

       In Columns (7) and (8), we test the robustness of our baseline results to our definition of

minimum wage changes. We define M W Dummy (F )t as an indicator variable equal to 1 if

there is an increase in the federal minimum wage in year t and 0 otherwise. While %M W (F )t

captures the percentage change in the minimum wage by the federal government in year t,

and equals 0 if no change occurred in year t. For example, in the year 2007, the federal

minimum wage increased from $5.15 to $7.25, which implies an increase of almost 40%. We

replace M W (F )t with %M W (F )t and M W Dummy (F )t , respectively, and we report the

regression results. The regression coefficient suggests a decline in Paydex scores by (0.40 ×

3.85=) 1.85 points. This reduction in score implies a delay in payment by nearly three days.

We find consistent results when we use a dummy instead of a change measure.

       In Column (8), we report the dynamics of the three main federal minimum wage increases

under examination. M W Dummy (F )t Yr1 is an indicator variable equal to 1 that identifies

the years 1990, 1996, and 2007. M W Dummy (F )t Yr2 identifies the years 1991, 1997, and

2008. M W Dummy (F )t Yr3 identifies the year 2009. We find that the effect is negative and

reduces over time. We further explore the dynamics in Section 4.1.6.

       Additional robustness tests of our baseline specification (Equation (1)) are presented in

Table IA2. As shown in Figure 2, many states switch from being bound to unbound before a

federal minimum wage increase. In addition, some bound and unbound states may increase their

state minimum wages in response to federal minimum wage increases.16 In our robustness tests,

we omit all observations in the state­years in which bounded and unbounded states respond
  16
    As an example, in response to the 2007 federal minimum wage increase (from $5.15 to $7.25 through three
consecutive annual increases of $0.70), the state of Ohio increased its state minimum wage from $5.15 to $7.30,
with annual increments of $1.00, $0.15 and $0.30 in the years 2007, 2008, and 2009, respectively. Similarly, the
state of California increased its state minimum wage from $6.75 to $8.00, with annual increments of $0.75 and
$0.50 in 2007 and 2008, respectively.


                                                      18
to federal minimum wage increases. In Column (1), we omit establishments located in those

state­years in which bounded states have increased their minimum wage more than the federal

minimum wage increase. Column (2) omits establishments located in those state­years where

unbounded states have increased the minimum wage in response to the federal minimum wage

increase. In Column (3), however, we omit both types of establishment­years. The results are

consistent with our previously reported results.

   Our baseline specification treats all unbound states equally. Yet, per our empirical strat-

egy, establishments in unbound states should not respond to federal minimum wage changes.

Thus, we can conduct a falsification test in which we regress Paydex Score on indicators that

capture the dollar amount by which the unbound states are above the federal minimum wage.

Consequently, we expected to see no statistical difference between establishments that are in

states whose state minimum wage is $1 above the federal minimum wage from those whose

state minimum wage is $1.50 above the federal minimum wage. We present results from this

placebo analysis in Column (4). We find that establishments located in unbounded states with

 < $1 have a credit score that is 0.58 points higher than establishments located in bounded

states. We find a similar effect for $1 <   $1.5 of 0.58. For states that have   $1.5, we

find slightly smaller differences but this difference is insignificant at conventional levels. These

results imply that all unbound states can serve collectively as appropriate control states. In

addition, the matching estimates presented in Section 4.1.4 and the bordering county estimates

presented in Section 4.1.5 further strengthen our counterfactual analysis through more stringent

control group construction.


4.1.4   Addressing Selection on Levels or Trends in Observable Characteristics:

        Nearest­Neighbor Matching

As we discussed in the previous section, a critical concern for the identification of our results

arises if establishments in unbounded states do not serve as appropriate controls for establish-

ments in bounded states. For example, they may differ in terms of financial health or some

other observable characteristics. To control for this potential selection on observable character-

istics, we utilize a narrow event window, and in the pre-event year, we match establishments

in the bounded states (treatment group) with those in unbounded states (control group) based

                                                19
first on the pre-shock level of, then based on trends in the treated establishments' credit scores

as well as establishment-, state-, county- and ZIP code-level observable characteristics.

   In 2007, the federal minimum wage increased from $5.15 to $7.25, which is an increase of

almost 40%. We match firms in 2006 for this particular series of the federal minimum wage

increases. To construct our control sample, we first use the credit score in the year 2006 and

exactly match establishments in the bounded states (treatment group) with the possible set

of control establishments within the same NAICS4 industry group in the unbounded states

(control group). Next, for the exactly matched control sample, we compute the Euclidean

distance between the treatment sample and the control sample, based on establishment-, state-

, county- and ZIP code-level observable characteristics.

   Table IA3 reports the means of the Euclidean distance based on nearest­neighbor pairs in

2006. Panel A reports the matching balance in 2006 for establishment-level characteristics (i.e.,

credit score, sales, employees, employee-to-sales ratio, and sales growth). Note that by construc-

tion, the average Paydex score is the same for the treatment and control group establishments

in 2006. After matching on the Euclidean distance, we find a decline in the differences be-

tween the means of establishment-level characteristics. At the state level, we match state-level

economic conditions by including both the level of and growth in GSP and population. Next,

we match on state-level political conditions, i.e., we match for state-level partisanship. At the

county-level, we match on unemployment rate, labor force, and changes in the unemployment

rate. At the ZIP code level, we match for aggregate sales growth, personal income (lagged level

and growth) and house prices (lagged level and growth). Note that for establishments located

in bounded states in 2006, we find between 600,000 and 800,000 matched pairs in different

matching models. Finally, in Table IA3, Panel H, we report the matching balance when we

include all establishment-, state-, county-, and ZIP code-level observable characteristics. After

matching, the t -stat for the two-sample t -statistic of mean equality is greater than 2 only for

the employee­sales ratio variable, where the differences in magnitude are not very large. We

next use the above matched sample and estimate Equation (1).

   Table 5 reports the results from our baseline regression Equation (1) between 2006 and 2013

for the matched pairs. The dummy variable Bounds,t-1 equals 1 if at the beginning of fiscal

year t, state s has a state minimum wage less than or equal to the federal minimum wage.

                                               20
The expression M W (F )t is the dollar increase in the federal minimum wage in 2007, 2008,

and 2009, otherwise zero. Therefore, the interaction­term, Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t , identifies

the differential effect of federally mandated minimum wage increases over and above the effect

of state-level variation caused by a change in state-determined minimum wages and changing

status from bound to unbound or vice versa. In Columns (2) - (8), we add the matching

variables as controls (with increasing granularity) to the establishment-level controls already

present in Column (1). In addition, we also include matched-pair fixed effects and year fixed

effects. Notice that for the matched sample, we find consistent results in all specifications, and

the magnitude in Column (8) matches our baseline estimates.

   One concern with our interpretation of our results as causal is that even if we match estab-

lishments on levels of Paydex Score, establishments may follow distinct trends before the federal

minimum wage increases. We address this concern by exactly matching, in 2005 and 2006, the

average Paydex score for establishments in the bounded states (treatment group) with the pos-

sible set of control establishments within the same NAICS4 industry group in the unbounded

states (control group). We then match establishment-, state-, county-, and ZIP code-level ob-

servable characteristics. Table IA4, Panel A, reports the regression results for sample firms in

2005-2013. In Panel B, we restrict our sample to 2006-2013. As a further test of robustness, we

attempt exact matching on Paydex Score in 2004, 2005, and 2006. Panel C and Panel D report

the regression results. In all these tests, the regression coefficient on Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t

is negative and statistically significant. Meanwhile, the magnitude of the estimate decreases

because it requires the sample firms to have more than three observations before the minimum

wage increase and thus introduces some survivor bias, which will be positively associated with

an establishment's Paydex Score.

   The results suggest that for establishments in the bounded state, after a one dollar increase

in the federal minimum wage, the Paydex Score declines by an additional 0.75 points, compared

to similar establishments located in the unbounded state. We conclude that selection on the

levels and trends in the observable characteristics that we consider is not driving our main

results.




                                               21
4.1.5      Controlling for Local Economic Conditions: Bordering Counties

We have already included some observable local economic conditions in the nearest­neighbor

matching exercise in Section 4.1.4. We attempt to further control for local economic conditions

by analyzing the establishments located in the contiguous counties next to state borders. The

underlying assumption for this identification strategy requires that the adjacent counties at

state borders have similar economic conditions along all dimensions other than the minimum

wage.

       Consistent with our analysis in Section 4.1.4, we utilize the federal minimum wage increase of

2007 and test how establishments located in the contiguous counties of bounded and unbounded

states are effected. We follow Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010) and identify 1,135 unique con-

tiguous counties at state borders. For 2006, we found 497 unique contiguous counties and 982

county pairs in which across the state border, one state was bounded by the federally mandated

minimum wage and the other was not. We start our analysis with the establishments in 2006

that are located in county pairs in which bounded states bordered on unbounded states. Then,

we track their Paydex Score from 2004 to 2009. As previously discussed, in 2007, the federal

minimum wage increased from $5.15 to $7.25, with equal annual increments of $0.70 in 2007,

2008, and 2009. To ensure sufficient variation in the treatment and control groups after this

federal minimum wage increase, we drop county pairs for which the 2006 difference between the

state minimum wage and federal minimum wage is less than $0.70.

       We estimate Equation (1) and include county pair × year fixed effects to control for any

time-varying county pair­level unobservables. We also control for time-varying establishment-,

state-, county-, and ZIP code-level observable characteristics, as in Section 4.1.2. The inclusion

of county pair × year fixed effects and time-varying observable characteristics should satisfy

the identification assumption; i.e., the assumption that adjacent counties at state borders have

similar economic conditions except for their respective minimum wage bounded status.17 Table

6 reports our results.

       In Columns (1)-(3), we exclude establishment fixed effects and thus present extensive margin
  17
    Although some minimum wage workers near state borders may commute across the state border to earn a
higher minimum wage, potentially causing market wages in the bounded stated to converge toward those of the
unbounded state. The potential for these spillover effects implies that our results provide a lower­bound estimate
of the effect of minimum wages in our setting.


                                                       22
results. Conversely, in Columns (4)-(6), we include establishment­level fixed effects, providing

intensive margin results. In Column (1), we find that for establishments in the bordering

county of the bounded state, a one dollar increase in the federal minimum wage reduces the

Paydex Score by 0.53 points more than establishments located in the bordering county of the

unbounded state after controlling for time-varying establishment-, state-, county-, and ZIP

code-level observable characteristics and time-varying county pair­specific unobservables.

   In Column (2), we test how these effects vary based on the distance between the centroid

of the bordering counties. We find that the decline in Paydex Score is larger when the dis-

tance between the centroid of the bordering counties is less than 25 miles, but this estimate

is not statistically significant. Similarly, we test how these effects vary based on the difference

between the minimum wage of the bordering counties. We notice that the declines in Paydex

Score are greater for county pairs with larger minimum wage differences, but again, they are

statistically insignificant. We find qualitatively similar results in Columns (4)­(6) when we

include establishment fixed effects.

   Overall, the results from Section 4.1.2, Section 4.1.4 and Section 4.1.5 indicate that after an

increase in the federal minimum wage, establishments in bounded states experienced a reduction

in their average Paydex Score relative to changes in the Paydex Score of establishments in

unbounded states. These results are robust after controlling for various time-invariant and time-

varying observable and unobservable characteristics that may be correlated with the timing of

the federal minimum wage increase. In the next section, we test whether establishments in

bounded and unbounded states follow similar trends around the time of the federal minimum

wage increases.


4.1.6   Dynamics in the Paydex Scores of Affected Establishments Before and After

        Minimum Wage Increases

As discussed before in Section 2.1, our above results can only identify the causal effect of

minimum wage increases to the extent that the Paydex Score of establishments in bounded

and unbounded states are following similar trends around the time that the federal government

adjusts minimum wages. We test this assumption in this subsection. We estimate the following



                                                23
equation:
                      5                        5
            Yit =           j BDs,t (j ) +           j Bounds,t (j ) + Xi,t-1 + i + t +   ist .   (3)
                    j =-5                    j =-5

   In the above equation, BDs,t is defined as Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t , and all the

controls are similar to those included in Equation (1). The inclusion of the dummy Bounds,t-1

for both pre- and post- window controls for the changing status of bound to unbound or vice

versa. Here, we estimate these interaction terms for the five years before and the five years

after the minimum wage increase.

   We present our regression results graphically in Figure 6. The bar plots the regression

coefficients of the interaction term, identifying bounded states for five years before and after

the federal minimum wage increase, while dashed lines correspond to a 95% confidence interval.

The bold dashed line indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum wage change.

   Similar to Figure 5, we observe that establishments in bounded states did not experience

differential trends prior to the introduction of federal minimum wage changes. This increases

our confidence that the results we present can be interpreted as causal. Second, we note that in

the year of the federal minimum wage increase, there is a sharp decline in the Paydex score for

establishments in bounded states. This is consistent with our baseline results reported in section

4.1.1. Finally, we observe that the difference between the Paydex score for establishments in the

bounded and unbounded states converge over three to five years. One possible reason for this

could be that establishments that managed to survive, which is potentially an indicator of the

stronger establishments, may be able to pass on some of these extra labor costs to customers

over a more extended period.


4.2   How Does the Impact of One-Size-Fits-All Federal Minimum Wage In-
      creases Vary Across Firms, Industries and Geography?

As discussed before, there is significant heterogeneity across firms, industries, and labor market

conditions across the U.S. In this section, we analyze how the one-size-fits-all federal minimum

wage increases impact the cross-section of firms, industries, and geography in the U.S. In

particular, we examine how the minimum wage­induced Paydex Score effects vary with the



                                                         24
sensitivity of the establishment's industry to the minimum wage, the establishment's labor

intensity, its size, age, local competition, local personal income, and ex-ante credit worthiness.


4.2.1   Industry Heterogeneity: Minimum Wage­Sensitive Industries

According to the 2015 Current Population Survey, Restaurants (NAICS 72) and Retail Trade

(NAICS 44, 45) are the only industries in which over 10% of employees earn the minimum wage.

In this subsection, we test whether the magnitude of the impact is higher for such industries.

We estimate Equation (3) separately for each industry and plot the regression coefficient of the

interaction terms in Figure 7. We find that the negative effect is larger for restaurants and

retail, but this impact is not limited to these industries. The pre and post dynamics are similar

to baseline results on dynamics.


4.2.2   Labor Intensity

We next test the differential effect of a federal minimum wage increase on the establishment's

financial health based on its labor utilization. In our data, the median establishment employs

12 employees per $ 1 million in sales. We hypothesize that the negative effect of the federal

minimum wage increase should be more severe for labor-intensive businesses. First, we partition

our sample into quintiles based on labor intensity one year before the federal minimum wage

change. Then, we re-estimate Equation (1) where we interact the equation by each quintile

group. In Figure 8, we plot the regression coefficient on triple interaction terms with a 95%

confidence interval. We find that with the minimum wage increase, the more labor-intensive

establishments are more adversely affected than less labor-intensive establishments.

   As discussed before in Section 2.1, one threat to our identification strategy is whether

the federal government's decision to adjust minimum wages is affected by or correlated with

unobservable differences in the economies of bound versus unbound states, thus biasing our point

estimates. To ensure that local economic conditions in the bounded vs. unbounded states are

not driving our results, we also control for state-year fixed effects in our cross-sectional results.

Table 7 reports the results of our analysis using triple interaction.

   We partition our sample into two groups using the median establishment labor-intensity

one year before the federal minimum wage change. We define M oreLabor as an indicator

                                                 25
variable equal to 1 if the establishment's labor-intensity measure is above median labor-intensity,

and 0 otherwise. We define LessLabor as 1-M oreLabor. For LessLabor and M oreLabor

establishments, we run our baseline model (i.e., Column (6) of Table 2), and we report the

results in Column (1) and Column (2) of Table 7, respectively. Note that we find strong

negative results for both LessLabor and M oreLabor establishments, while the negative effect is

more severe for M oreLabor establishments. In Column (3), we include establishment controls,

establishment fixed effects, and state-year fixed effects. In Column (4), we further include

NAICS4 × year fixed effects. We find consistent results.

   We extend our analysis by calculating labor cost instead of labor intensity. We measure the

establishment's labor cost as the number of employees × average salary divided by sales. We

use QCEW data to estimate the average compensation at the county-NAICS4 level. Table IA5

reports the regression results. The results are similar to the labor-intensity results.

   Further, using both measures of labor utilization, we re-estimate Equation (3) by interacting

the equation with a dummy equal to 1 if the establishment's labor intensity or labor costs are

above the median. The Figure IA1 plots the regression coefficients with a 95% confidence

interval. The solid line with circles plots the regression coefficients for establishments that are

more labor intensive or have higher labor costs, while the dashed line with diamonds plots the

coefficient for establishments that are less labor intensive or have higher labor costs. The bold

dashed line indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum wage change.

   Consistent with the findings presented earlier, the difference between the Paydex score before

the minimum wage increase is insignificant across the two groups, while this difference increases

after the minimum wage increase is enacted. Overall, we find consistent negative results for

labor-intensive businesses.

   As we discussed in Section 3, Crane and Decker (2019) recommend that we should be

cautious when using the NETS data set, especially for small firms. As a robustness test, we

re-estimate Equation (1) where we interact the equation with different labor groups. Figure IA2

plots the regression coefficient on the triple interaction terms with a 95% confidence interval. We

find statistically significant effects for each group. Overall, we find that with the minimum wage

increase, establishments with more employees are more adversely affected than establishments

with less employees.

                                                26
4.2.3   Establishment Size and Age

In this subsection, we test the differential effect of a federal minimum wage increase on an

establishment's financial health based on its size and age. These measures may proxy for the

ability of the businesses to absorb the financial shock caused by an increase in labor cost. We

test this hypothesis and report the results in Table 8 and Table 9.

   Similar to our treatment of labor intensity, we partition our sample into quintiles based on

size (measured by sales) and age one year before the federal minimum wage change. We then

re-estimate Equation (1) where we interact the equation with each quintile group. In Figure 9,

we plot the regression coefficient on triple interaction terms with a 95% confidence interval. We

find that with the minimum wage increase, small and young establishments are more adversely

affected.

   Next, we partition our sample into two groups divided along the median of sales. We define

this size-median one year before the federal minimum wage change. We also define Small

by an indicator variable equal to 1 if an establishment's sales are below median sales, and 0

otherwise. We define Large as 1-Small. For Small and Large establishments, we run our

baseline model (i.e., Column (6) of Table 2), and we report the results in Column (1) and

Column (2), respectively. Note that we find strong negative results for both Small and Large

establishments, while the negative effect is more for Small establishments.

   In Column (3), we include establishment controls, establishment fixed effects, and state-year

fixed effects. We are able to hold all state­year­ specific heterogeneity constant through the

inclusion of these state-year fixed effects, and we identify our triple interaction effect through

within state­year across firm-size variation by interacting Small with our main coefficient

(Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t ) from Equation (1). We find that the effect is stronger for

small establishments relative to large establishments within the bounded states. Finally, in

Column (4), we further strengthen the veracity of our results by including NAICS4 × year

fixed effects to absorb any industry­year­specific heterogeneity that may exist.

   We conduct the same analysis for establishment age, and we report our results in Table 9.

We find similar results: Younger firms experience larger decreases in their Paydex Score than

older firms.



                                               27
4.2.4   Local Product Market Competition

With the increase in labor cost, the cost of goods sold (COGS) increases for businesses. If

establishments can completely and immediately pass on these increased costs to their customers,

then they may not feel any additional financial stress as a result. In this subsection, we test

this possibility by examining the relative local competitiveness in a given firm's industry. The

establishments in our sample are relatively small businesses, and local competition determines

their cash flows. We expect that an establishment within the same industry and located in a

less competitive neighborhood may find it easy to pass on the increased labor costs compared

to other establishments, and they may experience a smaller reduction in Paydex scores.

   To test the effect of local competition on a firm's ability to pass on these costs, we measure

local product market competition using the HHI index, measured at the NAICS5-county-year.

To create the HHI index we use the full set of 50 million establishments in the NETS dataset.

Similar to the previous subsection, we first partition our sample into quintiles based on the

HHI index one year before the federal minimum wage change. We then estimate Equation (1)

and interact our main coefficient with each quintile group. In Figure 9, we plot the regression

coefficient on triple interaction terms with a 95% confidence interval. We find that with a

minimum wage increase, establishments in more competitive locations are adversely affected,

while establishments in less competitive locations are not negatively affected at all.

   We also partition our sample into two groups and split the HHI index at its median one

year before the federal minimum wage change. We define HighCompetition as an indicator

variable equal to 1 if an establishment's NAICS5-county-year HHI measure is below the median

HHI, and 0 otherwise. We define LowCompetition as 1-HighCompetition. For establishments

in HighCompetition and LowCompetition industry­county­years, we run our baseline model

(i.e., Column (6) of Table 2), and we report the results in Table 10, Column (1) and Column

(2), respectively. We find that the effect is very strong and dominant for establishments in more

competitive areas.

   In Columns (3) and (4), we include a triple interaction to identify our effect of interest.

In Column (3), we include establishment controls, establishment fixed effects, and state-year

fixed effects. In Column (4), we further include NAICS4 × year fixed effects. As such, our



                                               28
tests effectively compare two establishments in the same industry and the same bounded state,

and we exploit only variation in competition across industry­states. We find a strong negative

effect for establishments located in counties with more competition.

   Overall, these results suggest that small businesses located in bounded states are more

affected by federally imposed minimum wage increases, especially those located in more com-

petitive counties. Thus, establishments may not be able to completely pass on these increased

costs to their customers immediately, and therefore they experience some financial stress.


4.2.5   Local Personal Income

Similar to local competitiveness, the local personal income of a firm's customers may determine

the firm's ability to immediately transfer its increased labor costs entirely to those customers.

The increase in the minimum wage, on one hand, increases labor costs for businesses, but at

the same time, it increases the per capita local income. If businesses can pass on these costs to

customers in low-income ZIP codes, then we should not find a decline in their Paydex scores.

Otherwise, we should expect a more negative effect in a low-income neighborhoods.

   To test the effect of local personal income on a firm's ability to transfer these costs, we

use ZIP code­level IRS data on personal income. Similar to the previous sub-section, we first

partition our sample into quintiles based on local personal income one year before the federal

minimum wage change. Then, we re-estimate Equation (1) where we interact the equation with

each quintile group. In Figure 9, we plot the regression coefficient on the triple interaction terms

with a 95% confidence interval. We find that with the minimum wage increase, establishments

in the lowest-income neighborhoods are the most adversely affected.

   Next, we partition our sample into two groups and define personal income one year before

the federal minimum wage change. We define HighIncome as an indicator variable equal

to 1 if an establishment's ZIP code has an above­median income, and 0 otherwise. We define

LowIncome as 1-HighIncome. For establishments in HighIncome and LowIncome ZIP codes,

we run our baseline model ( i.e., Column (6) of Table 2), and we report the results in Table 11,

Column (1) and Column (2), respectively. We find that the effect is very strong and dominant

for establishments in low-income areas.

   In Columns (3) and (4), we conduct this analysis using triple interactions. In Column (3),

                                                29
we include establishment controls, establishment fixed effects, and county-year fixed effects. In

Column (4), we further include NAICS4 × year fixed effects. Here, our tests essentially compare

two establishments in the same industry and the in the same bounded state; we find a strong

negative impact on establishments located in ZIP codes with low income.


4.2.6    Ex Ante Paydex Score Group

In this subsection, we test whether a firm's ex ante financial health affects the magnitude of

the impact of a federal minimum wage increase. In other words, if the business already delays

payments and has cash flow problems, then we expect that the adverse effects will be more

severe for these financially stressed firms. We test this hypothesis and report the results in

Figure 10.

   Figure 10 plots the regression coefficients of Equation (1) with a 95% confidence interval for

different Paydex groups defined one year before the federal minimum wage change. We do find

a significant negative effect on the Paydex score for establishments with ex ante low scores, and

this effect diminishes with higher ex ante Paydex scores.


4.3     Bank Loan and Default Results

As discussed in Section 3.2.1, the Paydex Score is frequently used by lenders to measure the

financial risk of potential borrowers. In this section, we directly test whether minimum wage

increases also affect a small businesses' ability to obtain bank loans.

   We make use of 1 million publicly available transactions of all 7(a) and 504 loans approved

since January 1, 1990, from the US Small Business Administration (SBA). The SBA 7(a) Loan

Guarantee program is one of the most popular loan programs offered by the agency and is the

most common SBA loan. A 7(a) loan guarantee is provided to lenders so they are more willing

to lend money to small businesses that have "weaknesses" in their loan applications. We drop

all canceled loans and, to be consistent with our Paydex sample, we apply the same industry

filters as well. The average loan is about $100,000 with a maximum loan size $0.5 million. In

this section, we test the differential effect of federally mandated minimum wage increases on

the amount of SBA­guaranteed bank loans offered to small businesses. We also consider the

default risk on previously issued loans around the time of minimum wage increases.

                                               30
4.3.1    Loan Amount

We estimate our dynamic regression (i.e., Equation (3)), using logged loan amounts as our

dependent variable. We report our results in Table 12. Column (1) reports results with state

and NAICS4 × year fixed effects. We report only interaction terms five years before and after

the minimum wage increase. We find no difference in loan amounts between the bounded and

unbounded states before the federally mandated minimum wage increase. We find that loan

amounts decrease by 15% one year after the minimum wage increase. This result implies a 9%

decline for a one dollar increase in federal minimum wage. Similar to the Paydex results, the

difference between bounded and unbounded states diminishes within five years. In Column (2),

we add state-level controls for economic conditions, i.e., GSP and population (both level and

growth). In Columns (3) and (4), we replace state fixed effects with borrower ZIP code fixed

effects. We find consistent negative results across all these specifications.


4.3.2    Loan Default

Next, for the loans issued, we test whether the probability of default on granted loans increases

with an increase in the minimum wage. In Figure 11, we plot the regression coefficient of the

dynamics of the differential effect of the federal minimum wage for establishments located in

bounded versus unbounded states on the defaults on bank loans issued before the minimum

wage increase. The figure plots the regression coefficients of Equation (3) with a 95% confidence

interval, where we run the Cox survival model stratified over the loan term and NAICS4 × year

after controlling for loan size. The bars plot the regression coefficients of the interaction term

identifying bounded states for five years before and after the federal minimum wage increase,

while the dashed lines plot the 95% confidence interval. The bold dashed line indicates the

period immediately before the federal minimum wage change. We find that for a one dollar

increase in the federal minimum wage, the risk of default on a loan increases by almost 12% by

the end of the five years after the minimum wage increase.




                                                31
4.4    Entry and Exit of Establishments After Minimum Wage Increases

In the previous sections, we find that with an increase in the minimum wage by the federal

government, there is a differential effect on the Paydex scores of establishments located in

bounded versus unbounded states. This effect is stronger for labor­intensive, small, and young

businesses and those businesses located in low­income and competitive neighborhoods. Further,

we find lower loan amounts and higher default risk on bank loans. In this context, it is important

to understand whether this increased cost of labor significantly affects the entry and exit of small

businesses.

   Note that the Paydex score is one of the metrics that suppliers can use to determine whether

a new client or business partner might present risks going forward. Low Paydex scores may

make suppliers reluctant to do business with a firm or may limit the size and scope of the

services they are willing to agree to. In Section 4.2.6, we observe a 1­point decline in average

Paydex score for firms in groups that have ex ante credit scores between "70-79" and "80 and

above". Figure 4 suggests that about 70% of the establishments in our database have a score

of more than 70, while the average of 80.35 for the group "80 and above" suggests a lumping

of data at 80. Next, we test the importance of making payment "on time" or having a "perfect

score" (i.e., 80 points) and how this score affects the probability of exit. Table 13 reports the

regression results.

   Our dependent variable is Exitt+1 , a dummy variable equal to 1 if the establishment exits

in year t +1. We interact our baseline Equation (1) with SameScoreit (80), a dummy variable

identifying establishment­years in which the establishment does not observe any change in its

score (i.e., 80) from year t -1 to year t. Column (1) reports the coefficient from this triple interac-

tion term, which is negative and significant indicating, that establishments located in bounded

states that do not observe a decline in their credit score after federal minimum minimum wage

changes have a lower exit probability in the following year. Next, in Column (2), we test the

differential effect on establishments that observe a decline in credit score across a threshold.

We find that a 1­point decline in their credit score from 80 to 79 implies a 2.2% increase in

the probability of exit. The unconditional probability of exit is 8.5%. Therefore, a one dollar

increase in the federal minimum wage, along with a 1­point decline in credit score from 80 to



                                                  32
79, increases the exit probability by 25% more for establishments located in bounded states.

   We do not find such an exit effect for the decline in credit scores from 81 to 80 (Column

(3)). However, we find a similar effect for a 1­point decline in credit scores from 70 to 69

(Column (4)), while the results are weak for declines in credit scores from 71 to 70 (Column

(5)). In Column (6), we include all the groups and find similar results. In Table IA6, we

report results in which we replace the SameScoreit (80) dummy with the SameGroupit (80+)

dummy. Here, SameGroupit (80+) is a dummy that identifies the establishment­years in which

the establishment retains an "80 and above" score both in year t -1 and year t. We continue to

observe similar threshold effects.

   Next, we perform an aggregate county­industry analysis. We calculate the exits within

each county at the NAICS5­digit level. We define our dependent variable, Log(1+exits), where

we count the number of firm exits within each county­NAICS5 industry in a given year. Fig-

ure 12 plots the regression coefficient of the dynamics of the differential exit effect of federal

minimum wage for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded states. The figures

here plot the regression coefficients of Equation (3) with 95% confidence intervals, where the

exits at the county FIPS­NAICS5 level are calculated using NETS data. In the regressions,

we include county and NAICS5 × year fixed effects. The bars plot the regression coefficients

of the interaction term identifying bounded states for five years before and after the federal

minimum wage increase, while dashed lines plot the 95% confidence interval. The bold dashed

line indicates the period immeditately before the federal minimum wage change. We find that

the exits increase by 5% one year after the minimum wage increase. We observe that the exit

rate is higher for firms without a Paydex score.

   We find a similar pattern of exits for restaurants and businesses that employ fewer than 10

workers. We also find a similar pattern for the entry of new businesses. Figure 13 plots the

regression coefficient of the dynamics of the differential effect of the federal minimum wage on

the entry rates for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded states. We observe

nearly 4% decline in the entry rate during the year of minimum wage increases, and we find

a similar pattern for businesses without Paydex scores, those in the restaurant industry and

those with fewer than 10 workers.

   Overall, we find that establishments located in bounded states experience a decline in their

                                               33
credit scores around the time of federal minimum wage increases, and they are more likely to

exit in the following year. We also find that in states bounded by the federal minimum wage,

after an increase in the minimum wage, there is an increase in exits and a decline in entries for

all industries, including industries sensitive to the minimum wage.


4.5    Aggregate Employment Results

So far, we find that with an increase in the minimum wage by the federal government, small

establishments located in bounded versus unbounded states observe a decline in credit scores,

lower loan amounts, and higher default risk on bank loans. Further, we find an increase in exits

and a reduction in entries of small businesses.

    Finally, in this section, we test the aggregate employment effect. We test the differential

effect of the federal minimum wage on (a) aggregate employment and (b) the aggregate number

of establishments in the bounded versus unbounded states. We utilize the annual frequency

of the BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) database for each county-

NAICS2 for the period 1990-2013, and we define our dependent variables, Log(1+Employment)

and Log(1+Establishment). One caveat of this data set is that we cannot separate the effect for

small and large businesses. We use this data to test the differential effect based on (a) industry

and (b) local personal income. We estimate the regression from Equation (1) and plot the

regression coefficients of with a 95% confidence interval in Figure 14. We interact the equation

with each industry group and quartile group based on county-level local personal income one

year before the federal minimum wage change. All regressions include county and year fixed

effects.

    We find that with an increase in the minimum wage by the federal government, the differen-

tial effect on the aggregate employment for counties located in bounded versus unbounded states

is negative but statistically insignificant. When we interact the equation with each industry

group, we find that employment declines in restaurants and retail by 9% and 7%, respectively.

We find similar results for the number of establishments. Alternatively, we interact the equa-

tion with each county-level local personal income quartile one year before the federal minimum

wage change. We find a decline in employment and a decline in the number of establishments

for the two poorest quartiles.

                                                  34
    Overall, using aggregate data, we find that with an increase in the federal minimum wage,

some of the establishments located in bounded states may not be able to absorb the increase

in wage costs. As a result, there is a decline in aggregate employment in the affected states,

especially among industries sensitive to the minimum wage and industries located in low-income

areas.



5    Conclusion

The ongoing policy discussion on increasing the federal minimum wage to $15 per hour requires

a thorough analysis of its impact on small businesses, because as wages comprise a significant

portion of their operating costs. Not all affected firms would have the flexibility to immediately

adjust their capital­to­labor ratio or pass on the increased costs to their customers. And, not

all firms can maintain profit margins by reducing other costs or by increasing productivity.

Moreover, despite the substantial geographic differences in labor market conditions (e.g., avail-

ability, productivity, the bargaining power of workers) and despite the significant differences

in economic conditions and local product market competition, 14 states in the U.S. have mini-

mum wage rates equal to the federal rate and are thus immediately affected by a one-size-fits-all

federal minimum wage increase.

    Using inter-temporal variation in whether a state's minimum wage is bound by the federal

minimum wage and using credit score data for approximately 15.2 million establishments for

1989 ­2013, we find that increases in the federal minimum wage worsen the financial health of

small businesses in the affected states. Small, young, labor-intensive, minimum-wage sensitive

establishments located in bounded states and businesses located in competitive and low-income

areas experience higher financial stress and eventually leads to a higher exit rate and a lower

entry rate.

    Our evidence suggests that some small businesses, industries, and areas may face frictions

in absorbing the increased cost of labor due to an increase in the federal minimum wage. As a

result, they experience financial stress or may even default in extreme cases. Overall, our results

document the unintended negative effect of one-size-fits-all federal minimum wage increases on

the financial health of some small establishments.


                                                35
References
Aaronson, D. (2001). Price pass-through and the minimum wage. Review of Economics and Statistics 83 (1),
  158­169.

Aaronson, D., S. Agarwal, and E. French (2012). The spending and debt response to minimum wage hikes.
  American Economic Review 102 (7), 3111­39.

Aaronson, D. and E. French (2007). Product market evidence on the employment effects of the minimum wage.
  Journal of Labor Economics 25 (1), 167­200.

Aaronson, D., E. French, I. Sorkin, and T. To (2018). Industry dynamics and the minimum wage: A putty-clay
  approach. International Economic Review 59 (1), 51­84.

Acharya, V. V., R. P. Baghai, and K. V. Subramanian (2014). Wrongful discharge laws and innovation. Review
  of Financial Studies 27 (1), 301­346.

Agarwal, S., B. W. Ambrose, and M. Diop (2018). Do minimum wage increases benefit intended households?
  Evidence from the performance of residential leases. Working Paper .

Agrawal, A. K. and D. A. Matsa (2013). Labor unemployment risk and corporate financing decisions. Journal
  of Financial Economics 108 (2), 449­470.

Allegretto, S., A. Dube, M. Reich, and B. Zipperer (2017). Credible research designs for minimum wage studies:
   A response to Neumark, Salas, and Wascher. ILR Review 70 (3), 559­592.

Bai, J., D. J. Fairhurst, and M. Serfling (2018). Employee firing costs, corporate investment, and firm growth.
  Working Paper .

Barrot, J.-N. and R. Nanda (2019). Can paying firms more quickly affect aggregate employment? Journal of
  Finance, Forthcoming .

Belman, D. and P. J. Wolfson (2014). What does the minimum wage do? WE Upjohn Institute.

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1994). Minimum wages and employment: A case study of the fast-food industry in
  New Jersey and Pennsylvania. The American Economic Review 84 (4), 772­793.

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (2000). Minimum wages and employment: a case study of the fast-food industry in
  New Jersey and Pennsylvania: reply. American Economic Review 90 (5), 1397­1420.

Cengiz, D., A. Dube, A. Lindner, and B. Zipperer (2019). The effect of minimum wages on low-wage jobs. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3), 1405­1454.

Cho, D. (2016). Downward wage rigidity and corporate investment. Working Paper .

Clemens, J. and M. Wither (2019). The minimum wage and the great recession: Evidence of effects on the
  employment and income trajectories of low-skilled workers. Journal of Public Economics 170, 53­67.

Crane, L. D. and R. A. Decker (2019). Business dynamics in the national establishment time series. Working
  Paper .

David, H., A. Manning, and C. L. Smith (2016). The contribution of the minimum wage to us wage inequality
  over three decades: a reassessment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (1), 58­99.

Dinardo, J., N. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (1996). Labor market institutions and the distribution of wages, 1973-
  1992: A semiparametric approach. Econometrica 64 (5), 1001­1044.

Draca, M., S. Machin, and J. Van Reenen (2011). Minimum wages and firm profitability. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1), 129­51.

Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010). Minimum wage effects across state borders: Estimates using
  contiguous counties. The Review of Economics and statistics 92 (4), 945­964.



                                                      36
Giuliano, L. (2013). Minimum wage effects on employment, substitution, and the teenage labor supply: Evidence
  from personnel data. Journal of Labor Economics 31 (1), 155­194.

Gopalan, R., B. H. Hamilton, A. Kalda, and D. Sovich (2018). State minimum wage changes and employment:
  Evidence from one million hourly wage workers. Working Paper .

Gustafson, M. and J. D. Kotter (2018). Minimum wage and corporate policy. Working Paper .

Harasztosi, P. and A. Lindner (2019). Who pays for the minimum wage? American Economic Review 109 (8),
  2693­2727.

Katz, L. F. and A. B. Krueger (1992). The effect of the minimum wage on the fast-food industry. ILR Re-
  view 46 (1), 6­21.

Lee, D. S. (1999). Wage inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising dispersion or falling minimum
  wage? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3), 977­1023.

Luca, D. L. and M. Luca (2018). Survival of the fittest: The impact of the minimum wage on firm exit. Technical
  report, Working paper.

MaCurdy, T. (2015). How effective is the minimum wage at supporting the poor? Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 123 (2), 497­545.

Mayneris, F., S. Poncet, and T. Zhang (2018). Improving or disappearing: Firm-level adjustments to minimum
  wages in China. Journal of Development Economics 135, 20­42.

Meer, J. and J. West (2015). Effects of the minimum wage on employment dynamics. Journal of Human
  Resources .

Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2000). Minimum wages and employment: A case study of the fast-food industry
  in new jersey and pennsylvania: Comment. American Economic Review 90 (5), 1362­1396.

Serfling, M. (2016). Firing costs and capital structure decisions. The Journal of Finance 71 (5), 2239­2286.

Sorkin, I. (2015). Are there long-run effects of the minimum wage?       Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (2),
  306­333.

Tonin, M. (2011). Minimum wage and tax evasion: Theory and evidence. Journal of Public Economics 95 (11-12),
  1635­1651.




                                                      37
                                                                       % Years Bounded
                                                                             0.95 - 1.00
                                                                             0.75 - 0.95
                                                                             0.50 - 0.75
                                                                             0.25 - 0.50
                                                                             0.00 - 0.25


Figure 1: Bounded States by Year: The map plots the percentage of years during 1989-2013 a
given state has an average minimum wage bounded by federal minimum wage. The dark shade
reflects states that are mostly bounded by the federal mandated minimum wage. Calculated
based on Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                           38
                                                                                     8
        30




                                                                                     7
        25




                                                                                     Nominal Dollars
 No. of States




                                                                                               6
         20




                                                                                       5
 15     10




                                                                                     4
        5




                                                                                     3
                 1989   1992   1995    1998   2001    2004   2007    2010     2013
                                              Year

                         No. of Unbounded States
                         Max Fed MW            Avg. MW for Unbounded States


Figure 2: Minimum Wage and Unbounded States: The bar (left axis) shows by year the number
of states with a minimum wage above the federal mandated minimum wage (unbounded states)
in each year between 1989 and 2013. The dashed line and solid line (right axis) plots the
average federal minimum wage per hour and the average minimum wage in unbounded states,
respectively. Calculated based on Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                               39
                                      State Leading Index
                 2

                 1
  Coefficient




                 0

                -1

                -2

                -3
                     -5   -4   -3    -2      -1     0     1    2    3               4       5
                                Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                  UB_LB/UB_UB                     B_LB/B_UB
                                  Unbounded States                Bounded States



Figure 3: State Leading Index Dynamics: We test the dynamics of the differential trends of
bounded versus unbounded states around federal minimum wage increases. This figure plots the
regression coefficients of Equation (2) with 95% confidence interval. The solid line with circles
plots the regression coefficients for bounded states, while the dashed line with diamonds plots
the coefficient for unbounded states. The bold dashed line indicates the period immediately
before the federal minimum wage change.




                                               40
                                               Paydex Group                       On time or early
                                                                     Within 15 days




                                                                                                     80
                     40                                                                  80.35

                                                                             75.87




                                                                                                                          70
                     30




                                                                                                     Average Paydex Score
                                                             65.39
  % of observation




                                                                                                                 60
                     20                      55.2

                                                 Within 22 days




                                                                                                          50
                          >=30 days Within 30 days
                     10




                                                                                                     40
                                 31.72




                                                                                                     30
                      0
                          Less than 50   50-59         60-69     70-79 80 and above
                                                    Paydex Group


Figure 4: Paydex Group Summary: The bars in the figure plot the percentage of observations
(left axis) in each Paydex group, while the dots represent the mean Paydex (right axis) score
in each group.




                                                        41
                                              Average Paydex Score
                         72
  Average Paydex Score


                         70


                         68


                         66


                         64


                         62
                              -5   -4   -3    -2      -1     0     1    2    3      4       5
                                         Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                                   LB/UB           Unbound
                                                   LB/UB           Bound



Figure 5: Paydex Score Dynamics I: We test the dynamics of the differential effect of the federal
minimum wage on the Paydex scores for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded
states. This figure plots the average Paydex Score with 95% confidence interval. The solid
line with circle plots the average Paydex score for establishments located in bounded states,
while the dashed line with diamonds plots the average Paydex score for unbounded states. The
bold dashed line indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum wage change.
Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.




                                                       42
                                       Average Paydex Score
                   1


                   .5
  Bounded*MW(F)




                   0


                  -.5


                  -1

                        -5   -4    -3    -2     -1     0   1    2    3           4      5
                                  Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                              Diff             LB/UB



Figure 6: Paydex Score Dynamics II: We test the dynamics of the differential effect of the
federal minimum wage on the Paydex scores for establishments located in bounded versus un-
bounded states. This figure plots the regression coefficients of Equation (3) with 95% confidence
interval. The bars plot the regression coefficients of the interaction term identifying bounded
states for five years before and after the federal minimum wage increase, while the dashed lines
plot the 95% confidence interval. The bold dashed line indicates the period immediately before
the federal minimum wage change.




                                                43
                                                                                                Average Paydex Score
                                                                                                       Restaurants
                                                                        .5




                                                      Bounded*MW(F)
                                                                        0


                                                                       -.5


                                                                       -1


                                                                      -1.5
                                                                              -5     -4    -3    -2     -1    0    1   2    3                     4     5
                                                                                          Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                                                                                      Diff                         LB/UB



                                       Average Paydex Score                                                                                           Average Paydex Score
                                                     Retail                                                                                                    Others
                   1                                                                                                          1


                   .5                                                                                                         .5
  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                                                             Bounded*MW(F)
                   0                                                                                                          0


                  -.5                                                                                                        -.5


                  -1                                                                                                         -1

                        -5   -4    -3    -2     -1     0   1    2    3                      4    5                                 -5      -4    -3    -2     -1     0   1    2    3    4   5
                                  Years relative to Minimum Wage Change                                                                         Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                              Diff                           LB/UB                                                                          Diff          LB/UB




Figure 7: Paydex Score Dynamics­Industry Heterogeneity: We test the dynamics of the
differential effect of the federal minimum wage on the Paydex scores for establishments located
in bounded versus unbounded states based on industry heterogeneity. These figures plot the
regression coefficients of Equation (3) with a 95% confidence interval for each group. The bold
dashed line indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum wage change. We
present plots for (a) Restaurants (NAICS2 72), (b) Retail (NAICS2 44 and 45), and (c) Others.




                                                                                                      44
                                                  Labor Intensity Groups
                                  0
        Change in Avg. Paydex

                                 -.5



                                 -1



                                -1.5



                                 -2
                                       Q1           Q2          Q3          Q4        Q5
                                        Labour Intensity Group One Year Before MW Change
                                                       Coefficient        LB/UB



Figure 8: Paydex Score­Labor Heterogeneity: We test the differential effect of the federal
minimum wage on the Paydex scores for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded
states based on the establishment's labor intensity. These figures plot the regression coefficients
of Equation (1) with 95% confidence interval, where we interact the equation with each quintile
group based on labor intensity one year before the federal minimum wage change.




                                                           45
                                                    Size Groups                                                                           Age Groups
                           1                                                                                        0
  Change in Avg. Paydex




                                                                                          Change in Avg. Paydex
                                                                                                                   -.5
                           0

                                                                                                                   -1

                          -1
                                                                                                                  -1.5



                          -2                                                                                       -2
                                   Q1          Q2         Q3          Q4        Q5                                       Q1         Q2         Q3          Q4        Q5
                                         Size Group One Year Before MW Change                                                  Age Group One Year Before MW Change
                                                  Coefficient        LB/UB                                                              Coefficient       LB/UB



                                                     HHI Groups                                                                         Income Groups
                               0                                                                                    0
  Change in Avg. Paydex




                                                                                          Change in Avg. Paydex
                                                                                                                   -.5
                           -.5


                                                                                                                   -1
                           -1

                                                                                                                  -1.5
                          -1.5

                                                                                                                   -2
                           -2
                                    Q1         Q2         Q3          Q4        Q5                                       Q1          Q2         Q3          Q4       Q5
                                          HHI Group One Year Before MW Change                                                 Income Group One Year Before MW Change
                                                   Coefficient        LB/UB                                                             Coefficient       LB/UB




Figure 9: Paydex Score­Heterogeneity: We test the differential effect of the federal minimum
wage on Paydex scores for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded states based
on establishment's (a) size, (b) age, (c) local competition, and (d) local personal income. These
figures plot the regression coefficients of Equation (1) with a 95% confidence interval, where we
interact the equation with each quintile group based on the above measures one year before the
federal minimum wage change.




                                                                                     46
                                                   Paydex Group
                           0
  Change in Avg. Paydex



                          -1



                          -2



                          -3



                          -4
                               Less than 50   50-59      60-69        70-79  80 and above
                                         Paydex Group One Year Before MW Change
                                                   Coefficient        LB/UB



Figure 10: Paydex Group: The figure plots the regression coefficients of Equation (1) with
95% confidence interval for different Paydex groups defined one year before the federal minimum
wage change for bounded and unbounded states.




                                                        47
                                                   Loan Default
                         .6


                         .4
        Bounded*MW(F)




                         .2


                         0


                        -.2

                              -5   -4     -3 -2 -1          0    1   2   3    4   5
                                        Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                                    Diff          LB/UB



Figure 11: Bank Loan Default: The figure plots the regression coefficient of the dynamics of
the differential effect of the federal minimum wage on Paydex scores for establishments located
in bounded versus unbounded states on the defaults of bank loans issued before the minimum
wage increase. The figure here plots the regression coefficients of Equation (3) with a 95%
confidence interval, where we run the Cox survival model stratified over the loan term and
NAICS4 × year after controlling for loan size. The bars plot the regression coefficients of the
interaction term identifying bounded states for 5 years before and after the federal minimum
wage increase, while the dashed lines plot the 95% confidence interval. The bold dashed line
indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum wage change.




                                                   48
                                                  Exits                                                                                  Exits
                                                      All                                                                        Without Paydex Score
                    .1                                                                                    .1


                   .05                                                                                   .05
  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                                        Bounded*MW(F)
                    0                                                                                     0


                  -.05                                                                                  -.05


                   -.1                                                                                   -.1
                         -5   -4    -3    -2     -1    0    1   2    3     4   5                               -5   -4    -3    -2     -1    0    1   2    3     4   5
                                   Years relative to Minimum Wage Change                                                 Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                               Diff           LB/UB                                                                   Diff          LB/UB



                                                  Exits                                                                                  Exits
                                                Restaurants                                                                       Employees ( 2 - 10 )
                   .15                                                                                    .1

                    .1
                                                                                                         .05
  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                                        Bounded*MW(F)




                   .05

                                                                                                          0
                    0

                  -.05                                                                                  -.05

                   -.1
                                                                                                         -.1
                         -5   -4    -3    -2     -1    0    1   2    3     4   5                               -5   -4    -3    -2     -1    0    1   2    3     4   5
                                   Years relative to Minimum Wage Change                                                 Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                               Diff           LB/UB                                                                   Diff          LB/UB




Figure 12: Exits: The figures plot the regression coefficient of the dynamics of the differential
effect of the federal minimum wage for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded
states on exit rates. We define our dependent variable, Log(1+exits) where we count the num-
ber of firm exits within each county­NAICS5 industry in a given year for (a) all industries, (b)
businesses with no Paydex score, (c) restaurants (NAICS2 72), and (d) businesses with fewer
than 10 workers. The figures plot the regression coefficient of the dynamics of the differential
effect of the federal minimum wage for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded
states on exits. These figures plot the regression coefficients of Equation (3) with a 95% con-
fidence interval, where the exits at the county FIPS-NAICS5 level are calculated using NETS
data. In regressions, we include county and NAICS5 × year fixed effects. The bars plot the
regression coefficients of the interaction term identifying bounded states for five years before
and after the federal minimum wage increase, while the dashed lines plot the 95% confidence
interval. The bold dashed line indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum
wage change.




                                                                                   49
                                                                 Entry                                                                             Entry
                                                                   All                                                                     Without Paydex Score
                         .02                                                                                       .02

                          0                                                                                         0
  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                                                  Bounded*MW(F)
                     -.02                                                                                         -.02

                     -.04                                                                                         -.04

                     -.06                                                                                         -.06

                     -.08                                                                                         -.08
                                    -5    -4     -3 -2 -1          0    1   2    3   4   5                               -5   -4     -3 -2 -1          0    1   2    3   4   5
                                               Years relative to Minimum Wage Change                                               Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                                            Diff          LB/UB                                                                 Diff          LB/UB



                                                             Entry                                                                                 Entry
                                                          Restaurants                                                                       Employees ( 2 - 10 )
                    .1                                                                                             .02


                   .05                                                                                              0
  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                                                  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                                                                  -.02
                    0
                                                                                                                  -.04
                  -.05
                                                                                                                  -.06

                   -.1
                                                                                                                  -.08
                               -5    -4    -3    -2     -1    0    1   2    3       4    5                               -5   -4     -3 -2 -1          0    1   2    3   4   5
                                          Years relative to Minimum Wage Change                                                    Years relative to Minimum Wage Change
                                                          Diff           LB/UB                                                                  Diff          LB/UB




Figure 13: Entry: The figures plot the regression coefficient of the dynamics of the differential
effect of federal minimum wage for establishments located in bounded versus unbounded states
on entry rates. We define our dependent variable, Log(1+entry) where we count the number
of firms enters within each county­NAICS5 industry in a given year for (a) all industries, (b)
businesses with no Paydex score, (c) restaurants (NAICS2 72), and (d) businesses with fewer
than 10 workers. The figures plot the regression coefficient of the dynamics of the differential
effect of the federal minimum wage on establishments located in bounded versus unbounded
states on entry rates. These figures plot the regression coefficients of Equation (3) with a 95%
confidence interval, where the entry at the county FIPS-NAICS5 level are calculated using
NETS data. In regressions, we include county and NAICS5×year fixed effects. The bars plot
the regression coefficients of the interaction term identifying bounded states for five years before
and after the federal minimum wage increase, while the dashed lines plot the 95% confidence
interval. The bold dashed line indicates the period immediately before the federal minimum
wage change.




                                                                                             50
                                   Log(Employment)                                                                         Log(Establishment)
                                    Industry Group                                                                           Industry Group
                                                                                                       .1
                   .05

                                                                                                      .05
                    0
  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                               Bounded*MW(F)
                                                                                                       0
                  -.05

                                                                                                  -.05
                   -.1
                                                                                                      -.1
                  -.15
                                                                                                  -.15
                         All   Restaurants      Retail           Others                                          All   Restaurants       Retail           Others

                                  Coefficient            LB/UB                                                             Coefficient            LB/UB



                                   Log(Employment)                                                                      Log(Establishment)
                                    Income Group                                                                          Income Group
                   .05                                                                          .05



                    0
  Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                               Bounded*MW(F)




                                                                                                 0

                  -.05

                                                                                               -.05
                   -.1



                  -.15                                                                          -.1
                         Q1        Q2            Q3               Q4                                        Q1          Q2               Q3                Q4

                                  Coefficient            LB/UB                                                           Coefficient            LB/UB




Figure 14: Aggregate Employment and Establishments: We test the differential effect of
the federal minimum wage on (a) aggregate employment and (b) aggregate number of estab-
lishments in bounded versus unbounded states based on (a) industry and (b) local personal
income. We utilize annual frequency of BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
(QCEW) database for each county-NAICS2 for 1990-2013 and define our dependent variables
as Log(1+Employment) and Log(1+Establishment). These figures plot the regression coeffi-
cients of Equation (1) with a 95% confidence interval, where we interact the equation by each
industry group and quartile group based on local personal income one year before the federal
minimum wage change. In regressions, we include county and year fixed effects. The bars
plots the regression coefficients of interaction term identifying bounded states and the federal
minimum wage increase, while lines plot the 95% confidence interval.




                                                                          51
                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for our sample. Panel A reports the summary statistics of establishment
data. Panel B reports summary statistics for federal and state minimum wages during 1989-2013.


 Panel A: Establishment Sample

                                     All                    With Paydex Score           Without Paydex Score

 Observations                     72,375,466                       31,083,694                   41,291,772

                         Median      Mean       SD      Median        Mean       SD     Median     Mean       SD
 Paydex Score
     Minimum                74       67.35     17.13         74       67.35     17.13      -          -         -
     Maximum                80       73.92     12.74         80       73.92     12.74      -          -         -
     Average               76.5      70.63     13.12        76.5      70.63     13.12      -          -         -
 Exit                        0       0.05       0.21          0        0.03      0.16      0        0.06      0.24
 Sales ($ millions)        0.25      0.71      1.33         0.49       1.41      3.12    0.17       0.34      0.68
 Employees                   3        6.8       9.7           5       10.90     17.68      2        4.29      5.82
 Age (in years)             12       17.7       17.0         17         22      18.77      9        14.5      14.7
 Employee-to-Sales        14.28      18.28     15.39        12.0      15.34     12.99    16.1      20.48     16.30
 HHI Index                 0.07       0.17      0.24        0.09       0.19      0.25    0.06       0.16      0.23




                                                       52
Panel B: Minimum Wage


                                                  N      Median   Mean   SD
     All

     Average Federal Minimum Wage ($ per hour)   1,275    5.15    5.25   1.13
     Average State Minimum Wage ($ per hour)     1,275    5.15    5.50   1.29
     Boundt-1                                    1,275      1     0.74   0.44
     M W Dummy (F )                              1,275    0.00    0.44   0.50
       For M W Dummy (F )=1
        M W (F ) ($ per hour)                    561      0.34    0.35   0.22
        %M W (F )                                561      0.06    0.07   0.04
     Bounded States

     Average Federal Minimum Wage ($ per hour)   939      5.15    5.14   1.09
     Average State Minimum Wage ($ per hour)     939      5.15    5.17   1.10
      For M W Dummy (F )=1
       M W (S )($ per hour)                      399      0.34    0.34   0.26
       %M W (S )                                 399      0.06    0.07   0.05
     Unbounded States

     Average Federal Minimum Wage ($ per hour)   336      5.15    5.55   1.18
     Average State Minimum Wage ($ per hour)     336      6.75    6.42   1.35
      For M W Dummy (F )=1
       M W (S ) ($ per hour)                     162      0.15    0.24   0.26
       %M W (S )                                 162      0.03    0.04   0.05




                                      53
            Table 2: Effect of One-Size-Fits-All Minimum Wage on Business Credit Scores

This table reports results from our baseline regression Equation (1) estimating the differential effect of the
federally mandated minimum wage on an establishment's credit score using the Paydex Score as a dependent
variable.    In Columns (1)­(3), we estimate the regression equation without establishment controls, while
Columns (4)­(6) report results with a full set of establishment-level control variables (Xi,t-1 ) in our regressions:
size (measured as Log(sales)), age (Log(age)), number of employees (Log(employees)), and sales growth. These
variables are winsorized at their 1st and 99th percentiles. Column (1) and Column (4) report results for a
minimum Paydex score during the year, while Column (2) and Column (5) report results for a maximum Paydex
score during the year. In Column (3) and Column (6), we report results for an average score during the year
measured as mean of the minimum and maximum score during the year. Bounds,t-1 is a dummy variable equal
to 1 if, at the beginning of fiscal year t establishment's state s has a state minimum wage less than or equal to
the federal minimum wage. M W (F )t measures the nominal dollar increase in the federal minimum wage in
year t, otherwise zero. Therefore, the interaction term, Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t , identifies the differential effect
of the federally mandated minimum wage over and above the effect of state-level variation caused by a change
in the state-determined minimum wage and changing status from bound to unbound or vice versa. Standard
                                                                                              
errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.       p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,       p < 0.01.



  Dependent Variable :                                              Paydex Score

                                     (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
                                   Minimum      Maximum         Average        Minimum        Maximum         Average

  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t           -0.90***      -0.60**        -0.75***       -0.87***        -0.58***       -0.73***
                                     [0.30]       [0.23]           [0.24]         [0.30]         [0.21]        [0.23]

  Bounds,t-1                         -0.04        -0.00            -0.02          -0.07          -0.03         -0.05
                                     [0.16]       [0.13]           [0.14]         [0.16]         [0.12]        [0.14]

  Establishment Fixed Effects
  Year Fixed Effects
  Establishment Controls
  Adjusted R2                         0.59         0.56            0.61           0.59            0.56          0.62
  No. of Establishments                        4,447,312                                      4,447,312
  Observations                                 31,031,426                                     31,031,426




                                                           54
                                  Table 3: Role of Local Economic Conditions

This table report results from our baseline regression Equation (1) where we include additional controls for
local economic conditions at the state, county and ZIP code-level to our baseline specification, i.e., Column
(6) of Table 2. In Column (1), we control for state-level economic conditions by including both the level and
growth in GSP and population. In Column (2), we control for partisanship at the state level. In Column (3), we
include the county-level lagged unemployment rate, the labor force, and growth in the unemployment rate. In
Columns (4)­(6), we control for aggregate sales growth, personal income (lagged level and growth), and house
price (lagged level and growth) at ZIP code level, respectively. In Column (7), we include all the controls at
                                                                                                                                
the state, county, and ZIP code level. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.
                           
p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.


    Dependent Variable :                                            Average Paydex Score
                                          State-Level        County-Level                Zip-Level                    All
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)
                                   Economic      Political     Unemp.       Agg. Sales   Personal       House         All
                                   Conditions   Conditions      Rate         Growth      Income         Price


    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t          -0.83         -0.71        -0.67         -0.73         -0.88       -0.64        -0.59
                                     [0.23]        [0.22]       [0.19]        [0.23]       [0.32]       [0.25]       [0.20]

    Bounds,t-1                        -0.06        -0.01        -0.04         -0.05         0.12         0.05          0.10
                                      [0.11]       [0.15]       [0.12]        [0.14]       [0.23]       [0.15]        [0.14]
    Log(GSP)s,t-1                    1.25                                                                             0.69
                                      [0.19]                                                                          [0.33]
    GSP Growth    s,t-1               0.11                                                                              0.01
                                      [0.06]                                                                          [0.07]
    Log(Population)s,t-1            -1.12                                                                             -0.47
                                      [0.24]                                                                          [0.26]
    Population Growths,t-1           0.34                                                                              0.19
                                      [0.11]                                                                          [0.10]
    Democratic Governors,t                          0.03                                                               -0.01
                                                   [0.12]                                                             [0.15]
    Democratic Houses,t                             0.11                                                              0.20
                                                   [0.11]                                                             [0.12]
    Democratic Senates,t                            0.21                                                                0.03
                                                   [0.13]                                                             [0.15]
    Democratic Boths,t                             -0.08                                                               -0.07
                                                   [0.14]                                                             [0.19]
    Unemployment Ratec,t-1                                     -0.26                                                -0.28
                                                                [0.03]                                                [0.05]
    Unemployment Ratec,t                                       -0.12                                                -0.16
                                                                [0.02]                                                [0.02]
    Log(Labor Force)c,t-1                                        -0.00                                                 0.06
                                                                [0.04]                                                [0.06]
    Agg. Sales Growthz,t                                                      0.05                                      0.05
                                                                              [0.03]                                  [0.03]
    Log(Personal Income)z,t-1                                                              0.58                     -0.74
                                                                                            [0.11]                    [0.18]
    Log(Personal Income)z,t                                                                0.16                        -0.10
                                                                                            [0.06]                    [0.12]
    Log(House Price Index)z,t-1                                                                        1.28          1.11
                                                                                                        [0.13]        [0.23]
    Log(House Price Index)z,t                                                                            0.35        -0.86
                                                                                                        [0.33]        [0.38]
    Establishment Fixed Effects
    Year Fixed Effects
    Establishment controls
    Adjusted R2                        0.62         0.62          0.62         0.62         0.68         0.64         0.68
    No. of Establishments           4,420,503    4,447,312     4,419,080    4,447,287    3,692,469    3,503,129    3,131,759
    Observations                   30,871,118   31,031,426    30,845,366    31,030,782   18,732,437   21,710,331   15,690,130

                                                               55
                                                Table 4: Robustness Tests

In this table, we report results for various robustness tests of our baseline specification, i.e., Column (6) of Table
2. In Column (1), we report results in which we interact the establishment controls with the bound dummy.
Column (2) reports regression results in which we include NAICS4 industry × year fixed effects. In Column
(3), we do not omit any data and we report regression results on the full sample. In Column (4), we include all
the industries that we omit from our baseline specification. In Column (5), we also include multi-establishment
businesses to our baseline specification. In Column (6), we report results for multi-establishment businesses.
We replace M W (F )t with %M W (F )t and M W Dummy (F )t and report results in Column (7) and
Column (8), respectively. M W Dummy (F )t is an indicator variable equal to 1 if there is an increase in federal
minimum wage in year t, and 0 otherwise. While, %M W (F )t is change measure indicating the percentage
increase in the minimum wage by the federal government in year t, and 0 otherwise. In Column (9), we report
the dynamics. M W Dummy (F )t Yr1 is an indicator variable equal to 1 that identifies the years 1990, 1996,
and 2007, and 0 in all other years. M W Dummy (F )t Yr2 identifies the years 1991, 1997, and 2008, and 0 in
all other years. M W Dummy (F )t Yr3 identifies 2009. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the
                                             
state level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.




                                                            56
     Dependent Variable :                                                       Average Paydex Score

                                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)
                                   Bound×       NAICS4 ×        No           All        Include      Only       Percentage    Dummy         Series
                                   Controls     Year FEs       Drop       Industries   Multi-Est    Multi-Est    Change

     Bounds,t-1 ×                   -0.70        -0.74        -0.63        -0.68        -0.65        -0.24
      M W ( F ) t                    [0.24]       [0.23]       [0.21]       [0.23]       [0.22]       [0.13]

     Bounds,t-1 ×                                                                                                -3.85
      %M W (F )t                                                                                                  [1.33]

     Bounds,t-1 ×                                                                                                             -0.43
      M W Dummy (F )t                                                                                                          [0.15]

     Bounds,t-1 ×                                                                                                                           -0.48




57
      M W Dummy (F )t Yr1                                                                                                                   [0.25]

     Bounds,t-1 ×                                                                                                                          -0.40
      M W Dummy (F )t Yr2                                                                                                                   [0.17]

     Bounds,t-1 ×                                                                                                                          -0.42
      M W Dummy (F )t Yr3                                                                                                                   [0.17]

     Bounds,t-1                      -0.57        -0.03        -0.04        -0.07        -0.07        -0.20       -0.06        -0.07        -0.07
                                     [0.55]       [0.13]       [0.12]       [0.13]       [0.14]       [0.16]      [0.13]       [0.14]       [0.13]

     Establishment Fixed Effects
     Year Fixed Effects
     Establishment Controls
     Adjusted R2                      0.62         0.62         0.59         0.62         0.60         0.44        0.62         0.62         0.62
     No. of Establishments         4,447,312    4,447,312    15,046,496   6,632,327    4,921,821     474,509    4,447,312    4,447,312    4,447,312
     Observations                  31,031,426   31,031,419   90,291,929   45,172,568   37,235,728   6,204,302   31,031,426   31,031,426   31,031,426
                        Table 5: Addressing Selection on Levels or Trends in Observable Characteristics: Nearest­Neighbor Matching

     This table reports the results for an exact/nearest­neighbor match for our baseline regression Equation (1). For the federally mandated minimum wage increase
     from 2007­2009, we use matching methods to identify the control group. First, for the establishments in the bounded states (treatment group) in the year 2006,
     we identify exact matches based on the average Paydex score within the same NAICS4 industry from the unbounded states (control group). For these exact
     matches, we determine the nearest neighbor based on other covariates using Euclidean distance. In Table IA3, we report the balance for state-, county-, and ZIP
     code-level observable characteristics. This table reports the results of our baseline regression Equation (1) for 2006 to 2013 for the matched pairs. Bounds,t-1 is a
     dummy variable equal to 1 if at the beginning of fiscal year t state s has a state minimum wage less than or equal to the federal minimum wage. M W (F )t is the
     dollar increase in the federal minimum wage in year 2007, 2008, and 2009, otherwise zero. Therefore, the interaction term, Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t identifies the
     differential effect of a federally mandated minimum wage over and above the effect of state-level variation caused by a change in the state-determined minimum
     wage and changing status from bound to unbound or vice versa. In Column (2)-Column (8), in addition to establishment-level controls, we also include the
     matching variables as controls. All regressions are with matched-pair fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the
                                                  
     state level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.

         Dependent Variable :                                                               Average Paydex Score




58
                                                  Establishment-Level         State-Level       County-Level                    Zip-Level                     All
                                                          (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                     Establishment      Economic      Political     Unemp.        Agg. Sales     Personal      House          All
                                                     Characteristics    Conditions   Conditions      Rate          Growth        Income        Price
         Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                          -0.79           -0.76        -0.65         -0.56            -0.75        -0.65        -0.38        -0.75
                                                          [0.38]          [0.28]       [0.28]        [0.20]          [0.38]        [0.28]       [0.17]       [0.18]

         Bounds,t-1                                       0.54             0.20       0.58            0.00           0.52         0.72          0.27         0.23
                                                          [0.24]          [0.17]       [0.18]        [0.11]          [0.23]        [0.18]       [0.11]       [0.12]
         Matched-Pair Fixed Effects
         Year Fixed Effects
         Controls
         Adjusted R2                                      0.49             0.50         0.49         0.50            0.49           0.55         0.50         0.51
         No. of Pairs                                   861,804          862,818      861,822      863,184         862,303        837,103      662,299      654,266
         Observations                                  10,699,327       10,809,094   10,664,903   10,770,820      10,683,110     7,120,312    8,234,942    7,780,297
             Table 6: Controlling for Local Economic Conditions: Bordering Counties

This table reports our baseline regression Equation (1) where we control for local economic conditions by analyzing
the establishments located in the contiguous counties at the state borders. We keep data for establishments that
exist in 2006 and utilize their data for 2004 to 2009. See Section 4.1.5 for more details. In Column (1) to Column
(3), we do not include establishment fixed effects, while in Column (4) to Column (6), we include establishment
fixed effects.   1Distance25 is a dummy variable that identifies the county pairs where the distance between the
centroid of the bordering counties is less than 25 miles. Similarly, we define other1Distance dummies. 1$1.5
is a dummy variable that identifies the county pairs where the difference between the minimum wage of the
bordering counties is less than $1.50. Similarly, we define all other      1 dummies. Standard errors are in brackets
                                                                      
and are clustered at the state level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.

  Dependent Variable :                                                 Average Paydex Score

                                               All         Distance        MW           All      Distance      MW
                                                (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)       (6)
  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                     -0.53                                   -0.48
                                              [0.21]                                  [0.07]

  Bounds,t-1                                   0.21                                   0.15
                                              [0.13]                                  [0.08]

  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                   -0.93                                 -0.49
      × 1Distance25                                         [0.17]                                [0.11]

  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                    -0.68                                 -0.28
      × 125<Distance50                                       [0.27]                               [0.14]

  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                     -0.19                                0.55
      × 1Distance>50                                         [0.70]                               [0.24]

  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                  -0.44                               -0.26
      × 1<$1.5                                                            [0.26]                               [0.12]

  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                 -0.75                               -0.30
      × 1$1.5                                                             [0.21]                              [0.09]

  County-Pair × Year Fixed Effects
  Controls
  Group × Controls
  Interactions
  Establishment Fixed Effects
  Adjusted R2                                  0.03           0.04          0.04        0.75        0.75        0.75
  Observations                              1,308,996      1,308,996     1,308,996   1,303,823   1,303,823   1,303,823
  1Distance25 - 1Distance>50                                 -0.74                                 -1.03
  p-value                                                     0.31                                  0.00
  1<$1.5 - 1$1.5                                                           0.31                                0.04
  p-value                                                                  0.39                                0.81




                                                             59
                                Table 7: Heterogeneity: Labor Intensity

This table reports labor heterogeneity for our baseline regression Equation (1). We measure an establishment's
labor intensity as the number of employees per $ 1 million in sales. We partition our sample into two groups
using the median establishment labor intensity. We define the labor-intensity median one year before the federal
minimum wage change, and we define M oreLabor as an indicator variable equal to 1 if the establishment's
labor intensity exceeds the median labor intensity, and zero otherwise. We define Less as 1-M oreLabor. For
LessLabor and M oreLabor establishments, we run our baseline model (i.e., Column (6) of Table 2), and we
report the results in Column (1) and Column (2), respectively. In Columns (3) and (4), we conduct this analysis
using triple interaction. In Column (3), we include establishment controls, establishment fixed effects, and state
× year fixed effects. In Column (4), we further include NAICS4 × year fixed effects. Standard errors are in
                                                                               
brackets and are clustered at the state level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.


 Dependent Variable :                                                      Average Paydex Score
                                                            (1)                 (2)              (3)          (4)
                                                            Less               More              All          All

 Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                    -0.56               -0.84
                                                            [0.22]             [0.26]
 Bounds,t-1                                                 -0.05              -0.03
                                                            [0.14]             [0.13]

 More Labor × Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                           -0.24        -0.24
                                                                                                [0.08]       [0.08]

 More Labor × Bounds,t-1                                                                         0.01        -0.01
                                                                                                [0.04]       [0.03]

 More Labor × M W (F )t                                                                        0.23         0.27
                                                                                                [0.06]       [0.04]

 Establishment Fixed Effects
 Year Fixed Effects
 Establishment Controls
 State × Year Fixed Effects
 NAICS4 × Year Fixed Effects
 Adjusted R2                                                 0.59              0.66              0.62         0.62
 No. of Establishments                                    2,073,441         2,829,919         4,420,503    4,420,503
 Observations                                            15,324,301        15,314,557         30,871,118   30,871,111




                                                           60
                              Table 8: Heterogeneity: Establishment Size

This table reports the size heterogeneity for our baseline regression Equation (1). We partition our sample into
two groups using median sales. We define the size median one year before the federal minimum wage change. We
define Small as an indicator variable equal to 1 if an establishment's sale is below the median sales, otherwise
zero. We define Large as 1-Small. For Small and Large establishments, we run our baseline model (i.e., Column
(6) of Table 2), and we report the results in Column (1) and Column (2), respectively. In Columns (3) and (4), we
conduct this analysis using triple interaction. In Column (3), we include establishment controls, establishment
fixed effects, and state × year fixed effects. In Column (4), we further include NAICS4 × year fixed effects.
                                                                                                      
Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.


     Dependent Variable :                                        Average Paydex Score
                                                     (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)
                                                    Small           Large                  All             All

     Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                        -1.02           -0.46
                                                    [0.30]          [0.21]

     Bounds,t-1                                      0.02           -0.09
                                                    [0.15]          [0.15]

     Small × Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                     -0.54            -0.50
                                                                                         [0.08]           [0.08]

     Small × Bounds,t-1                                                                   0.12            0.09
                                                                                          [0.05]          [0.04]

     Small × M W (F )t                                                                  0.70             0.62
                                                                                         [0.06]           [0.05]

     Establishment Fixed Effects
     Year Fixed Effects
     Establishment Controls
     State × Year Fixed Effects
     NAICS4 × Year Fixed Effects
     Adjusted R2                                    0.69            0.55                  0.62           0.62
     No. of Establishments                       2,073,441       2,829,919             4,420,503      4,420,503
     Observations                                15,324,301      15,314,557            30,871,118     30,871,111




                                                       61
                              Table 9: Heterogeneity: Establishment Age

This table reports age heterogeneity for our baseline regression Equation (1). We partition our sample into two
groups using the median establishment age. We define the age median one year before the federal minimum wage
change, and we define Y oung as an indicator variable equal to 1 if the establishment's age is below the median
age, otherwise zero. We define Old as 1-Y oung . For Y oung and Old establishments, we run our baseline model
(i.e., Column (6) of Table 2), and we report the results in Column (1) and Column (2), respectively. In Columns
(3) and (4), we conduct this analysis using triple interaction. In Column (3), we include establishment controls,
establishment fixed effects, and state × year fixed effects. In Column (4), we further include NAICS4 × year
                                                                                                                     
fixed effects. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,
p < 0.01.


    Dependent Variable :                                         Average Paydex Score
                                                     (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                    Young            Old               All               All

    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                         -0.84           -0.58
                                                     [0.29]         [0.21]

    Bounds,t-1                                       -0.04          -0.05
                                                     [0.14]         [0.12]

    Young × Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                 -0.28               -0.25
                                                                                    [0.12]              [0.12]

    Young × Bounds,t-1                                                            -0.35                -0.35
                                                                                   [0.04]               [0.04]

    Young × M W (F )t                                                              0.62                0.58
                                                                                    [0.08]              [0.09]

    Establishment Fixed Effects
    Year Fixed Effects
    Establishment Controls
    State × Year Fixed Effects
    NAICS4 × Year Fixed Effects
    Adjusted R2                                     0.69            0.57            0.62                 0.62
    No. of Establishments                        2,073,441       2,829,919       4,420,503            4,420,503
    Observations                                 15,324,301      15,314,557      30,871,118           30,871,111




                                                       62
                             Table 10: Heterogeneity: Local Competition

This table reports local competition heterogeneity for our baseline regression Equation (1). We measure local
product market competition using the HHI index measured at NAICS5­county­year. We partition our sample
into two groups. We define the HHI median one year before the federal minimum wage change, and we define
HighCompetition as an indicator variable equal to 1 if an establishment's NAICS5­county­year HHI measure is
below the median HHI, otherwise zero. We define LowCompetition as 1-HighCompetition. For establishments
in HighCompetition and LowCompetition industry­county­years, we run our baseline model (i.e., Column (6)
of Table 2), and we report the results in Column (1) and Column (2), respectively. In Columns (3) and (4), we
conduct this analysis using triple interaction. In Column (3), we include establishment controls, establishment
fixed effects, and state × year fixed effects. In Column (4), we further include NAICS4 × year fixed effects.
                                                                                                      
Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.


 Dependent Variable :                                                           Average Paydex Score
                                                                 (1)               (2)                  (3)             (4)
                                                                High               Low                  All             All

 Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                        -0.76              -0.47
                                                                [0.29]             [0.19]

 Bounds,t-1                                                     -0.07              -0.07
                                                                [0.15]             [0.12]

 High Competition × Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                            -0.24           -0.21
                                                                                                       [0.10]          [0.10]

 High Competition × Bounds,t-1                                                                        0.07              0.03
                                                                                                      [0.04]           [0.03]

 High Competition × M W (F )t                                                                         0.39            0.29
                                                                                                       [0.07]          [0.08]

 Establishment Fixed Effects
 Year Fixed Effects
 Establishment Controls
 State × Year Fixed Effects
 NAICS4 × Year Fixed Effects
 Adjusted R2                                                     0.63              0.62             0.62                0.62
 No. of Establishments                                        2,073,441         2,829,919        4,420,503           4,420,503
 Observations                                                15,324,301         15,314,557       30,871,118          30,871,111




                                                       63
                                 Table 11: Heterogeneity: Local Personal Income

This table reports local personal income heterogeneity for our baseline regression Equation (1). We measure
local personal income using IRS data at ZIP code-level. We partition our sample into two groups. We define the
income median one year before the federal minimum wage change, and we define M oreIncome as an indicator
variable equal to 1 if the personal income in an establishment's ZIP code is above the median income, otherwise
zero. We define LessIncome as 1-M oreIncome. For establishments in LessIncome and M oreIncome ZIP codes,
we run our baseline model (i.e., Column (6) of Table 2), and we report the results in Column (1) and Column
(2), respectively. In Columns (3) and (4), we conduct this analysis using triple interaction. In Column (3), we
include establishment controls, establishment fixed effects, and county FIPS × year fixed effects. In Column (4),
we further include NAICS4 × year fixed effects. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state
                                       
level.      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.


  Dependent Variable :                                              Average Paydex Score
                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
                                                         Less          More            All             All

  Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                               -1.08           -0.61
                                                        [0.37]         [0.31]

  Bounds,t-1                                             0.21           0.03
                                                        [0.26]         [0.20]

  Less Income × Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                              -0.23           -0.23
                                                                                     [0.06]          [0.06]

  Less Income × Bounds,t-1                                                           0.10           0.11
                                                                                      [0.03]         [0.03]

  Less Income × M W (F )t                                                            0.29           0.29
                                                                                      [0.06]         [0.04]

  Establishment Fixed Effects
  Year Fixed Effects
  Establishment Controls
  County × Year Fixed Effects
  NAICS4 × Year Fixed Effects
  Adjusted R2                                            0.68           0.67          0.67            0.67
  No. of Establishments                               2,359,556      1,757,668     3,885,352       3,885,352
  Observations                                        12,278,824     8,511,296     21,151,603     21,151,603




                                                       64
                                Table 12: Impact on Bank Loan Amount

This table reports the results from regression Equation(3) estimating the differential effect of the federally
mandated minimum wage on SBA guaranteed bank loans to small businesses. In Column (1), we report results
with state and NAICS4 × year fixed effects. In Column(2), we add state-level controls on economic conditions
(i.e., GSP and population, both level and growth). In Columns (3) and (4), we replace state fixed effects with
                                                                                                         
borrower ZIP code fixed effects. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.      p < 0.10,
               
   p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.

                    Dependent Variable :                             Log(Loan Amount)
                                                              (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t-5           0.03       0.03      0.04      0.05
                                                            [0.11]     [0.09]    [0.11]    [0.09]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t-4           0.08       0.07      0.07      0.08
                                                            [0.08]     [0.08]    [0.07]    [0.08]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t-3          -0.01      -0.03     -0.01     -0.01
                                                            [0.07]     [0.08]    [0.07]    [0.08]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t-2          -0.12      -0.15     -0.10     -0.13
                                                            [0.07]     [0.08]    [0.07]    [0.08]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t-1          -0.04      -0.08     -0.04     -0.06
                                                            [0.07]     [0.09]    [0.06]    [0.09]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t            -0.04      -0.07     -0.04     -0.07
                                                            [0.07]     [0.10]    [0.07]    [0.10]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t+1       -0.15        -0.17     -0.14     -0.16
                                                          [0.07]      [0.09]     [0.06]   [0.09]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t+2       -0.17        -0.19     -0.15     -0.17
                                                          [0.08]       [0.09]   [0.08]    [0.09]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t+3       -0.14        -0.17     -0.13     -0.16
                                                          [0.06]       [0.07]    [0.06]    [0.07]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t+4          -0.10     -0.12     -0.11     -0.12
                                                            [0.06]     [0.05]   [0.06]     [0.05]

                    Bounds,t-1 × M W Dummy (F )t+5          -0.05      -0.08     -0.05     -0.07
                                                            [0.06]     [0.05]    [0.06]    [0.05]

                    State Fixed Effects
                    ZIP code Fixed Effects
                    State Controls
                    NAICS4 × Year Fixed Effects
                    Adjusted R2                           0.21         0.21      0.24      0.24
                    Observations                         909,393      775,772   902,409   768,633




                                                       65
                           Table 13: Exits After Minimum Wage Increases

This table reports the results from regression Equation (1) estimating the differential effect of the federally
mandated minimum wage on the probability of small business exits. We measure exit as the last year of the
establishment in the NETS database. Thus, Exit(= 1)t+1 , is a dummy variable measuring the probability of exit
in year t +1. SameScoreit (80) is a dummy variable identifying establishment­years in which the establishment
does not observe any change in Paydex score (80) from year t -1 to year t. While, Downgradeit (80 to 79) is
a dummy variable identifying establishment­years in which the establishment observes a drop in average score
from 80 in year t -1 to 79 in year t. All other downgrade variables are similarly defined. In addition to the
reported coefficients, in all regressions, we include the dummy for each group and its interaction term with the
                                                                                                                     
bound dummy. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at the state level.        p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,
p < 0.01.

    Dependent Variable :                                         Exit(= 1)t+1
                                      (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)          (6)
    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t         -0.016                                                             -0.016
    × SameScoreit (80)              [0.005]                                                            [0.005]

    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                      0.022                                                  0.018
    × Downgradeit (80 to 79)                     [0.003]                                                [0.003]

    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                    -0.004                                     -0.006
    × Downgradeit (81 to 80)                                  [0.005]                                    [0.004]

    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                 0.021                         0.019
    × Downgradeit (70 to 69)                                               [0.010]                       [0.010]

    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t                                                                0.016           0.014
    × Downgradeit (71 to 70)                                                              [0.009]        [0.009]

    Bounds,t-1 × M W (F )t          -0.007      -0.009        -0.008       -0.008         -0.008         -0.007
                                    [0.005]      [0.004]      [0.004]      [0.004]        [0.004]        [0.005]

    Bounds,t-1                     0.008        0.008         0.008        0.008        0.008          0.008
                                    [0.003]      [0.003]       [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]        [0.003]

    Interaction terms
    Establishment Fixed Effects
    Establishment Controls
    Year Fixed Effects
    Adjusted R2                      0.18         0.18          0.18         0.18         0.18           0.18
    No. of Establishments         3,274,815    3,274,815     3,274,815    3,274,815    3,274,815      3,274,815
    Observations                  22,316,622   22,316,622    22,316,622   22,316,622   22,316,622     22,316,622




                                                        66
