                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PLEDGEABILITY AND ASSET PRICES:
            EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINESE CORPORATE BOND MARKETS

                                          Hui Chen
                                         Zhuo Chen
                                         Zhiguo He
                                          Jinyu Liu
                                        Rengming Xie

                                     Working Paper 26520
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26520


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2019


We thank Antje Berndt, Jia Chen, Darrell Duffie, Burton Hollifield, Jennifer Huang, Sebastian
Infante, Anil Kashyap, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Kai Li, Yang Liu, Francis Longstaff, Konstantin
Milbradt, Benjamin Munyan, Dmitry Orlov, Chris Palmer, Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pederson, Jun Qian,
Andreas Rapp, Antoinette Schoar, Christopher Sims, Constantine Yannelis, Tao Zha, Xiaoneng
Zhu, and participants at Chicago Booth, MIT Sloan, Tsinghua PBC School of Finance, Shanghai
Advanced Institute of Finance, CUFE, SWUFE, RUC, ZJU, Guanghua International Symposium
on Finance, Finance Down Under, FIRS Annual Meeting, the Fudan Fanhai Summer Conference,
MFM Summer School, LAEF OTC Markets Workshop, Erasmus Liquidity Conference, SFS
Cavalcade NA, Mitsui Finance Symposium, CICF, CFRC, NBER Summer Institute, FRIC 2019,
EFA Annual Meeting, NFA Annual Meeting, and 2019 Greater Bay Area Summer Finance
Conference for helpful comments. We thank Tianshu Lyu for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hui Chen, Zhuo Chen, Zhiguo He, Jinyu Liu, and Rengming Xie. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pledgeability and Asset Prices: Evidence from the Chinese Corporate Bond Markets
Hui Chen, Zhuo Chen, Zhiguo He, Jinyu Liu, and Rengming Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 26520
November 2019
JEL No. G12,G18,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide causal evidence for the value of asset pledgeability. Our empirical strategy is based
on a unique feature of the Chinese corporate bond markets, where bonds with identical
fundamentals are simultaneously traded on two segmented markets that feature different rules for
repo transactions. We utilize a policy shock on December 8, 2014, which rendered a class of AA+
and AA bonds ineligible for repo on one of the two markets. By comparing how bond prices
changed across markets and rating classes around this event, we estimate that an increase in the
haircut from 0 to 100% would result in an increase in bond yields in the range of 40 to 83 bps.
These estimates help us infer the magnitude of the shadow cost of capital in China.


Hui Chen                                       Jinyu Liu
MIT Sloan School of Management                 University of International Business and Economics
100 Main Street, E62-637                       Beijing
Cambridge, MA 02142                            China
and NBER                                       jinyu.liu@uibe.edu.cn
huichen@mit.edu
                                               Rengming Xie
Zhuo Chen                                      CITIC Securities
Tsinghua University                            Beijing
43 Chengfu Road                                China
Beijing, 100083                                xrm@citics.com
China
chenzh@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
1         Introduction
It has long been recognized that asset prices depend not only on the fundamental cash
flows but also liquidity factors that are broadly related to the frictions prevalent in
modern financial markets (see e.g., Duffie, 2010). Among these liquidity considerations,
the most attention has arguably been given to asset pledgeability--the ability of an asset
to serve as collateral and help reduce financing costs--because of its central role in the
research of borrowing constraints in macroeconomics and finance (see e.g., Kiyotaki and
Moore, 1997; Gromb and Vayanos, 2002).
    Our paper aims to offer an empirical estimate for the value of asset pledgeability.
Our study focuses on bonds, which, besides spot transactions, are often involved in
repurchase agreements, or repos. Repos are essentially collateralized loans, with the
assets in transaction (typically fixed income securities) serving as the collateral.1 Lenders
often set a haircut over the market price of the collateral bond to determine the amount
of credit extended; the smaller the haircut, the greater the pledgeability of the bond.
     In a world where collateral helps reduce the costs of borrowing for a financially
constrained investor (relative to default-adjusted uncollateralized borrowing), pledgeable
bonds carry a convenience yield. We refer to this type of convenience yield as the
pledgeability premium, which is jointly determined by the frequency of the liquidity
shocks, the degree of pledgeability (the haircut), and the shadow cost of capital (the gap
in financing costs between collateralized and default-adjusted uncollateralized borrowing).
The pledgeability premium should be reflected in the equilibrium pricing of the bonds.
This logic has been used to explain repo specialness (Duffie, 1996), Treasury convenience
yields (Longstaff, 2004; Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig, 2014; Lewis, Longstaff, and
Petrasek, 2017; Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig, 2018), and "basis" across assets with
different margins (G^  arleanu and Pedersen, 2011). Haircut-implied funding costs have
also been used by Chen, Cui, He, and Milbradt (2018) to endogenize the holding costs of
illiquid assets, which in turn helps account for the liquidity premium in corporate bonds.
    Though the theoretical mechanisms through which pledgeability boosts asset values
are relatively clear, it is challenging to measure the effect empirically. Asset pledgeability
is endogenous and, in general, will depend on asset fundamentals, various market frictions,
and the interactions between the two. We overcome this endogeneity issue by exploiting
a policy shock on asset pledgeability together with a set of unique institutional features
in the Chinese bond markets.
        The Chinese bond markets have experienced tremendous growth during the past
    1
    A key difference between repos and collateralized loans is that the repo collateral is exempt from an
automatic stay in the event of bankruptcy. See, e.g. Adrian, Begalle, Copeland, and Martin (2012).


                                                   1
decade and are now ranked second in the world only behind the US bond markets. A
distinct feature of the Chinese bond markets is the co-existence of two bond markets,
the OTC-based interbank market and the centralized exchange market. The interbank
bond market is a wholesale market serving only institutional investors including banks
and non-bank financial institutions; on the other hand, the exchange bond market, as a
part of the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges, is populated by non-bank financial
institutions as well as retail investors. What is relevant to our study is that non-bank
financial institutions, including mutual funds, securities firms, and insurance companies,
are active institutional investors on both markets, though the restrictions on market
access and trading frictions cause the two markets to be largely segmented (for more
details, see Section 2.3).
    Furthermore, the two markets differ significantly in their rules for repos. Repos in
the interbank market essentially follow the standard tri-party repo model in the US. The
key transaction terms (collateral, haircuts, repo rates) are negotiated bilaterally; they
depend not only on bond characteristics, but also on the identity (credit quality) of the
counter-parties. On the exchange market, the exchange acts as the Central Counter-Party
(CCP) for all repo buyers and sellers; the exchange unilaterally determines the list of
eligible collateral bonds as well as their respective haircuts, which are almost exclusively
based on bond ratings. As a result, the pledgeability of the same bond can vary depending
on the market for different investors. For instance, smaller institutional participants with
limited government support could find it difficult to borrow on the interbank market
even when using AAA bonds as collateral, while borrowing against these bonds will
be relatively easy on the exchange. In contrast, a large state-owned commercial bank
can borrow against AA- bonds on the interbank market, even though these bonds are
not eligible for repo on the exchange. Together, the differences in rating-dependent
pledgeability and market segmentation imply that the prices of the same bond can be
different on the two markets.
    Our main empirical strategy is to exploit these cross-market valuation differences
for these dual-listed bonds. Specifically, we define the "exchange premium" as the yield
on the interbank market minus that on the exchange market for the same bond with
simultaneous transaction prices on the two markets. As we show in Section 4.1, since
any unobservable fundamentals affect the pricing of the same bonds on the two markets
identically, the exchange premium isolates the effects of the remaining non-fundamental
factors, including the differences in pledgeability and potentially other liquidity factors
in the two markets.
   To further isolate the pledgeability premium, we exploit a policy shock that signifi-
cantly changed the pledgeability for a set of bonds on the exchange. In the after-hours on

                                             2
December 8, 2014, the exchange suddenly announced that enterprise bonds with ratings
below AAA were no longer accepted as repo collateral. This policy was aimed at the
exchange market only; effectively it only changed the pledgeability of bonds rated AA+
and AA on the exchange (AA- bonds were already ineligible for repo before the event).
Thus, even if the exchange premium is partly due to differences in liquidity factors on
the two markets, so long as the pricing impact of such factors varies in the same way over
time for the treated bonds (AA+ and AA) and the bonds in the control group (AAA
and AA-), we are able to identify the pricing impact of changes in the exchange market
pledgeability on the exchange premia via a difference-in-differences (Diff-in-Diff) study.
    We show that AAA and AA- bonds had similar trends in their exchange premia
with the treatment group (AA+ and AA) before the December 2014 shock. However, in
the first two weeks after the shock, the exchange premia of both AAA and AA- ratings
rose, while that of the treatment group fell. This suggests that this rating-dependent
pledgeability shock adversely affected the prices of bonds with middle ratings only. Notice
that our control group consists of both higher- (AAA) and lower-rated (AA-) bonds,
which helps us rule out many alternative fundamental-based explanations: typically,
these mechanisms generate asset pricing reactions that are monotonic in asset qualities
(here, credit ratings).
    A main contribution of our paper is to provide an estimate of the effect of changes in
pledgeability on asset prices. Using the rating-dependent policy shock as an instrument
in a two-stage least squares regression, we find that raising the haircut from 0 to 100%
leads to a 40 bps (0.4%) increase in the bond yield, implying a roughly 2.2% drop in
price for a typical enterprise bond in our sample.
    While the exchange premia­based estimates help address the issue of the policy shock's
endogeneity related to unobservable bond fundamentals, they are likely downward-biased
for several reasons. One leading concern is that despite the limits to cross-market
arbitrages in the short-run, the policy shock on the exchange market will be transmitted
to the interbank as long as some institutional investors engage in arbitrage activities. As
a result, the yields on the interbank market rise to offset the declines in exchange premia,
and consequently the price impact of the changes in pledgeability on the exchange is
underestimated. Moreover, as we explain in Section 4.2, the flight-to-quality effect--which
is stronger in the interbank market in our setting--when using AAA-rated bonds as the
control group leads to an underestimate of our pledgeability premium as well.
    We address this concern by providing an alternative IV estimate that likely overstates
the price impact of changes in pledgeability. Thus, the two sets of IV estimates together
plausibly bound the magnitude of the pledgeability premium. Specifically, instead of
using the prices of the same bonds on the interbank market as a benchmark, we compare

                                             3
the price changes of the treated bonds against those of the matched policy shock­free
AAA bonds on the exchange market. These matched AAA bonds have similar haircuts
and credit spreads in the pre-event sample as those treated AA+/AA bonds, but their
pledgeability was not affected by the policy shock. It is plausible that these matched
AAA bonds have better unobservable fundamentals relative to the treated bonds, which
would cause this alternative IV estimate to be upward biased. For instance, a potential
flight to quality effect in response to the policy shock can boost the prices of AAA bonds
and thus inflate the relative price changes between the treated bonds and the matched
AAA bonds, leading to an overestimate of the pledgeability premium. A similar logic
applies to the case where the regulator has private information that AA+/AA -rated
bonds are worse than the market believes. The resulting IV (over)estimate suggests that
raising the haircut from 0 to 100% leads to a 83 bps increase of yield (compared to 40 bps
based on the exchange premium), or a roughly 4.6% drop in price for a typical enterprise
bond in our sample. These estimates are in the same range as the effect documented in
Ashcraft, G^ arleanu, and Pedersen (2011) (see more details in the literature review).
   We provide a formal theoretical framework in Section 4.1 to guide our empirical
study outlined above. The pledgeability premium derives from the convenience yield for
a group of financially constrained investors who are marginal on both market; in our
context, these investors represent non-bank investors such as securities firms in China.
Heuristically, the pledgeability premium is determined by the following formula, which is
modified from G^  arleanu and Pedersen (2011),

Pledgeability premium = Freq. of liq. shocks × shadow cost of capital × (1 - haircut).

The pledgeability premium is higher when the marginal investor is more frequently in a
liquidity-constrained state, and it is higher when the investor faces a high shadow cost
of capital in the constrained state. The shadow cost of capital is the gap between the
interest-rate spread of collateralized and uncollateralized financing--that is, a form of
financing risk premium (n.b., uncollateralized financing is default adjusted as in, for
example, Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012). Finally, the premium is higher for assets with
smaller haircuts.
    Through the lens of the formula above, we can infer the shadow cost of capital for
investors on the exchange market. Before the policy shock, about 35% of the enterprise
bonds on the exchange were used as repo collateral on a typical day. If we interpret this
number as the frequency of being liquidity constrained, then the pledgeability premium
estimates of 40 to 83 bps correspond to a shadow cost of capital between 1.1% to 2.4%.



                                            4
Literature review. Equilibrium asset pricing with financial constraints is a very active
research field; we do not aim to provide an exhaustive survey here. Early theoretical
contributions include Detemple and Murthy (1997) who study the role of the short-sale
limit, a constraint that is intrinsically linked to margin requirements or haircuts in
equilibrium. For more recent analysis, see Chabakauri (2015). G^   arleanu and Pedersen
(2011) consider a general equilibrium model with two assets that have identical cash-flows
but may differ in their margins/haircuts, and tie their equilibrium pricing differences
(bases) to margin differences modulated by the shadow cost of capital. This model
provides the closest theoretical framework to our empirical study. Other equilibrium
asset pricing models with financial constraints include Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Basak
and Cuoco (1998), He and Krishnamurthy (2013), and Danielsson, Zigrand, and Shin
(2002).2
    There is no doubt that margin constraints or haircuts are endogenously determined
by aggregate conditions in financial markets as well as asset characteristics. Influential
theoretical contributions include Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008) and Geanakoplos (2010),
in which riskless lending arises endogenously due to heterogeneous beliefs. 3 Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2009) relate the haircut of assets to a Value-at-Risk constraint and highlight
the downward spiral in a general equilibrium model with endogenous leverage constraints.
    Our paper contributes to the literature that connects pledgeability to asset prices.
The related empirical studies include Gorton and Metrick (2012), who document the
repo runs during the 2007/08 financial crisis. In contrast, Copeland, Martin, and Walker
(2014) show that there were not systemic runs on tri-party repo--which is the major
segment of this market--during the crisis, except for the funding of Lehman in September
2008. Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014) study the repo funding extended by money
market funds (MMF) before and during the 2007/2008 financial crisis. Relatedly, there
are also a few empirical studies on the failure of the law of one price and its connections to
margin constraints and liquidity. Examples include Longstaff (2004) and Lewis, Longstaff,
and Petrasek (2017), who document the premium of Treasury securities over agency or
   2
     Our paper is also more broadly related to the macroeconomics literature where assets also serve the
role of collateral (for instance, Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2001). More
generally, equilibrium asset pricing terms can also be endogenously determined in a framework with
over-the-counter search markets (Duffie, G^    arleanu, and Pedersen, 2005; Lagos and Rocheteau, 2009;
He and Milbradt, 2014, among others), of which the Chinese interbank market is one. Based on this
framework, Vayanos and Wang (2007) and Vayanos and Weill (2008) study the premia of on-the-run
Treasuries as a symptom of the failure of the law of one price. Previous studies have also documented
empirically how price dispersion arises in the OTC municipal and corporate bond markets due to dealers'
market power (Green, Hollifield, and Sch¨    urhoff, 2007a,b), bond characteristics (Harris and Piwowar,
2006), selling pressure (Feldh¨ utter, 2012), and more recently, trading networks (Di Maggio, Kermani,
and Song, 2017; Hendershott, Li, Livdan, and Sch¨    urhoff, 2017; Li and Sch¨
                                                                             urhoff, 2019).
   3
     The extensions include Simsek (2013) and He and Xiong (2012), among others.


                                                   5
corporate bonds that are guaranteed by the US government; Krishnamurthy (2002), who
documents the on-the-run Treasury premium; Bai and Collin-Dufresne (2019), who study
the CDS-bond basis which is the pricing difference between a corporate bond and its
synthetic replicate (buying Treasury and selling CDS). For a more recent study on the
link between pledgeability and asset pricing in the US equity market, see Ai, Li, Li, and
Schlag (forthcoming).
    Ashcraft, G^ arleanu, and Pedersen (2011) present a model where the haircut, which
represents asset pledgeability, can be used as an effective monetary policy tool in addition
to the interest rate. By exploring one of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
(TALF) programs in 2009, they also empirically examine the price impact of lowering the
haircuts of some eligible mortgage-backed securities. Based on market reactions of bonds
that were rejected by the program (which might carry some additional information), the
authors find that an increase in the haircut from 0 to 100% would result in an increase of
28 to 52 bps in bond yields.4 This is close to the range based on our IV estimates. Though
our paper has a similar spirit as Ashcraft, G^ arleanu, and Pedersen (2011) in investigating
the market reactions of some policy, the dual-listed nature of Chinese enterprise bonds,
together with two control groups--one with bonds of higher quality and the other with
lower--lends support in identifying the causal effect of asset pledgeability on asset prices.
    Our paper also makes contribution to the burgeoning literature on the Chinese bond
market. Fan and Zhang (2007) study the early phase of the Chinese corporate bond
markets during the period of 2000­2005, by exploring the potential mechanisms behind
the market segmentation between the exchange and interbank markets. Ang, Bai, and
Zhou (2019) offer the first comprehensive study on the pricing of municipal corporate
bonds (Cheng-tou Bonds), which constitute a majority of dual-listed enterprise bonds in
our sample. Chen, He, and Liu (forthcoming) link China's shadow banking activities to
its 2009 stimulus plan by showing that provinces are refinancing maturing 2009-stimulus
loans by issuing municipal corporate bonds (MCB). Wang and Xu (2019) develop a
model for asset pledgeability and offer empirical support using primary bond market
data in China.5
   4
      The effect of rejection by the TALF is estimated to be around 20 bps; but because the TALF
rejection essentially raised the bond haircut by 75% (25% to 100%), the effect of a 100% rise in haircut
should be around 28 bps. Ashcraft, G^     arleanu, and Pedersen (2011) offer another gauge of the effect of
TALF; according to the survey in which both investors and dealers participated, the effect of haircut
is at the range of 400 to 500 bps. However, it is hard to compare the survey evidence with the real
transaction prices due to the non-binding nature of survey responses.
    5
      Asset pledgeability also matters for the stock market in China; Bian, He, Shue, and Zhou (2018) show
the role of leveraged margin trading in the 2015 crash of the Chinese stock market. And, complementary
to our angle of rating-dependent pledgeability, Liu, Wang, Wei, and Zhong (2019) find that retail
investors play a significant role in explaining the pricing wedge between the interbank and exchange
markets for the dual-listed bonds. Several papers also look at the implicit government guarantee in


                                                    6
2     Institutional Background
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the key features of the Chinese bond
markets that are relevant for our study. For more details on the history of the Chinese
bond markets, see Amstad and He (2018).


2.1     Overview of the Chinese Bond Markets
Over the past twenty years, especially the past decade, China has taken enormous strides
to develop its bond markets as an integral step of financial reforms, along with the efforts
to liberalize interest rates and internationalize its currency. Panel A of Figure 1 shows
the recent growth path of Chinese bond market capitalization scaled by GDP, which
rises from 35% in 2008 to more than 90% in 2017. In comparison, the US bond market
has remained slightly above 200% of the US GDP during the same time period.
    There are three major categories of fixed-income securities in the Chinese bond
markets based on issuing entities: government bonds, financial bonds, and (non-financial)
corporate bonds.6 Panel B of Figure 1 shows the notional outstanding and market shares
of the different types of corporate bonds. In the aggregate social financing statistics
released by the PBoC, corporate bonds correspond to "bonds," contributing 11% of
financing to the real sector as shown in Panel C of Figure 1.
    Our paper focuses on enterprise bonds, a type of corporate bonds issued by non-
listed state-owned enterprises (SOEs). They account for 15% of total corporate bonds
outstanding (or 4% of total bonds outstanding) by 2017. For our analysis, it is important
to understand the following features of the Chinese bond markets: (1) the co-existence
of the exchange and interbank bond markets; (2) the dual-listing of bonds on the two
markets; and (3) the different ways that repo transactions are conducted on these two
markets.
the Chinese bond market. Among them, Liu, Lyu, and Yu (2017) investigate the role of implicit local
government guarantees for the above mentioned MCB; Jin, Wang, and Zhang (2018) study the event of
first bond default by a central SOE in 2015 to estimate the value of implicit guarantees; and Huang,
Huang, and Shao (2018) are after the same question by looking at financial bonds issued by commercial
banks.
    6
      Government bonds are issued by formal government agencies (e.g., the Ministry of Finance and
policy banks in China) and account for 56% of bonds outstanding in 2017. Financial bonds, which
account for 17% of bond outstanding in 2017, are issued by financial institutions which are almost all
state owned. Corporate bonds, which represent 27% of the market, are issued by non-financial firms.
Though corporate bonds in some international contexts also include long-term bonds issued by financial
institutions, we specifically separate out bonds issued by financial institutions, given that almost all
entities in the Chinese financial sector are heavily influenced by the government. There is also another
widely used classification among practitioners in China, which groups financial bonds and corporate
bonds together as the so-called "credit bonds."


                                                   7
Panel A: Bonds outstanding as % of GDP




Panel B: China's corporate bonds outstanding by category




Panel C: China's aggregate social financing outstanding by category




Figure 1: China's bond market. This figure plots statistics of China's bond market
from 2008 to 2017. Panel A plots the bonds outstanding as a percentage of GDP in
China and the US, Panel B plots China's corporate bonds outstanding by category (with
corresponding regulators in parentheses), and Panel C plots PBOC aggregate social
financing outstanding by category. For more details, see Amstad and He (2018).
                                          8
Figure 2: China's interbank and exchange bond markets. This figure plots China's
two bond markets from 2008 to 2017. Panels A and B plot spot and repo transaction RMB
volume, respectively, of all bonds on the interbank and exchange markets. Panels C and D
plots the number of trades for spot and repo transactions, respectively, in these two markets.
Data on interbank-market transactions are from China Foreign Exchange Trade System and
data on exchange-market transactions are from the Statistics Annuals of Shanghai exchange
and Shenzhen exchange.


2.2    Co-Existence of Exchange and Interbank Markets
For historical reasons, there are two distinct and largely segmented markets in today's
Chinese bond markets: the over-the-counter interbank market and the centralized
exchange market. The interbank market is largely a "wholesale" market, similar to the
interbank markets in developed economies like the US, while the exchange market is
more "retail" oriented (including smaller non-bank financial institutions, high net-worth
individual investors with ample investment experience, and normal individual investors).
    The exchange bond market resides within the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges,
which were established in 1990 in the wake of the SOE reforms. Repo transactions, which
allow investors to borrow against bond collateral, have been popular on the exchanges
since their inception. During the first half of 1997, the Chinese stock market experienced


                                              9
an unprecedented boom (with the Shanghai Stock Exchange composite index rising by
over 50% from January to May). Due to the concern that repo financing might have
fueled the stock market boom, in June 1997 the People's Bank of China (PBoC), the
central bank in China, ordered all commercial banks to fully switch from the exchange
to the newly established interbank market.7 Both markets have grown significantly in
the twenty years since then. The participants on the interbank market grew from the 16
head offices of commercial banks initially in 1997 to a total of 3,469 financial institutions
by the end of 2017, including urban and rural credit cooperatives, securities firms, and
insurance companies. The participants on the exchange market include non-bank financial
institutions (such as mutual funds, insurance companies, and securities firms), corporate
investors, and retail investors.8 The exchange market has aggressively competed with
the interbank market. One product of this competition is dual-listed enterprise bonds,
which we discuss in Section 2.3.
   The interbank market adopts a quote-driven over-the-counter trading protocol, in
which the terms of trades are finalized through bilateral bargaining between relevant
parties. In contrast, the trading protocol on the exchange is facilitated by a transpar-
ent order-driven mechanism, with electronic order books aggregating orders from all
participants. Matched trades are settled via China Securities Depository & Clearing
Corporation (CSDC), an entity that provides the depository and settlement services for
the exchange market.
    Consistent with the "wholesale vs. retail" distinction, the average trade size for spot
transactions is 100 to 200 million RMB on the interbank market, compared to 0.3 to 1
million on the exchange. For repos, the average trade size is 200 to 500 million RMB on
the interbank market and just 1 to 3 million on the exchange. This helps explain the
fact that while the interbank market has the dominant market share for both spot and
repo transactions based on dollar volume, the opposite is true based on number of trades.
As Panel A of Figure 2 shows, the interbank market accounts for more than 90% of the
dollar volume of spot transactions for all bonds and over 70% for repo transactions. On
the other hand, when it comes to the number of trades (Panel B), the exchange market
accounts for 75% to 95% of all spot transactions and over 98% of repo transactions.
       Figure 2 highlights that while the two bond markets serve different clienteles with
   7
     Technically, the interbank market is now self-regulated by the National Association of Financial
Market Institutional Investors (NAFMII). However, the PBoC is the de facto gate keeper of this market.
   8
     Although publicly listed commercial banks could participate in the exchange market after certain
restrictions were removed by the Chinese banking regulators in 2010, they still face significant trading
constraints even today, and as a result the presence of commercial banks in the exchange market is
negligible. In particular, commercial banks are prohibited from repo transactions on the exchange
market.



                                                  10
different trading needs, they are both quite active. In short, the wholesale interbank
market satisfies infrequent but large transaction needs, while the exchange accommodates
frequent but small trades. This is in sharp contrast to the bond markets in the US, where
the exchange attracts very limited trading in corporate bonds (see e.g., Biais and Green,
2019).9 Table A1 in the Appendix provides a more detailed comparison of the secondary
market liquidity in the two Chinese bond markets and in the US corporate bond market.
Market (il)liquidity is similar between the interbank market and exchange market in
China based on the fraction of bonds that do not trade on a given day. Compared to
the US corporate bond market, China's bond markets are slightly less liquid based on
non-trading days, but are more liquid if we look at turnovers.


2.3     Dual-Listing of Enterprise Bonds
Due to the possibility of dual-listing, the exchange and interbank markets overlap in
several key bond products, mainly government bonds and enterprise bonds.
    The issuance of enterprise bonds is regulated by the National Development and
Reform Commission (NDRC), a powerful government agency which oversees SOE reforms
in China. The interbank market, after its establishment in 1997, became the only market
where enterprise bonds were issued and traded, as most SOEs were not publicly listed
at that time and hence excluded from the exchange market. In 2005, to expand the
potential investor base, the NDRC carried out a series of reforms that granted non-listed
SOEs access to the exchange market. The exchange market embraced this reform with
great enthusiasm, and applications for dual-listing on the exchange are almost always
approved. Consequently, over 90% of the enterprise bonds outstanding are dual-listed.
Figure A1 provides more information regarding the notionl outsanding and issuance of
dual-listed enterprise bonds.
   9
    Over the past decade, a new type of corporate bond trading facility, the electronic-trading platform,
has proliferated in both US and China. Broker-dealers used to provide liquidity to the market by
taking inventory positions, but they faced increased capital requirements and tighter regulation after
the 2007/2008 financial crisis. The electronic-trading platforms, thanks to technological developments in
algorithmic-based trading which has dramatically improved trading efficiency, started to intermediate
smaller trades in the opaque OTC corporate bond market. According to Greenwich Associates, over
90% of present-day US corporate bond trades of less than $100,000--which account for 70% of total
trades--are executed on electronic-trading platforms (see, "The challenge of trading corporate bonds
electronically" dated on 2019/5/13, http://www.greenwich.com/printpdf/110646). In China, Quebee
(QB) provides a request for quote (RFQ) service in the interbank market and can be viewed as the
Chinese counterpart of those e-trading platforms in the US, and anecdotally bond trades through QB
accounted for 25% of the total number of trades in the interbank market in 2018.




                                                   11
Limits to arbitrage Despite having identical fundamentals, the prices of a dual-listed
bond on the two markets can differ significantly. Such differences can persist for a long
time because there are major frictions that prevent "textbook" cross-market arbitrages.
    As explained in the previous section, commercial banks, the largest financial institu-
tions in China, are prohibited from conducting repo transactions on the exchange and
are virtually nonexistent in spot trading on the exchange. That leaves only a subset of
investors (i.e., mutual funds, insurance companies, and securities firms) who can trade
bonds on both markets.
    Even for those investors with access to both markets, there exist significant frictions
for cross-market arbitrage, the most significant one being settlement delays. Suppose an
investor wants to sell some interbank market­acquired bonds on the exchange (or use it
to do repo on the exchange). To do so, she needs to apply for transfer of custody from
the interbank market to the exchange, which takes five working days or more in 2014.10
A transfer in the opposite direction is slightly faster and takes two to three working days.
Such delays expose an arbitrageur to significant price risks. Moreover, due to liquidity
limitations, it is quite difficult to simultaneously buy and sell a large quantity of the
same bond on the two markets.
    The limits to arbitrage explain why the prices of the same bond on the two markets
may not converge quickly. We argue that the differences in pledgeability on the two
markets are a major factor that causes the prices to differ in the first place. To explain
this point, we next turn to the differences in repo transactions on the two markets.


2.4     Repos on the Exchange and the Interbank Market
A repurchase agreement, or "repo," is the sale of a security coupled with a seller's
commitment to purchase the same security back from the buyer at a pre-specified price
on a pre-specified future date. It is effectively a form of collateralized borrowing with the
security serving as collateral. As shown in Panel B of Figure 2, repos are quite active on
both the exchange and interbank markets. In 2017, repo transactions account for 90% of
the total volume of bond transactions in China (including both repo and spot trading).
   Our research design crucially depends on the different mechanisms for repo transactions
on these two markets, which we explain below.
  10
    The depository and clearing agency in the interbank market is China Central Depository & Clearing
Co. Ltd (CCDC) and Shanghai Clearing House, while in the exchange market it is China Security
Depository & Clearing Co. Ltd (CSDC). Before the system upgrade in 2012, the process of transferring
from interbank to exchange was even longer, taking about six to eight working days.




                                                 12
Repos on the interbank market In a repo transaction on the Chinese interbank
market, a seller (the borrower) contacts a buyer (the lender), and both parties reach an
agreement on the terms of trade based on bilateral bargaining.11 The trading protocol is
nearly identical to the tri-party repos in the US, with the China Central Depository &
Clearing Co., Ltd (CCDC) serving as the third-party agent who processes the post-trading
settlement.12 As explained in Section 2.2, the interbank market is dominated by large
institutions who have institution-specific funding needs and constraints, and hence each
repo contract tends to be highly customized, including the specification of collateral, the
repo rate, and the method of delivery.
    Repo terms, including types of collateral, haircuts, and repo rates, are set through
private bargaining on the interbank market. The haircuts and repo rates primarily reflect
the risks of the underlying securities and that of the counter-party. For example, the
perceived default risk is almost zero for large state-owned Big Four banks.13 Unfortunately,
we do not have access to trade-level repo data on the interbank market.14


Repos on the exchange For repos on the Chinese exchange market, the exchange
(specifically the CSDC) not only facilitates transactions--just like the CCDC for interbank
repos--but also acts as the Central Counter-Party (CCP) for all repo buyers and sellers.
Unlike the third-party agent in tri-party repos, the CCP guarantees that obligations are
met to all non-defaulting parties regardless of whether obligations to the CCP have been
met or not. This market mechanism is similar to some CCP-based European electronic
platforms (Mancini, Ranaldo, and Wrampelmeyer, 2016).
   Furthermore, unlike on the interbank market, the CSDC unilaterally sets the collateral
pool (i.e., the list of securities eligible as collateral) and haircuts on a daily basis. For
each eligible bond security, the CSDC announces the conversion rate (CR), which is the
  11
     Two types of repo transactions are available for interbank market participants: pledged repo, where
bonds are used as a pledge of rights; and outright repo, where bonds are sold from a positive repo party
to a reverse repo party. Pledged repo accounts for the majority (94.2% in our one-year sample period)
of interbank repo transactions. Another informal "repo"-type transaction is agent-holding, which has
decreased dramatically since April 2013 when the regulator put strict restrictions on agent-holding (for
more details, Mo and Subrahmanyam, 2019).
  12
     Tri-party repo is a transaction for which post-trade processing--collateral selection, payment and
settlement, custody and management during the life of the transaction--is outsourced by the parties to
a third-party agent, which is called the custodian bank. Bank of New York Mellon and JP Morgan are
the two custodian banks in the US, while in Europe they are Clearstream Luxembourg, Euroclear, Bank
of New York Mellon, JP Morgan, and SIS.
  13
     The Big Four banks are Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank, Bank
of China, and Agricultural Bank of China.
  14
     CFETS reports daily aggregate transaction volume and volume-weighted repo rates for the interbank
market. "R" series represents collateralized repo transactions for all participants in the interbank
market and "DR" series represents collateralized repo transactions between two deposit-type institutions.
Maturity ranges from 1, 7, 14, and 21 days to 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 9 months, to 1 year.


                                                  13
borrowed amount quoted as a fraction of the face value of the security. For instance,
suppose Treasuries receive a conversion rate of 1, while that of a AAA corporate bond
is 0.9. Then an investor posting one unit each of the two types of bonds as collateral,
both with face value of 100 RMB, will be able to borrow 190 RMB from the exchange.
Suppose a bond has face value F V and market price P . We can translate its conversion
rate into the haircut using the following formula:

                                                                        F V · CR
                  (1 - haircut) · P = CR · F V  haircut = 1 -                    .                (1)
                                                                           P
Notice that haircut is negatively correlated with conversion rate; a haircut of 100%
implies zero pledgeability for that security. Effectively, all eligible securities become
completely fungible after adjusting for their respective conversion rates. This feature is
necessary for the exchange market whose function crucially relies on standardization.
    While the exchange sets the haircuts, the equilibrium repo rate for any given maturity
is determined by the market and is common across all repo sellers after the standardization
of collateral. A central limit order book aggregates all bids and asks from repo sellers
(borrowers) and buyers (lenders) in continuous double auctions. Even though repo buyers
and sellers have limited information about each other and the actual composition of
the collateral pool (the exchange does not publish such information), the counterparty
risk component in the repo rates should be negligible due to the exchange's implicit
government backing.15 Consequently, the exchange repo rates mainly reflect the market
supply and demand for short-term funding.16
    The fact that the exchange's CCP structure offers counterparty risk­free repo trans-
actions with desirable transparent standardization is likely a major reason behind the
popularity of the exchange repo market. As Figure 2 shows, in contrast to its small
market share for spot transactions (Panel A), which is in the range of 1­4% after 2012,
the exchange market's share of repo transactions has been over 20% during the same
  15
      The Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges are owned and run by the CSRC, one of the most powerful
government agencies in China at the ministerial level. Of course, rising bond default risk since 2014
triggers concerns whether the CSDC (and the CSRC behind) has the capacity to absorb these losses.
Based on realized default and recovery rates since 2014, Chen, Chen, He, and Xie (2018) estimate that,
during 2014 and 2015, annual expected losses due to default of bond collaterals constitute about 50%
of the CSDC's registered capital. This dwarfs annual non-performing loans as a fraction of the equity
capital of China's banking system (which sits slightly below 10%). The CSDC increased its capital from
0.6 billion RMB to 1.2 billion RMB in 2016, and further to 10 billion RMB in 2017, perhaps partly due
to this consideration.
   16
      A total of eighteen standardized collateral repo products are available on the exchange market,
including 9 on the Shanghai stock exchange ("GC" series) and 9 on the Shenzhen stock exchange
("R-" series). These products have maturities of 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 14, 28, 91, and 182 days. One-day
repo transactions account for 85% to 90% of total exchange market transactions. Shanghai bond repo
transactions account for 90% to 95% of total exchange market transactions.


                                                 14
period (Panel B). This comparison highlights the significant role that the exchange repo
market plays in China's short-term financing market.


2.5     The 2014 Policy Shock in the Exchange Market
To identify the effects of changes in pledgeability on bond pricing, we exploit a policy
shock on the exchange market. In a nutshell, after market closing on December 8, 2014,
the exchange suspended the repo eligibility of all enterprise bonds rated below AAA.17
    The background of this policy shock is related to the local government debt problem
in China; for more details on this issue, see Chen, He, and Liu (forthcoming). In 2009,
Beijing responded to the 2007/08 global financial crisis with a four-trillion RMB stimulus
package, in which local government financing vehicles (LGFVs, which are local SOEs)
funded heavy infrastructure investment mainly through loans extended by commercial
banks. Three to five years later, the back-to-normal credit policy forced LGFVs to turn
to the bond market and to aggressively issue MCBs--a type of enterprise bonds--to
either refinance the maturing bank loans or continue the ongoing long-term infrastructure
projects.18 As a result, the enterprise bond market became flooded with MCBs, with the
share of MCB-type enterprise bonds rising from about 52% in 2012 to about 76% by the
end of 2017.
   Increasingly concerned about local government debt problems, the State Council
of China released the tone-setting guideline No. 43 Document in October 2014, which
explicitly banned the backing of MCBs by local governments. Soon financial regulators
coordinated an effort to support Beijing on this agenda. At that time, MCBs were quite
popular on the exchange market for their low perceived credit risk (thanks to the implicit
guarantee) and transparency in pledgeability (thanks to centrally published haircuts).
    To curb the overheated demand of MCBs, the CSDC decided to slash the conversion
rates for enterprise bonds with ratings below AAA during the after-hours on December 8,
2014.19 This sudden move by the CSDC surprised exchange market investors to a large
  17
      Among the AAA-rated bonds, those with below-AA issuer ratings or with an AA issuer rating, but
negative outlook also lost their repo eligibility. In this paper, we reclassify these two types of AAA
enterprise bonds as AA- bonds. See Appendix A for details.
   18
      MCB, also known as Urban Construction Investment Bond or Chengtou Bond, is one of the perfect
examples of the mixture between planning and market in today's Chinese economy: in a strict legal
sense they are issued by LGFVs, which are regular corporations, yet the market views them as being
implicitly backed by the corresponding local governments. For more details, see Chen, He, and Liu
(forthcoming).
   19
      On the evening of December 8, 2014, the CSDC issued No. 149 Document "Notice on the Issues of
Risk Management on Enterprise Bond Pledged-Repo Transactions" to immediately disqualify sub-AAA­
rated enterprise bonds from being used as collateral in repo transactions in both the Shanghai and the
Shenzhen exchanges. In this document, the CSDC raised concerns about the risk of enterprise bonds


                                                 15
Figure 3: Average repo haircut on the exchange market. This figure plots the
average daily haircut on the exchange market for dual-listed enterprise bonds in each of the
four rating categories. The sample period is from 6/9/2014 to 6/8/2015.


extent, as market participants had expected tightening in the competing interbank market
instead. This is because it is well documented that the local government debt problem is
rooted in the commercial banking system (Bai, Hsieh, and Song, 2016; Chen, He, and
Liu, forthcoming), which heavily relies on the interbank market--not the exchange--for
liquidity management.


2.6     Market Reactions to the 2014 Policy Shock
We now explain details of the policy and the reactions from both markets in detail.
As shown in Figure 3, the policy change on December 8, 2014, led to immediate and
significant increases in the haircuts for AA+ and AA enterprise bonds on the exchange.
In contrast, the average haircut for AAA bonds on the exchange remained steady after
the event. Finally, since AA- bonds were already ineligible as repo collateral on the
exchange six months before the event, their haircuts were also unaffected by the new
policy.
   In contrast to the dramatic changes in haircuts on the exchange, there were only
minor changes in the haircuts on the interbank market during the same period. Table 3
that were mainly issued by local governments, echoing the No. 43 Document issued two months earlier
by the State Council of China, which explicitly banned the backing of MCBs by local governments.
According to estimates from Haitong Securities (one of the leading securities firms in China), about 75%
of enterprise bonds deposited in the two exchanges lost their pledgeability. Bond market participants
viewed this policy change as a "black swan" event--or "zhong-zheng-deng" event--that triggered a
market-wide liquidity squeeze.


                                                  16
reports the average haircuts for enterprise bonds on the interbank market during the
one-month and six-month windows before and after December 8, 2014, which are based
on all the repo transactions conducted by an anonymous major financial institution in
China. The average haircuts increased by about 10% for AAA bonds and 3­5% for the
other rating categories, which likely reflected the tightening of liquidity on the interbank
market.20
    The adjustments in exchange haircuts by the CSDC were a surprise to the market. As
a first pass, we examine the average credit spreads for all dual-listed enterprise bonds in
the four rating categories around the event. On the exchange, the average credit spreads
for AA+ and AA bonds jumped up on the event date (by 55 and 50 bps, respectively),
while the average spreads for AAA and AA- bonds fell on the event date (by 13 and
18 bps, respectively). In contrast, on the interbank market, the average credit spreads
for AA+ and AA bonds actually fell slightly on the event date (by 7 and 10 bps) while
AAA and AA- changed in a slightly greater magnitude (-23 bps and 27 bps). These
market reactions are consistent with the premise that the policy shock hit AA+ and AA
rated bonds on the exchange market only.


3      Exchange Premia
As described in the previous section, the policy shock on December 8, 2014, significantly
reduced the pledgeability of AA+ and AA-rated enterprise bonds on the exchange
market, yet at the same time their haircuts were largely intact on the interbank market.
Such a unique setting provides us with the opportunity to study the impact of shocks to
pledgeability on bond pricing through the exchange premia, i.e., the price gap for the
dual-listed enterprise bonds between the exchange and interbank markets. In this section,
we first describe our data, and then examine the empirical properties of the exchange
premia.


3.1     Data
The major part of our empirical analysis focuses on the enterprise bonds that are dual-
listed on both markets. We obtain enterprise bond characteristics and exchange-market
trading data from WIND. Data on interbank market trading are from the China Foreign
  20
    Since the repo terms are bilaterally negotiated, one would ideally like to control for the credit
quality of the financial institution's counter-parties when comparing interbank market haircuts from
two different periods. Unfortunately this is not feasible due to the lack of trade-level data, though
anecdotally the credit quality of its counter-parties remained stable over this period.



                                                 17
Exchange Trade System (CFETS), the platform for all interbank bond trading. Our
sample period ranges from June 9, 2014 to June 8, 2015, a twelve-month window around
the event date (the policy shock is on December 8, 2014). This dual-listed enterprise
bond sample covers 82.7% of the total trading volume of all the enterprise bonds during
the same period (79.3% in terms of outstanding notional), or 28.8% of the total volume
of all corporate bonds (27.1% in terms of outstanding notional). Table A2 reports the
detailed coverage of our sample.
    For each bond-day observation, we obtain the conversion rates quoted by the exchange
and convert them into haircuts based on the formula in Eq. (1). We also calculate
the enterprise bond yields based on the RMB volume-weighted average clean prices.
These yields are winsorized at 0.5% and 99.5% on the exchange and interbank markets,
respectively. Following industry practice, the credit spreads of the enterprise bonds
are calculated relative to the matching China Development Bank bond (CDB) yields
following the similar procedure of Ang, Bai, and Zhou (2019) and Liu, Lyu, and Yu
(2017).21
    As the main empirical object, we construct the "exchange market premium" or simply
the "exchange premium," which is defined shortly in Eq. (2) as the yield difference
between two markets, based on synchronous trading of dual-listed bonds. On a given day
t when there is at least one transaction for a bond on one of the two markets, we use the
nearest transaction data from the other market within the time window [t - 2, t] to form
the pair. We refer to this sample as the "simultaneous trading sample," which contains
about 10,000 bond-day observations from 995 unique bonds. The simultaneous trading
sample covers 55% of all dual-listed bonds in our sample period; see Table A2 for details.
The exchange premium for each pair is calculated as the yield on the interbank market
minus the exchange market counterpart. To reduce the potential impact of outliers, we
trim the sample at the bottom 0.5% and the top 99.5% in terms of exchange premium. In
the robustness test, we also repeat our empirical exercises using a more strict same-day
trading window and hence a smaller sample, which requires trades of the very same bond
in two markets on the same day.22
  21
     Bonds issued by the China Development Bank, the largest of the three policy banks in China,
are fully backed by the central government, although they do not enjoy the tax-exempt status that
Treasuries do. Thanks to this identical tax treatment as well as CDB bonds' superior liquidity, the CDB
yield curves are commonly used as the benchmark by the bond market participants in China, especially
institutional investors. Specifically, we first compute the implied prices of the CDB bonds with matching
cash flows, i.e. the NPV of the same cash flows as promised by the enterprise bond discounted at the
CDB bonds' zero-coupon rates, and then calculate the matching CDB yields. All of our empirical results
are robust to using Treasury yields instead of CDB yields.
  22
     See Appendix A.2 for details on the construction of these two trading samples. "Same-day" trading
requires a bond-day observation have transactions on both markets on the same day to be included in the
sample. Since enterprise bond transactions are relatively sparse in both markets, this definition limits


                                                   18
   We also conduct analysis on an alternative spread measure, called "spread over
matched AAA," which is the difference between the credit spreads of AA/AA+-rated
dual-listed enterprise bonds and that of the matched AAA-rated ones but with similar
haircuts and yields, based on their trading prices on the exchange market (for more
details, see Section 4.3).
    Other market variables from WIND include the ten-year spot yield of CDB bonds,
the spread between the one-day Shanghai exchange repo rate and the one-day Shanghai
interbank offering rate (SHIBOR), the term spread between ten-year Treasury yield and
three-month Treasury yield, and aggregate stock market returns.
    Table 1 provides detailed definitions of variables, and Table 2 reports the summary
statistics for the simultaneous trading sample. The summary statistics for the same-day
trading sample are reported in Table A3 in the Appendix. In Table 2, we separately
report the summary statistics for exchange premia, conversion rates, and haircuts before
and after the policy shock.


3.2     Haircuts and Credit Ratings
Before studying the impact of changes in exchange haircuts on bond prices, it is important
to understand the determinants of haircuts on the exchange during normal times. As
shown in Eq. (1), the haircut is equivalent to the conversion rate for a given bond price.
The conversion rates on the exchange are set by the CSDC and exclusively depend on
security-level characteristics. During our sample period, the CSDC published a formula
for how the conversion rates were set, which involves the bond's credit rating, market
price, and volatility.23 However, the CSDC also made it clear that the formula was
only suggestive; by inserting an opaque term called "discount coefficient," the CSDC
effectively reserved the discretion in setting the conversion rate for each bond.
   To check the extent that one can reverse-engineer the conversion rate formula prior
to the policy shock, in the six-month period before the policy shock, we regress the
conversion rates on four bond rating dummies (AAA, AA+, AA, AA-), market price,
coupon, maturity, volatility, turnover, issuer characteristics such as size and leverage,
plus additional market variables such as CDB spot rate, term spread, and stock market
returns. The results for both the full sample and the simultaneous-trading sample are
the sample size to about 3,400 bond-day observations, compared to about 10,000 bond-day observations
in the simultaneous trading sample.
  23
     The exact definitions of "market price" and "volatility" are given by the relevant regulatory
documents and differ slightly from what are commonly accepted in academia. We replicate these
variables, which are only used in Table 4 where we show the CSDC's reliance on ratings to determine
conversion rates.


                                                19
shown in Table 4. By far the most important determinant of the conversion rates is credit
rating. For the full sample of dual-listed enterprise bonds, the rating dummies explain
96.8% of the total variation in conversion rates, while a kitchen sink regression only raises
the R2 to 97%; the results are quite similar in the simultaneous trading sample. The
main reasons that the CSDC appears to rely primarily on credit ratings when setting
the conversion rates include the transparency and third-party objectiveness of credit
ratings, as well as the poor secondary market liquidity. The fact that bond haircuts
largely depend on credit ratings implies that the policy shock that explicitly targeted
AA+ and AA bonds will result in significant changes in exchange haircuts across bonds,
i.e, a strong first stage for the policy shock as an IV.

                                            [Insert Table 4]


3.3     Exchange Premia and the Policy Shock
We define the exchange premium measure, EXpremiumijt , as the cross-market difference
in credit spreads for bond i from rating category j on day t. Because the credit spreads
for the same enterprise bond on the two markets are based on the same matching CDB
yield, we have

                               EXpremiumijt = yieldIB         EX
                                                   ijt - yieldijt ,                                     (2)

where j  {AAA, AA+, AA, AA-}. A positive premium means the price of a bond is
higher on the exchange than on the interbank market. With common fundamentals,
EXpremiumijt should primarily reflect the differences in pledgeability on the two markets,
plus differences in other liquidity factors (e.g., trade size, frequency). We compute the
exchange premia for all the dual-listed enterprise bonds that satisfy the simultaneous (or
same-day) trading criterion defined in Section 3.1.


Exchange premia before the policy shock For bonds in the simultaneous trading
sample, we first plot the average credit spreads (on the two markets) and the average
exchange premia for the four rating categories in the 6-month window prior to the policy
shock (Figure 4, Panel A). The positive exchange premium of 22 bps enjoyed by the
AAA bonds is significant in terms of economic magnitude. It represents roughly one-fifth
of the average credit spread of these high quality bonds.24 The exchange premia decline
  24
    Does the average exchange premium of 22 bps for AAA bonds imply a near-arbitrage opportunity?
We calculate the returns of a cross-market arbitrage strategy in our sample. Specifically, for the half-year
period before the policy shock, consider buying AAA bonds on the interbank market whenever the


                                                    20
Figure 4: Exchange premia before and after the event. This figure plots the average
credit spreads for each of the four rating categoris on the interbank market and the exchange,
along with the average exchange premium. Panels A and B show the results for the 6 months
before and after the event date 12/8/2014, respectively.


monotonically with lower credit ratings: 15 bps for AA+ bonds, 5 bps for AA bonds,
and -22 bps for AA- bonds.
    To understand the pattern of average exchange premia across ratings, we examine how
pledgeability differs on the two markets for bonds with high and low ratings (assuming
for now that the other components of exchange premia are common across ratings). On
the exchange, the pledgeability of a bond is solely determined by its haircut. We have
explained that the central counter-party system on the exchange features fungibility
across various bond securities: the CSDC treats Treasuries and corporate bonds with
different ratings the same way after adjusting for their conversion rates. In addition, the
conversion rates set by the CCP are non-discriminatory to all investors on the exchange.
Such standardization greatly improves the liquidity of repo transactions on the exchange.
   On the interbank market, however, the haircut for a bond can vary significantly across
counter-parties. Smaller institutional investors--especially local rural credit unions or
small securities firms--often complain about the difficulty of using even AAA corporate
bonds as collateral for repo transactions, whereas large state-owned commercial banks
exchange premium exceeds zero (or 10 bps), holding the bonds for 5 working days, and then selling
the holdings on the exchange. We use the volume-weighted average invoice prices on the interbank
market as buying prices. The volume-weighted invoice bid prices on the exchange market are used as
selling prices. According to industry practice, a minimum trade size of 10 million RMB is assumed on
the interbank market. The pace of selling on the exchange is capped at 20% of its daily volume. The
annualized Sharpe ratio of this strategy is 0.66 (or 0.72) based on the IID assumption. Taking into
account the correlation in returns across bonds will likely further reduce the Sharpe ratio.




                                                21
can get favorable haircuts on the same type of bonds.25 Thus, despite the fact that the
average haircut for AAA bonds based on the reported repo transactions on the interbank
market (about 8%, see Table 3) is lower than the quoted values on the exchange (about
10%, see Table 3), the AAA bonds are actually more pledgeable on the exchange from the
point of view of small institutions. Furthermore, due to tighter financial constraints, we
expect these small institutions to value asset pledgeability more than the large commercial
banks. These factors would tend to raise the valuation for AAA bonds on the exchange
relative to the interbank market, contributing to a positive exchange premium.
   On the other end of the rating spectrum, while OTC-based bilateral bargaining on
the interbank market would allow some reputable institutions to borrow against bonds
with AA- ratings, the haircuts for these bonds were essentially at 100% on the exchange
even before the policy shock. This makes AA- bonds more pledgeable on the interbank
market for the large institutions, resulting in a negative exchange premium.


Exchange premia after the policy shock We examine the impact of the policy
shock on the exchange premia across ratings in the raw data. If the exchange premia are
indeed driven by the rating-dependent haircut policy employed by the CSDC, because
the policy shock alters the rating-haircut relationship, one should expect corresponding
changes in rating-dependent exchange premia afterwards. This is indeed the case, as
shown in Panel B of Figure 4. After the policy shock, exchange premia turned negative
for bonds with both AA+ and AA ratings, consistent with these two type of bonds
completely losing their pledgeability edge on the exchange. The control groups do not
exhibit this behavior: exchange premia did not drop as much for AAA bonds and rose for
AA- bonds. In particular, the rise in exchange premium for AA- bonds in the absence
of any meaningful change in haircuts on the exchange suggests that liquidity for AA-
bonds deteriorated on the interbank market relative to the exchange following the event.


Time-series of exchange premia around the policy shock Next, we plot in
Figure 5 the time series of average exchange premia for three rating groups: AAA,
AA+/AA (combined into one "mid-rated group"), and AA-. We observe that "mid-
rated group" share a similar trend with both the higher credit quality AAA control group
and the lower credit quality AA- control group. What is more, while the exchange
  25
    Large state-owned commercial banks are in a dominant position in the Chinese interbank market.
According to the official statistics released by the interbank market's clearing and settlement agencies
(China Central Depository & Clearing Corporation and Shanghai Clearing House), at the end of 2014,
large state-owned commercial banks, "joint-stock" commercial banks, and city commercial banks held
57% of total bonds outstanding, while small banks like rural commercial banks, rural credit unions, and
postal savings bank only held about 6%. For non-bank financial institutions, mutual funds held about
15%, insurance companies held about 7.5%, and security firms held about 1%.


                                                  22
Figure 5: Exchange premia dynamics. This figure presents the average exchange premia
by bond ratings and subperiods. The three bond-rating groups include the treated group
(AA+ and AA), the AAA group, and the AA- group. The sample of simultaneous trading
is a [-6,6]-month window around the event day 12/8/2014. The sample is divided into 14
subperiods, with two subperiods of 10 trading days each before and after the event day, and
the remaining 12 subperiods of 20 trading days each.


premia for the AA+/AA bonds were in between those of the AAA and AA- bonds before
the event, the former fell after the policy shock whereas the latter, which are control
groups, rose. We highlight that our unique empirical setting allows us to use higher-
and/or lower-credit rating groups as controls to rule out many alternative mechanisms.
In these alternative mechanisms, the policy event represents some aggregate fundamental
shock, and the treatment and control groups could just differ in their sensitivities to the
fundamental shock. However, the implied responses under these alternative mechanisms
tend to be monotonic in credit ratings, which is not what the data show.26
    Notice that the exchange premia for AA- bonds rose after the policy shock, while
the AAA exchange premia fell slightly. The rise in AA- exchange premia is mainly due
to the rise in the credit spreads for AA- bonds on the interbank market, which is likely
because the policy shock made institutional investors more reluctant to hold enterprise
bonds or accept them as repo collateral. In contrast, a flight-to-quality effect actually
made some institutional investors increase their holdings of AAA bonds on the interbank
market, pushing the AAA exchange premia lower. We provide supporting evidence of
  26
    Figure 5 also shows that the gap in exchange premia between AAA an AA- bonds closed after the
event, which is due to the more significant rise in exchange premia following the event for AA- than
AAA bonds. This difference raises the question about which of these two rating categories is a more
appropriate control group for our study. We examine the sensitivity of our Diff-in-Diff analysis and the
pledgeability premium estimates to alternative control groups in Section 4.2.2.



                                                  23
this view in Section 4.2.2. To the extent that the flight-to-quality is unique to AAA
bonds while the reduction in demand of low-grade bonds also applies to AA+/AA bonds,
AA- bonds are more suitable as a control group than AAA bonds.
    The empirical pattern revealed by the raw data in Figure 5 is encouraging, as it shows
that the exchange premia in the treatment rating group (AA+ and AA) react differently
to the policy shock than the control groups (AAA and AA-). However, Figure 5 does
not control for the potential changes in the composition of the simultaneous-trading
sample before and after the event. These concerns will be formally addressed based on a
formal regression-based Diff-in-Diff approach with various fixed effects, to which we turn
next.


4     Empirical Analysis
We present our formal empirical analysis in this section. After highlighting the identifi-
cation challenge in estimating the pledgeability effect on asset pricing, we lay out our
empirical framework and research design to tackle this challenge.


4.1    Research Design
To identify the effects of changes in pledgeability on bond pricing, ideally we would like to
compare how the price of the same bond behaves with and without an exogenous shock
to the haircut. As is evident from Figure 3, the policy shock brought drastic changes to
the haircuts of AA+ and AA bonds (the treatment group) while leaving those of AAA
and AA- bonds (the control group) largely unaffected. But the bonds in the treatment
group are not randomly selected. Besides the differences in the observable characteristics,
it is possible that the exchange's new policy specifically targeted AA+ and AA bonds for
reasons that are not controlled for. In particular, the policy makers might have private
information about the rising risks of the treated enterprise bonds, which are signaled
to the market through the policy action. If so, the policy shock would be correlated
with unobserved changes in investors' beliefs about asset fundamentals and hence would
violate the exclusion restriction; in this case, we may not be able to attribute the relative
changes in credit spreads of the treated bonds to the changes in haircuts.
    We tackle this challenge in two ways. First, as the main empirical strategy after
laying out our theoretical framework, we exploit the advantage of dual-listed bonds, for
which the cross-market credit spread of the same bond (i.e., the exchange premium) is
arguably immune to any potential (unobservable) changes in asset fundamentals. As


                                             24
we explain later, the resulting IV estimates based on the exchange premia are likely
to be downward biased due to cross-market arbitrage. Our second strategy is a more
standard Diff-in-Diff estimation, where we use the non-treated AAA bonds with matching
pre-event characteristics as controls. In contrast to the estimates based on exchange
premia, the second set of estimates are likely upward biased. Together, the two sets of
estimates provide a range for the economic magnitude of the pledgeability effect.


4.1.1    Exchange premia based on dual-listed bonds

We explain our main identification strategy through the following economic framework.
Consider an investor with access to both the exchange and interbank market. A one-
period defaultable bond i with rating j is traded on both markets. The bond's payoff
at time t + 1 (maturity) is Yi,t+1 . The market-specific haircut at time t is hm ijt , with
m  {EX, IB }. Let pm  ijt be the price of the bond at time t in market m. The first-order
condition for the investor's optimal portfolio decision yields the Euler equation:27

                         pm
                          ijt = Et [Mt+1 Yi,t+1 ] +         (1 - hm
                                                                  ijt ).                               (3)
                                                      pledgeability premium

The first term on the right-hand side of (3) is standard: Mt+1 is the pricing kernel for
this agent (as determined by the ratio of marginal utility of consumption between t + 1
and t); the second term is the pledgeability premium due to borrowing constraint. Notice
that  is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the collateral constraint scaled by the
marginal utility at time t, which represents the shadow value of relaxing the collateral
constraint. It is related to the "specialness" in Duffie (1996) and can be microfounded by
the wedge between the collateralized and uncollateralized borrowing (see, e.g. G^  arleanu
and Pedersen, 2011; Chen, Cui, He, and Milbradt, 2018).
   A key assumption behind Eq. (3) is that agents in our model are marginal on both
markets. It follows that the exchange premium in terms of price differential can be
expressed as:

                                   pEX     IB      IB     EX
                                    ijt - pijt =  hijt - hijt ,                                        (4)

where the asset fundamental component from Eq. (3), Et [Mt+1 Yi,t+1 ], drops out. In the
  27
      The investor chooses consumption ct , collateralized borrowing Bt (or riskless saving if Bt < 0), and
                             m                                                                  
defaultable bond holding ijt    in the two markets to maximize a time-separable utility, E [ t=0  t u(ct )].
In each period, she faces a standard budget constraint plus a collateral constraint Bt  m{EX,IB } (1 -
hm     m                                                m
 ijt )ijt . The first-order condition with respect to ijt then implies Eq. (3).




                                                    25
context of Chinese corporate bond markets, mutual funds, insurance companies, and
securities firms are active on both markets (see Section 2.3). We offer empirical evidence
in Appendix B that these three groups of financial institutions were actively trading, and
hence were marginal, in both markets around the 2014 policy shock.
    Eq. (4) shows that one can identify  based on how the exchange premium changes
in response to relative changes in haircuts across the two markets. As shown earlier,
the 2014 policy shock significantly increased the haircuts for AA+ and AA enterprise
bonds on the exchange. This explains the basis of our first set of estimates based on
AA+ and AA bonds, implicitly assuming that their haircuts on the interbank market
remain unchanged during the shock.
    Besides the collateral constraints, there could be additional factors (such as market
liquidity) that affect bond pricing. More specifically, these market liquidity factors may
have affected the haircuts on the interbank market as well, which may introduce certain
biases in estimating Eq. (4). While the simple model above does not consider these
factors, we can summarize them with a residual term m     ijt . The exchange premium then
becomes:

                        pEX     IB      IB     EX
                         ijt - pijt =  hijt - hijt +                 EX
                                                                     ijt   -   IB
                                                                               ijt .    (5)

We are interested in identifying  in the above equation.
    Since we do not directly observe the haircuts on the interbank market or the residual
terms, two additional identification assumptions are needed. First, we assume the
interbank haircuts satisfy

                                 hIB     IB   IB   IB
                                  ijt = hi + hj + ht .                                  (6)

According to Table 3, which reports the interbank market haircuts of a major bank
before and after the policy shock, bonds in the four rating groups seemed to experience a
parallel shift in their haircuts, suggesting that this assumption largely holds in the data.
   Second, we similarly assume the residual, which captures liquidity effects other than
pledgeability-related reasons, satisfies

                                    m         m        m       m
                                    ijt   =   i   +    j   +   t .                      (7)

The key point of this assumption here is that we can rule out rating-time variations in
the residual. One leading economic mechanism that potentially violates this assumption
is the standard "flight-to-quality" effect, a concern that we will discuss later in Section
4.2.2, where we present various estimation results based on different control groups (i.e.,

                                                  26
whether AAA or AA- rated bonds).
    Denoting  u  EX u  - IB
                          u , where u  {i, j, t}, and assuming that the shadow cost
of capital  remains constant during the event window, the price differential can be
expressed as:

      pEX     IB      EX     IB
       ijt - pijt = -hijt + hi +                    i      +      hIB
                                                                   j +           j       + hIB
                                                                                            t +            t   .    (8)
                    identifies     i : bond fixed effect       j : rating fixed effect    t : time fixed effect


In other words, the shadow cost of capital, , can be identified from the responses of
exchange premia to the rating-time dependent haircuts in the exchange market (the first
term), as all other terms can be absorbed by bond, rating, or time fixed effects. This
forms the basis of our 2SLS regression, which uses the policy shock as an instrument for
the haircut change in the exchange market.


2SLS estimation procedure More specifically, recall that for each bond i with rating
j , we construct its exchange premium EXpremiumijt on some trading day t. Let Djt be
the dummy variable for the treatment-group rating categories and the post-policy-shock
period, i.e.,

                              1,    j  {AA+,AA} & t > 12/08/2014
                  Djt =                                                                                             (9)
                              0,    otherwise

To use Djt as an instrument to estimate the impact of changes in haircuts on the exchange
premium, we estimate the first stage as follows:

                      haircutijt = i + j + t +  Djt + Xit  + vijt .                                                (10)

The second stage of the 2SLS is:

               EXpremiumijt = i + j + t +  haircutijt + Xit  + ijt ,                                               (11)

where haircutijt are the first-stage fitted values for exchange market haircuts. As in
Eq. (8), the regression includes bond fixed effects, rating fixed effects, and weekly time
fixed effects. We use weekly time fixed effects because daily time fixed effects are too
stringent given the low frequency of bond trading in our sample. For this reason, we
add market-level controls including CDB spot rates, term spreads, the spread between
one-day exchange repo rate and interbank lending rate, and stock market returns. In
addition, we also add four bond-level time-varying controls including time-to-maturity,
turnover, price, and volatility, as of the day of the simultaneous trade. Finally, it is worth

                                                    27
                 60



                 40



                 20



                  0



                 -20



                 -40



                 -60
                       0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4        0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1



Figure 6: The impact of arbitrage on the estimate of pledgeability premium.
With simulated data, this figure illustrates how cross-market arbitrage forces can lead to a
reduction in the exchange premium, which in turn leads to a downward-biased estimate of   ^.


noting that rating fixed effects should be included in the presence of bond fixed effects
because a bond's rating can change over time.


Cross-market arbitrage: potential downward biases of             ^ The exchange premium­
based estimate of  ^ in Eq. (11) from the above empirical design is likely downward biased,
due to the (limited) cross-market arbitrage activities. We have discussed in great detail
the significant trading frictions--in particular the delays caused by transfer of custody
across two markets--in the second half of 2.3, and as well as footnote 24. However, as
illustrated in Figure 6, in general, market forces will prevent the exchange premium from
drifting too far away from zero.28 In the data, indeed, although there were no significant
reactions on the interbank market for AA+ and AA rated bonds on the day of the policy
shock, the credit spreads of these rating classes rose slowly in the days that followed,
potentially due to arbitrage activities between these two markets. In other words, the
interbank-market credit spreads could also be adversely affected by the policy shock on
the exchange.
    Consequently, the changes in exchange premia would tend to understate the effect of
the pledgeability changes on bond prices. With the possible downward bias of the 2SLS
estimator in mind, we consider the following alternative approach that is designed to
deliver an upward-biased estimate.
  28
   The presence of arbitrage forces will also likely alter the equilibrium dynamics of the exchange
premium, a factor that is ignored in our illustration.


                                                   28
4.1.2   Premia over matching AAA exchange-market bonds

Recall that the unexpected policy shock hit the exchange market by only dis qualifying
AA+ and AA enterprise bonds' pledgeability without affecting AAA bonds. We hence
construct the pledgeability premium of AA+ and AA enterprise bonds over "similar" AAA
enterprise bonds using the credit spreads of these treated and benchmark bonds on the
exchange market only. This alternative exchange-market AAA benchmark improves our
previous estimate in addressing the downward-bias problem, as there is no cross-market
arbitrage involved between the treatment bonds and benchmark bonds.
    The question is how to choose "similar" AAA exchange-trade enterprise bonds. For
each treated exchange-traded enterprise bond--which we denote by "treated"--we match
it with another exchange-traded AAA-rated bond with similar haircut and credit spreads.
Under the framework established in Section 4.1.1, we have hEX            EX
                                                            treated,t - hmatched-AAA,t = 0 for
t < 12/08/2014, while after the policy shock we have hEX               EX
                                                        treated,t - hmatched-AAA,t increases.
Hence one can write the matched-AAA premium as:



pEX           EX                EX               EX
 treated,t - pmatched-AAA,t =  hmatched-AAA,t - htreated,t

                                         identifies 
                                                                                EX              EX
                         + Et Mt+1 Ytreated,t+1 - Ymatched-AAA,t+1          +   treated,t   -   matched-AAA,t .

                                  fundamental residual: 0 if matched well             liquidity residual

                                                                                                   (12)

    In the above Eq. (12), the first line identifies , which is the focus of our study. In
the second line, we have the first term, the "fundamental residual", that captures the
fundamental difference between the matched-bond-pair; if the "matching" is perfect,
then it should be exactly zero (more precisely, we only need the difference to stay at a
constant). The second term "liquidity residual" in the second line captures the liquidity
differential between the treated and control bonds, which might be dependent on the
policy shock. Since "matching" is never ideal, both the second and third terms might be
correlated with the policy shock.
    But keep in mind that we are interested in an overestimate of the value of pledgeability.
In other words, we are tolerant on potential mechanisms that produce a positive correlation
between the terms in the second line in Eq. (12) and the policy shock.
   All plausible economic mechanisms in our context that could contaminate our estimate
seem to satisfy this condition. More specifically, recall that the policy shock in December
2014 represents a negative shock to pledgeability. We argue all of the following three

                                                29
leading endogeneity concerns generate a negative shock to the terms in the second line of
Eq. (12), thereby delivering an overestimate of  in this approach:

   1. First, suppose that the policy maker has some private information that AA+/AA
      rated bonds are lower quality than the market believes, and hence releases the
      liquidity-tightening rules on these bonds. The market views the policy shock as
      the negative signal of the treated AA+/AA bonds, leading to a negative shock to
      the "fundamental residual" term.

   2. Second, suppose that the matched AAA bonds with better fundamentals have
      a smaller beta than those of treated AA/AA+ bonds, so that the "fundamental
      residual" term has a positive beta. Because the liquidity-tightening policy shock is
      likely to represent a negative aggregate market shock, this again implies a negative
      shock to the "fundamental residual" term.

   3. Finally, suppose that the policy shock represents a liquidity-tightening event, and
      the resulting flight-to-liquidity effect raises the price of matched AAA bonds,
      perhaps due to better uncontrolled fundamentals (i.e., beyond the observable
      controls we add in the regressions). This effect also leads to a negative shock to
      the "liquidity residual" term.

    The rest of the IV estimation procedure is the same as the 2SLS procedure laid out
in Section 4.1.1, and we present the corresponding empirical results in Section 4.3.


4.2     Pledgeability and Asset Prices: Exchange Premia
This section conducts our formal empirical analyses on exchange premia, by presenting a
Diff-in-Diff estimation and then the IV estimate of the pledgeability on asset prices.


4.2.1   Diff-in-Diff analysis

We have showed some preliminary evidence in Figure 4 and Figure 5 that exchange
premia across ratings react differently to the policy shock. Overall, they are consistent
with the interpretation that the drop in pledgeability on the exchange adversely affects its
bond prices. These results, however, have potentially severe limitations, as they do not
control for the potential changes in the composition of the sample before and after the
event. To have a higher chance of being included in the simultaneous trading sample (i.e.,
being traded on both markets within a three-day window), a bond needs to be traded
relatively frequently on the two markets. Trading frequencies are endogenous and could

                                            30
change with market conditions, including the policy shock. For example, the trading of
enterprise bonds, especially AAA bonds, became more frequent after the event, which
could have raised the average quality of the AAA bonds in the simultaneous trading
sample.
    To address the above concerns, we conduct a formal Diff-in-Diff analysis in the
12-month window around the policy shock, controlling for bond, rating, and weekly fixed
effects, as well as additional market- and bond-level variables. The model specification is
given in Eq. (13). For better illustration of the dynamics of the differences in exchange
premia between treatment and control groups, we divide the 12-month window into 26
sub-periods (with 10 trading days or 2 weeks in each period); this ensures a sufficient
                                                                       k
number of observations in each sub-period. The dummy variable Djt        , k  {1, · · · , 26},
equals 1 for the treatment group bonds j  {AA+, AA} in the sub-period k and 0
otherwise. Following Freyaldenhoven, Hansen, and Shapiro (2019), we normalize the
point estimate of the Diff-in-Diff coefficient immediately before the event date to zero.
We plot the point estimate, dk , of each sub-period and the associated 95% confidence
interval.
                                                    26
                                                              k
                 EXpremiumijt = ai + bj + ct +            dk Djt + Xit e + uijt          (13)
                                                    k=1


    As Figure 7 shows, the average exchange premia for the treated AA+/AA bonds
and the control AAA/AA- bonds share a common trend before the policy shock. The
Diff-in-Diff coefficients up to 100 days before the event are insignificantly different from
the one immediately before the event. After the event, the exchange premia for the
treated group became significantly lower relative to the control group. Consistent with
the results in Figure 4, the gap ranges between -30 to -50 bps and remained significant
in the 6 months after.


4.2.2   IV estimation

Now we conduct the IV estimation following the procedure outlined in Section 4.1. The
results are shown in Table 5. Results are reported based on three different samples. The
first (columns 1 and 2) is the full simultaneous trading sample. The second (columns 3
and 4) is the subsample that excludes AAA bonds (i.e., using only AA- bonds as the
control group). The third (columns 5 and 6) is the subsample that excludes AA- bonds
(i.e., using only AAA bonds as the control group). By comparing the results across the
three samples, we can learn about the sensitivity of the IV estimates to the assumption
regarding how the exchange premia of the treated group and that of the two control

                                             31
Figure 7: Difference-in-Difference estimation of exchange premia. This figure
plots the estimated coefficients d^k along with their confidence intervals in the difference-in-
difference specification of (13). The point estimate immediately before the event date is
normalized to zero (hence a zero standard error). The dotted line indicates the event on
12/08/2014. The sample is from 2014/6/9 to 2015/6/8, which is divided into 26 10-day
sub-periods.


groups share common variations over time.

                                       [Insert Table 5]

   In all regressions we always include rating fixed effects and time fixed effects at the
weekly level. We then report the results based on two different specifications, one without
bond fixed effects or other bond- and market-level regular controls, the other with.
The regular control variables include bond-day­level characteristics (time to maturity,
turnover ratio, market price, and volatility) and various macro factors (term spread,
CDB yield, 1-day exchange market repo rate over SHIBOR spread, and stock market
return). The t-statstics in parentheses are based on standard errors clustered by week.
For robustness, we also report the t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by rating
and week (in brackets).
    To simplify the interpretation of estimation magnitude, the exchange premium is
quoted as percentage while explanatory variables are quoted as raw values, and the
estimated coefficients in the first stage are reported as percentage.
   The first stage, which regresses exchange market haircuts on the policy shock dummies
and other controls (see Eq. (10)), is quite strong. This result, is expected given the sharp
dependence of bond-level haircuts on credit ratings (see Table 4) and the nature of the

                                              32
policy shock (which specifically targeted ratings). The magnitude of the coefficient on
the policy shock dummy is consistent across all three samples. Without bond fixed
effects and regular controls, the value of the estimated coefficients around 70% reflects
the average rise in haircut for AA+ and AA bonds (see Figure 3). The magnitude
of the coefficient drops slightly after bond level controls are included, likely reflecting
changes in the composition of the sample due to the "simultaneous trading" requirement.
The standard errors are indeed higher when clustering by rating and week than when
clustering by week, consistent with persistent variations in haircuts within each rating.
    In the second stage, we regress the exchange premia on the fitted haircuts, haircut,
from the first-stage regression (see Eq. (11)), with the coefficient  measuring the effect
of changes in haircut on exchange premia. The coefficient estimate is highly statistically
significant across different samples and specifications, although the economic magnitude
varies depending on the control group (more on this point later). In the full sample, the
estimated   ^ of -0.40 implies that an increase in the haircut from 0 to 100% would raise
the bond yields on the exchange by 40 bps.


Flight to quality Using different control groups yields somewhat different estimates
for ^. Dropping the AAA bonds from the sample raises the magnitude of the estimated
^ to -0.53. This is consistent with the results in Figure 5, where we saw the average

exchange premium of AA- bonds rising more than that of the AAA bonds after the
event. In contrast, when restricting the sample to the one without the AA- bonds--so
that only the AAA bonds are used as the control group--the estimated    ^ is -0.21. This
is the most conservative estimate among the three samples, implying that a rise in haircut
from 0 to 100% would raise the bond yields on the exchange by 21 bps.
    The reason that the estimated pledgeability premium is significantly smaller with
AAA bonds as the control is likely due to a "flight-to-quality" effect, as upon the policy
shock it is quite plausible that institutional investors started selling their lower-rated
(AA+ and below) enterprise bonds and increasing the holdings of AAA bonds on both
markets. As we argue below, the effect of the "flight-to-quality" is likely to be stronger on
the interbank market. As a result, the exchange premium of AAA bonds would decline
after the event (as the prices of AAA bonds rise on the interbank market relative to the
exchange) while that of the AA- bonds would rise. This would make AAA bonds a poor
control group, biasing the estimate of  downward.
    What drove a stronger "flight-to-quality" effect in the interbank market in this
episode? As we explained in the introduction, this December 2014 policy event hit
institutional investors hard, which triggered many non-bank financial institutions and
even commercial banks to scramble for liquidity. Since the exchange market is more

                                             33
"retail" oriented while the interbank market is a "wholesale" market (recall Section 2.2
and Figure 2), financial institutions turned to the interbank market as the primary source
of funding to cover any large-scale liquidity shortage following the 2014 policy shock.
While we do not have detailed enterprise bond holdings data in the two markets, we are
able to obtain data on the enterprise bond holdings from an anonymous institutional
investor during that event. Their average daily holdings of AAA enterprise bonds on
the interbank market increased by 61.6% from the month before to the month after the
policy shock, while the increase was only 16.8% on the exchange market. In contrast,
their AA+ and AA enterprise bond holdings declined by around 10% on the interbank
market and by up to 40% on the exchange. These statistics are consistent with our
interpretation of the "flight-to-quality" effect above.


Other robustness tests As robustness test, we repeat the analysis for a half-year
event window (three months before and after the policy shock; see Table A4 in Appendix)
and using the same-day trading sample (Table A5 in Appendix). The findings are
quantitatively similar. We also report the results of OLS regressions of exchange premium
on the haircut in Table A6 in the appendix. The OLS estimate of    ^ has smaller magnitude
of -0.23 compared to the IV estimate. The upward bias in the OLS estimate is likely
due to omitted variables.29
    Another factor that could potentially affect our estimate is that post-event market
liquidity could change differentially across ratings and markets. As a robustness test,
we add controls that measure the liquidity of the two markets separately, including the
rating-level turnover by market as of the day of trade. The economic and statistical
magnitudes for the estimates of pledgeability premia are similar (see Table A7 for the
simultaneous trading sample and Table A8 for the same-day sample in the appendix).
Notice that controlling for rating-level turnover (or similarly bid-ask spreads) may lead
to underestimation of the pledgeability premium due to over-controlling. The reason
is that the policy shock is likely to have heterogeneous effects on liquidity for different
ratings and markets, which cannot be separated from the effects on exchange premia.
  29
    To see this, consider the unobservable credit quality of some dual-listed enterprise bonds. Lower-
quality bonds usually have worse liquidity in the spot market; but because interbank-only investors
such as commercial banks face restrictions by regulation or internal compliance to invest in those bonds,
such a quality-liquidity link tends to be stronger in the interbank market. As a result, bonds with low
(unobservable) credit quality tend to have relatively lower interbank prices and hence relatively higher
exchange premia. On the other hand, these low quality bonds also have higher haircuts, leading to
a positive correlation between haircuts and exchange premia and hence an upward bias for the OLS
estimate.




                                                   34
                              Panel A: Differences in haircuts




                           Panel B: Differences in credit spreads




Figure 8: Differences in haircuts and exchange credit spreads between the
AA+/AA and matched AAA bonds. This figure plots differences of AA+/AA dual-
listed enterprise bonds' haircut and exchange market credit spread with respect to matched
AAA bonds. Panels A and B plot the differences in haircut and credit spread for AA+/AA
bonds with matched AAA bonds, respectively. The matching variables include the pre-event
exchange market credit spread and haircut with the details in the Appendix. The sample period
is 6/9/2014 to 6/8/2015.


4.3    Pledgeability and Asset Prices: Matching AAA Bonds
As mentioned toward the end of Section 4.1.1, our IV estimate based on exchange
premium is likely biased downward due to arbitrage, and one can address this concern
by considering matched exchange-trade AAA enterprise bonds (with similar haircuts
and credit spreads) as the control group. As we have explained in Section 4.1.2, this
approach produces an overestimate of the pledgeability premium.
   We match each bond-day observation of AA+ and AA enterprise bonds on the
exchange market with AAA bond-day observations that have the same haircut and


                                             35
credit spread during the pre-event window. Our matching procedure, which is detailed
in Appendix A.3, results in very similar pre-event haircuts and credit spreads for the
treatment group (AA+ and AA) and the matched AAA benchmarks. Figure 8 shows the
differences in haircuts and credit spreads of the bonds in the treatment group and those
of the matched AAA bonds. The average haircuts are 13.0% and 12.8% for treatment
and control bonds, respectively; the 10th percentile haircuts are 5.3% and 5.4%; and the
90th percentile haircuts are 29.7% and 27.8%. The average credit spreads are 1.31% and
1.26% for treatment and control bonds; the 10th percentile credit spreads are 0.78% and
0.75%; and the 90th percentile credit spreads are 1.80% and 1.75%. The pledgeability
premium is thus the difference between a treatment bond's exchange market credit spread
and the average credit spread of all matched AAA bonds on the same day of trade.
    Table 6 reports the results of the two-stage IV estimation using the matched AAA
bonds as a benchmark.30 The first-stage is reported in Panel A and confirms that the
policy shock is a strong instrument variable. The estimated coefficients of the second-
stage regressions are consistent with our conjecture (Panel B of Table 6): a 100% increase
in the haircut of AA+/AA bonds transfers to a 83 bps decrease in the pledgeability
premium, the effect of which is larger than the estimate of 40 bps when the interbank
credit spread of the simultaneous trading sample is used as the benchmark (Column 2 of
Table 5).31 Overall, our IV estimation provides a lower bound of 40 bps and an upper
bound of 83 bps on bond yields when the haircut increases from 0 to 100%. Taking the
two numbers together, the average impact on credit spread for a 100% increase in the
haircut is around 61 bp, which translates to 3.41% price change for an average dual-listed
enterprise bond as we will discuss with more detail in the next section.


4.4     Economic Effects
We end this section by examining the economic significance of the pledgeability premium
coefficient  estimated from the exchange premia and premia over matching AAA bonds.
    First, we can re-express the impact of changes in the haircut on bond yield in dollar
terms. Consider a bond with face value of 100 RMB. The average enterprise bond in our
sample has a coupon rate of 6.62% and a maturity of 7.58 years. The yield to maturity is
6.45%. When the haircut increases from 0 to 100%, the yield to maturity would increase
by 40 bps based on the exchange premium estimate, and the price would drop from 103.7
  30
     For the sample of only treated AA+ and AA bonds, we do not include the weekly time fixed effects
as our treatment dummy only reflects the time series variation coming from before and after the event.
  31
     To be consistent with the definition of exchange premium and the interpretation of the economic
magnitude, the premium in question is defined as the yields of matched AAA enterprise bonds minus
those of AA+/AA enterprise bonds.


                                                 36
Figure 9: Spread between the interbank market repo rate and the CDB bond
yield, as percentages. This figure plots the daily spread between the one-month interbank
market repo rate for all financial institutions ("R1m") and the CDB bond yield calculated
from CDB bonds with one-month maturity. Two events, the CDSC policy shock on 12/8/2014
studied by this paper and the Chinese banking liquidity crisis during 06/2013 analyzed in
Hachem and Song (2017), are indicated. The sample period is from 1/1/2010 to 10/31/2019.


to 101.4 RMB, which is 2.3 RMB or 2.2%. Based on the estimate of premia over matched
AAA bonds, the yield increase would be 83 bps, and the price drop would be 4.8 RMB
or 4.6%.
    Second, we can convert  into the shadow cost of capital  in Eq. (3). We extend
the formula for the shadow value of margin constraint in G^ arleanu and Pedersen (2011)
to take into account the fact that the marginal investor borrows against her bonds only
when hit by liquidity shocks,

Pledgeability premium = Freq. of liq. shocks × shadow cost of capital × (1 - haircut).

The pledgeability premium will be higher when the marginal investor is more frequently
in a liquidity-constrained state, and/or when she faces higher shadow cost of capital in
the constrained state. The shadow cost of capital is the gap between the interest-rate
spread of collateralized and uncollateralized financing--that is, a form of financing risk
premium (n.b., uncollateralized financing is default adjusted as in, for example, Gilchrist
and Zakrajsek, 2012). Finally, the premium is higher for assets with smaller haircuts.
   Through the lens of the formula above, we can infer the shadow cost of capital for
investors on the exchange market. Before the policy shock, about 35% of the enterprise
bonds on the exchange were used as repo collateral on a typical day. If we interpret this


                                            37
number as the frequency of a typical bond investor being liquidity constrained, then the
pledgeability premium estimates of 40 to 83 bps, which are for a bond with a 0% haircut,
imply a shadow cost of capital of 1.1% to 2.4% per annum.
    Finally, to put into perspective our estimate of the pledgeability premium and shadow
cost of capital during the historical episode around the end of 2014, we plot the time
series of the spread between the interbank market repo rate for all financial institutions
and the risk-free CDB yield in Figure 9; this spread is a widely used indicator of funding
constraints in the Chinese bond markets. Consistent with the policy shock tightening
the funding constraints faced by financial institutions, the spread did spike up on the day
of policy shock as indicated in Figure 9. In the longer sample, we also see other periods
(e.g., the Chinese banking liquidity crisis during June 2013 indicated in the figure) with
even higher repo spreads. The pledgeability premium is likely to be significantly higher
during these crisis episodes.


5     Conclusion
The equilibrium price of an asset not only depends on its fundamentals but also its
pledgeability. The Chinese corporate bond markets provide an ideal laboratory to study
the effect of pledgeability empirically thanks to the fact that some bonds with identical
fundamentals are simultaneously traded in two parallel markets--centralized exchange
market and decentralized OTC interbank market. The differences in pledgeability lead
to identical corporate bonds having different prices on the two markets. By exploiting
a policy shock that dramatically reduced the pledgeability of bonds rated below AAA
and above AA- on the exchange market, we are able to establish a causal effect of asset
pledgeability on prices. Estimates based on instrumental variables imply that a 100%
increase in the haircut increases credit spreads by 40­83 bps.




                                            38
References
Adrian, T., B. Begalle, A. Copeland, and A. Martin, 2012, "Repo and securities lending,"
 Discussion paper.

Ai, H., K. Li, J. Li, and C. Schlag, forthcoming, "The collateralizability premium,"
  Review of Financial Studies.

Amihud, Y., 2002, "Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects,"
 Journal of Financial Markets, 5, 31­56.

Amstad, M., and Z. He, 2018, "Chapter 6: Interbank System," Handbook of China's
 Financial System, edited by Marlene Amstad, Guofeng Sun and Xiong Wei.

Anderson, M., and M. R. Stulz, 2017, "Is post-crisis bond liquidity lower," Working
 paper.

Ang, A., J. Bai, and H. Zhou, 2019, "The great wall of debt: Real estate, political risk,
 and Chinese local government financing cost," Working paper.

Ashcraft, A., N. G^arleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2011, "Two monetary tools: Interest
  rates and haircuts," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 25, 143­180.

Bai, C.-E., C.-T. Hsieh, and Z. Song, 2016, "The long shadow of a fiscal expansion,"
 Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 60, 309­327.

Bai, J., and P. Collin-Dufresne, 2019, "The CDS-bond basis," Financial Management,
 48, 417­439.

Basak, S., and D. Cuoco, 1998, "An equilibrium model with restricted stock market
  participation," Review of Financial Studies, 11, 309­341.

Biais, B., and R. Green, 2019, "The microstructure of the bond market in the 20th
  century," Review of Economic Dynamics, 33, 250­271.

Bian, J., Z. He, K. Shue, and H. Zhou, 2018, "Leverage-Induced Fire Sales and Stock Mar-
  ket Crashes," NBER Working Papers 25040, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Brunnermeier, M., and L. Pedersen, 2009, "Market liquidity and funding liquidity,"
  Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2201­2238.




                                           39
Caballero, R. J., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2001, "International and domestic collateral
  constraints in a model of emerging market crises," Journal of Monetary Economics,
 48, 513­548.

Chabakauri, G., 2015, "Asset pricing with heterogeneous preferences, beliefs, and portfolio
  constraints," Journal of Monetary Economics, 75, 21­34.

Chen, H., Z. Chen, Z. He, and R. Xie, 2018, "Repo counterparty risk in China's exchange
  market," Memo.

Chen, H., R. Cui, Z. He, and K. Milbradt, 2018, "Quantifying liquidity and default risks
  of corporate bonds over the business cycle," Review of Financial Studies, 31, 852­897.

Chen, Z., Z. He, and C. Liu, forthcoming, "The financing of local government in China:
  Stimulus loan wanes and shadow banking waxes," Journal of Financial Economics.

Copeland, A., A. Martin, and M. Walker, 2014, "Repo runs: Evidence from the tri-party
  repo market," The Journal of Finance, 69, 2343­2380.

Danielsson, J., J.-P. Zigrand, and H. S. Shin, 2002, "Asset price dynamics with value-at-
  risk constrained traders," Working Paper.

Detemple, J., and S. Murthy, 1997, "Equilibrium asset prices and no-arbitrage with
 portfolio constraints," Review of Financial Studies, 10, 1133­1174.

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and Z. Song, 2017, "The value of trading relations in
  turbulent times," Journal of Financial Economics, 124, 266­284.

Duffie, D., 1996, "Special repo rates," The Journal of Finance, 51, 493­526.

Duffie, D., 2010, "Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital,"
 The Journal of Finance, 65, 1237­1267.

Duffie, D., N. G^
                arleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2005, "Over-the-counter markets," Econo-
 metrica, 73, 1815­1847.

Fan, L., and C. Zhang, 2007, "Beyond segmentation: The case of China's repo markets,"
  Journal of Banking and Finance, 31, 939­954.

Feldh¨utter, P., 2012, "The same bond at different prices: Identifying search frictions and
  selling pressures," Review of Financial Studies, 25, 1155­1206.

Fleckenstein, M., F. A. Longstaff, and H. Lustig, 2014, "The TIPS-Treasury bond puzzle,"
  The Journal of Finance, 69, 2151­2197.

                                            40
Fostel, A., and J. Geanakoplos, 2008, "Leverage cycles and the anxious economy,"
  American Economic Review, 98, 1211­1244.

Freyaldenhoven, S., C. Hansen, and J. M. Shapiro, 2019, "Pre-event trends in the panel
  event-study design," American Economic Review, 109, 3307­38.

G^
 arleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen, 2011, "Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from
 the law of one price," Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1980­2022.

Geanakoplos, J., 2010, "The leverage cycles," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 24, 1­66.

Gilchrist, S., and E. Zakrajsek, 2012, "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,"
  American Economic Review, 102, 1692­1720.

Gorton, G., and A. Metrick, 2012, "Securitized banking and the run on repo," Journal
 of Financial Economics, 104, 425­451.

Green, R. C., B. Hollifield, and N. Sch¨
                                       urhoff, 2007a, "Dealer intermediation and price
  behavior in the aftermarket for new bond issues," Journal of Financial Economics, 86,
  643­682.

Green, R. C., B. Hollifield, and N. Sch¨
                                       urhoff, 2007b, "Financial intermediation and the
  costs of trading in an opaque market," Review of Financial Studies, 20, 275­314.

Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos, 2002, "Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
  constrained arbitrageurs," Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361 ­ 407.

Hachem, K., and Z. M. Song, 2017, "Liquidity regulation and credit booms: Theory and
  evidence from China," Working paper.

Harris, L. E., and M. S. Piwowar, 2006, "Secondary trading costs in the municipal bond
  market," The Journal of Finance, 61, 1361­1397.

He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2013, "Intermediary asset pricing," American Economic
 Review, 103, 732­770.

He, Z., and K. Milbradt, 2014, "Endogenous liquidity and defaultable bonds," Econo-
 metrica, 82, 1443­1508.

He, Z., and W. Xiong, 2012, "Debt financing in asset markets," American Economic
 Review, 102, 88­94.

Hendershott, T., D. Li, D. Livdan, and N. Sch¨
                                             urhoff, 2017, "Relationship trading in
  OTC markets," Working paper.

                                          41
Huang, J., Z. Huang, and X. Shao, 2018, "The risk of implicit guarantees: Evidence from
 the shadow interbank market in China," Working paper.

Jiang, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and H. Lustig, 2018, "Foreign Safe Asset Demand and the
  Dollar Exchange Rate," NBER Working Papers 24439, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Jin, S., W. Wang, and Z. Zhang, 2018, "The value and real effects of implicit guarantees,"
  Working paper.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore, 1997, "Credit cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 105,
  211­248.

Krishnamurthy, A., 2002, "The bond/old-bond spread," Journal of Financial Economics,
  66, 463­506.

Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and D. Orlov, 2014, "Sizing up repo," The Journal of
 Finance, 69, 2381­2417.

Lagos, R., and G. Rocheteau, 2009, "Liquidity in asset markets with search frictions,"
  Econometrica, 77, 403­426.

Lewis, K. F., F. A. Longstaff, and L. Petrasek, 2017, "Asset mispricing," NBER Working
  Papers 23231, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Li, D., and N. Sch¨
                  urhoff, 2019, "Dealer networks," The Journal of Finance, 74, 91­144.

Liu, C., S. Wang, K. J. Wei, and N. Zhong, 2019, "The demand effect of yield-chasing
  retail investors: Evidence from the Chinese enterprise bond market," Journal of
  Empirical Finance, 50, 57­77.

Liu, L. X., Y. Lyu, and F. Yu, 2017, "Implicit government guarantee and the pricing of
  Chinese LGFV debt," Working paper.

Longstaff, F. A., 2004, "The flight-to-liquidity premium in U.S. Treasury bond prices,"
 The Journal of Business, 77, 511­526.

Mancini, L., A. Ranaldo, and J. Wrampelmeyer, 2016, "The euro interbank repo market,"
 Review of Financial Studies, 29, 1747­1779.

Mo, J., and M. G. Subrahmanyam, 2019, "Policy interventions, liquidity, and clientele
 effects in the Chinese corporate credit bond market," Working paper.



                                           42
Simsek, A., 2013, "Belief disagreements and collateral constraints," Econometrica, 81,
  1­53.

Vayanos, D., and T. Wang, 2007, "Search and endogenous concentration of liquidity in
  asset markets," Journal of Economic Theory, 136, 66 ­ 104.

Vayanos, D., and P.-O. Weill, 2008, "A search-based theory of the on-the-run phenomenon,"
 The Journal of Finance, 63, 1361­1398.

Wang, Y., and H. Xu, 2019, "Bond pledgeability and bond issuance yield: Evidence from
 the financial market," Journal of Financial Research, 464, 20­39, in Chinese.




                                          43
                                                           Table 1: Definition of variables


     Variables                 Definition
     Dependent variables
     EX premium                Exchange premium in terms of percentage is the interbank market credit spread minus the simultaneous exchange
                               market credit spread
     EX premiumpre             Exchange premium of the subsample before the policy shock from 6/9/2014 to 12/8/2014
     EX premiumpost            Exchange premium of the subsample after the policy shock from 12/9/2014 to 6/8/2015
     Matched spread            Credit spread in terms of percentage is the exchange market AA+/AA-rated bond credit spread minus the matched
                               AAA-rated bond credit spread

     Explanatory variables
     Haircut                   The percentage of the levered investors' own money needed for the margin account to borrow using the underlying bond as
                               collateral
     Haircutpre                Haircut of the subsample before the policy shock from 6/9/2014 to 12/8/2014
     Haircutpost               Haircut of the subsample after the policy shock from 12/9/2014 to 6/8/2015
     Conversion                The rate (%) between the value of exchange market standard bond that can be converted from one unit of pledgeable bonds
     Conversionpre             Conversion rate of the subsample before the policy shock from 6/9/2014 to 12/8/2014




44
     Conversionpost            Conversion rate of the subsample after the policy shock from 12/9/2014 to 6/8/2015

     Bond-day level variables
     IB spread                The interbank market credit spread defined as bond trading price implied YTM minus the matching China Development
                              Bank bond yield
     EX spread                The exchange market credit spread defined as bond trading price implied YTM minus the matching China Development
                              Bank bond yield
     Maturity                 The number of years to maturity as of the day of trade
     Turnover                 The total number of shares traded in both the interbank and the exchange markets over the number of shares outstanding
     Market price             The average invoice trading price of the most recent five non-zero trading days of the exchange market
     Volatility               The highest close price minus the lowest close price divied by the average of the two over the past five non-zero trading
                              days of the exchange market

     Day level variables
     CDBspot                   10-year China Development Bank spot yield as of the day of trade
     Term spread               10-year Treasury yield minus 1-year Treasury yield as of the day of trade
     GC001-SHIBOR              Spread of 1-day Shanghai exchange repo rate over 1-day Shanghai Interbank Offering Rate as of the day of trade
     Retstock                  Daily return of Shanghai Composite Index as of the day of trade
                               Table 2: Summary statistics
This table reports the summary statistics the simultaneous trading sample from 6/9/2014 to
6/8/2015. The table presents number of observations, the mean, the standard deviation, the
10th percentile, the median, and the 90th percentile. Panel A presents the summary statistics
of key variables. Panel B presents the summary statistics of exchange premia by rating. Panel
C presents the summary statistics of haircuts by rating.

          Panel A: All variables
                                    N       Mean    STD      P10     Median    P90
          EX premium               9976    -0.03     0.45    -0.62    -0.02    0.50
            EX premiumpre          4882     0.08     0.40    -0.38     0.05    0.56
            EX premiumpost         5094    -0.14     0.47    -0.73    -0.11     0.41
          Haircut                  9976    63.79    38.50    14.41   100.00   100.00
            Haircutpre             4882    32.35    23.50     7.42    30.51    44.63
            Haircutpost            5094    93.93    22.75   100.00   100.00   100.00
          Conversion               9976    38.34    40.85     0.00     0.00    90.00
            Conversionpre          4882    71.68    25.19    58.00    74.00    98.00
            Conversionpost         5094     6.39    23.95     0.00     0.00     0.00
          IB spread                9976     2.40     0.80     1.40     2.41    3.41
          EX spread                9976     2.44    0.85      1.31     2.49    3.46
          Matched spread           9961     0.56    0.68     -0.12     0.47     1.40
            Matched spreadpre      2176     0.05     0.15    -0.12     0.04    0.26
            Matched spreadpost     7785     0.70     0.70    -0.12     0.71    1.50
            Matched spreadAA+      7246     0.55     0.65    -0.11     0.45    1.38
            Matched spreadAA       2715     0.58     0.75    -0.18     0.50    1.48
          Maturity                 9976    5.11     1.62      2.96     5.29    6.74
          Turnover                 9976     0.08     0.08     0.01     0.05     0.17
          Market price             9976   105.06    5.64    100.46   105.37   110.81
          Volatility               9976     0.02     0.02     0.00     0.01     0.04
          CDBspot                  9976     4.36     0.51     3.80     4.15     5.18
          Term spread              9976     0.54    0.31      0.27     0.44    0.95
          GC001-SHIBOR             9976     1.89     3.86    -0.46     0.61    5.46
          Retstock                 9976     0.40     1.59    -1.13     0.32    2.31


          Panel B: Exchange premia by rating (%)
          AAA                       538      0.16   0.45    -0.34      0.07    0.72
          AA+                      3082      0.02   0.42    -0.53      0.01    0.55
          AA                       5181     -0.08   0.45    -0.69     -0.04    0.45
          AA-                      1175     -0.05   0.45    -0.61     -0.05    0.48


          Panel C: Haircuts by rating (%)
          AAA                       538   10.62      8.82    5.21     6.74     26.00
          AA+                      3082   60.56     40.65    7.14    100.00   100.00
          AA                       5181   63.02     35.57   26.39     43.20   100.00
          AA-                      1175   100.00     0.00   100.00   100.00   100.00

                                               45
                       Table 3: Haircuts on the interbank market
This table reports average haircuts on the interbank market one and six months prior to and
after the policy shock on the exchange on December 8, 2014. The average values are computed
based on all the enterprise bond repo transactions conducted by an anonymous major bank on
the interbank market. The numbers in parentheses are standard errors.

                                                                              AA- &
     Sample period             AAA               AA+            AA
                                                                               below
                               7.41              11.44         28.85            33.64
  11/09/14­12/08/14
                              (0.85)             (1.87)        (3.12)          (14.11)
                              17.24              16.53         32.14            37.18
  12/09/14­01/08/15
                              (1.10)             (2.24)        (2.88)          (22.37)
                               8.38              12.93         32.03           35.66
  06/09/14­12/08/14
                              (0.56)             (0.96)        (1.53)          (7.01)
                              13.76              14.38         31.23           37.20
  12/09/14­06/08/15
                              (0.44)             (1.25)        (1.28)          (8.89)




                                            46
                           Table 4: Determinants of conversion rate
This table reports the regression results of dual-listed enterprise bonds' exchange market
conversion rates on rating dummies and control variables. The sample in Columns (1) to (3)
includes all dual-listed enterprise bonds' daily observations including those without transaction.
The sample in Columns (4) to (6) includes daily observations with simultaneous trading within
a two-day window in two markets. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics clustered by bond
are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The sample period is 6/9/2014 to 12/8/2014.



                                  Full                                  Simultaneous
                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
 DummyAAA           91.41                      36.13          93.20                     -95.80
                  (125.22)                     (3.13)        (25.37)                    (-3.49)
 DummyAA+           80.83                      26.67          82.26                    -105.66
                   (89.78)                     (2.26)        (47.72)                    (-4.00)
 DummyAA            72.53                      18.85          72.00                    -113.19
                  (178.62)                     (1.60)        (67.93)                    (-4.29)
 DummyAA-            1.89                     -49.74           3.84                    -177.49
                    (1.10)                    (-4.32)         (1.01)                    (-7.06)
 Market price                      0.71          0.57                        0.70          1.50
                                 (98.04)       (4.94)                      (42.08)       (6.16)
 Volatility                     -26.31        -48.56                     -110.66        -64.46
                                (-0.88)       (-2.36)                     (-2.27)       (-2.11)
 MCB                                           -2.03                                     -2.96
                                              (-2.27)                                   (-1.37)
 Coupon                                        -0.93                                     -2.61
                                              (-1.34)                                   (-1.92)
 Maturity                                        0.28                                      1.07
                                                (1.17)                                    (1.40)
 Turnover                                     386.22                                       3.88
                                                (5.67)                                    (0.85)
 YieldCDB
      matching                                 53.23                                   1180.65
                                                (0.25)                                    (2.13)
 Size                                            1.21                                      1.00
                                                (2.85)                                    (1.25)
 Leverage                                      -8.75                                     -6.34
                                              (-3.42)                                   (-0.95)
 CDBspot                                       -2.47                                     -9.31
                                              (-1.23)                                   (-1.69)
 Term spread                                   -2.95                                     -2.64
                                              (-2.55)                                   (-0.63)
 SHIBOR                                          4.17                                    12.19
                                                (6.84)                                    (4.13)
 Retstock                                        0.12                                      0.18
                                                (4.65)                                    (0.75)
 Industry FE         -             -                           -             -
 R-square           0.97          0.92          0.97          0.95          0.90           0.96
 N                117780        117780        117780          4882          4882           4882




                                               47
                                       Table 5: IV estimation
This table reports the results of IV regressions using the simultaneous trading sample. Panels
A and B present the results for the first and second stage regressions. Columns (1) and (2)
present the results using the full sample. Columns (3) and (4) present the results using the
subsample of AA+, AA, and AA- bonds. Columns (5) and (6) present the results using
the subsample of AA+, AA, and AAA bonds. The sample period is 6/9/2014 to 6/8/2015.
Heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistics clustered by week (or by rating and week) are reported
in parentheses (brackets). The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


 Panel A: First stage

 Dependent:              Full                     exclude AAA              exclude AA-
 Haircut           (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
 Shock            72.89          67.80         72.12       64.96        74.35         72.31
                (113.42)        (28.92)      (109.08)     (17.18)      (93.15)      (104.14)
                 [19.99]        [11.23]       [19.57]      [8.07]      [18.97]       [14.46]
 Controls          -                            -                        -
 Rating FE
 Week FE
 Bond FE           -                             -                        -
 R-square         0.93           0.97           0.92       0.96           0.92         0.97
 N                9976           9799           9438       9282          8801          8631




                                                48
                               Table 5 (cont.): IV estimation


Panel B: Second stage
Dependent:                      Full                exclude AAA      exclude AA-
Exchange premia          (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)    (5)        (6)
Haircut                  -0.50   -0.40   -0.64              -0.53   -0.24     -0.21
                        (-8.64) (-5.40) (-8.68)            (-5.50) (-3.55)   (-2.84)
                        [-3.04] [-3.07] [-8.78]           [-11.31] [-6.89]   [-4.10]
Maturity                           1.97                       2.10              2.41
                                  (2.70)                     (2.71)            (3.08)
                                  [2.41]                     [2.32]            [2.88]
Turnover                           0.07                       0.05              0.10
                                  (0.89)                     (0.68)            (1.11)
                                  [1.15]                     [0.80]            [1.51]
Market price                       0.01                       0.01              0.01
                                  (3.75)                     (2.95)            (4.87)
                                  [3.11]                     [2.62]            [5.25]
Volatility                         0.08                     -0.03               0.01
                                  (0.31)                   (-0.11)             (0.03)
                                  [0.62]                   [-0.08]             [0.08]
CDBspot                          -8.47                      -4.95            -13.36
                                (-0.89)                    (-0.51)           (-1.16)
                                [-1.52]                    [-0.47]           [-1.84]
Term spread                        5.48                       1.37            10.80
                                  (1.10)                     (0.23)            (2.12)
                                  [1.60]                     [0.09]            [3.04]
GC001-SHIBOR                     -0.25                      -0.25             -0.23
                                (-2.28)                    (-2.53)           (-2.03)
                                [-1.88]                    [-1.42]           [-1.47]
Retstock                         -0.14                      -0.26               0.09
                                (-0.47)                    (-0.71)             (0.27)
                                [-0.66]                    [-0.96]             [0.51]
Rating FE
Week FE
Bond FE                   -                         -                -
R-square                 0.15          0.50        0.14     0.48     0.17     0.52
N                        9976          9799        9438     9282    8801      8631




                                              49
           Table 6: IV estimation using matched AAA bonds as benchmark
This table reports the results of IV regressions using the matched AAA bonds as a benchmark.
The pledgeability premium is the credit spread between AA+/AA dual-listed enterprise bonds
and their matched AAA bonds, where the matching criteria include credit spread and haircut
before 12/8/2014. Panels A and B present the results for the first and second stages. The
sample period is 6/9/2014 to 6/8/2015. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics clustered by
week are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


            Panel A: First stage

            Dependent: Haircut                          (1)              (2)
            Shock                                      86.89            85.77
                                                      (89.77)          (85.77)
            Controls                                    -
            Rating FE
            Bond FE                                      -
            R-square                                    0.98             0.99
            N                                           9961             9916

            Panel B: Second stage

            Dependent: Pledgeability premium            (1)              (2)
            Haircut                                   -0.74            -0.83
                                                    (-30.87)         (-17.72)
            Maturity                                                   -0.03
                                                                      (-0.34)
            Turnover                                                     2.18
                                                                        (2.94)
            Market price                                                 0.02
                                                                        (4.78)
            Volatility                                                   0.39
                                                                        (0.93)
            CDBspot                                                    -3.53
                                                                      (-0.93)
            Term spread                                                  4.40
                                                                        (0.90)
            GC001-SHIBOR                                               -0.19
                                                                      (-0.70)
            Retstock                                                     0.32
                                                                        (0.70)
            Rating FE
            Bond FE                                      -
            R-square                                    0.15             0.63
            N                                           9961             9916



                                              50
                                       Appendix

A         Details of Data Construction

A.1        Bond rating classification
Multiple bond ratings or issuer ratings. In China, there are five major rating
agencies offering rating services to bond issuers.32 Moreover, credit ratings are available
at both the bond level and the issuing entity level. Consequently, not only can a bond
have multiple bond ratings, it can also have multiple issuer ratings. We use the following
procedure to determine the unique bond and issuer rating for a given bond on a given
day. First, for bond rating, we follow the market convention of "lowest rating principle."
That is, if there are multiple ratings available for the same bond on a given day, we use
the lowest rating as the bond rating.
    We then determine the issuer rating for this bond. For the sample before October 24,
2014, the issuer rating would be the one from the same rating agency where the lowest
bond rating is obtained. The CSDC refers to this as the "issuer-bond rating matching
principle." For the sample after October 24, 2014, following the new CSDC policy, we
set the issuer rating to be the lowest one among all the issuer ratings for the same bond.


Bond rating reclassification. As explained in Section 2.5, on the evening of December
8, 2014, the exchange not only made the enterprise bonds rated below AAA ineligible as
repo collateral, but also disqualified the AAA enterprise bonds with below-AA issuer
ratings or having an AA issuer rating but with negative outlooks. To be conservative,
we reclassify these two types of AAA bonds as AA- bonds in the after-event period.
   Our final sample has four re-defined rating groups for each bond-day observation:
AAA, AA+, AA, and AA- (including those bonds with below AA- rating). AA+ and
AA bonds are classified as treatment group and AAA and AA- bonds are classified
as control group.33 We also drop observations whose bond rating switches between
treatment group and control group within the [-2,2] month window around the event
date.
       The exchange's criteria regarding repo eligibility of various bonds have changed several
  32
     These five rating agencies are Chengxin (Chengxin Securities Rating and Chengxin International
Rating), Lianhe (China United Rating and China Lianhe Rating) and Dagong Global Credit Rating; for
a comprehensive review of the rating agency, see Amstad and He (2018).
  33
     AA- bonds are included in the control group as few AA- bonds are pledgeable even before the
policy shock.


                                                51
times just in 2014. Before June 27, 2014, bonds with both the issuer rating and bond
rating no lower than AA were eligible as repo collateral on the exchange. Regulations
released on May 29 and June 27 that year required that starting from June 27, bonds in
pledge with issuer rating of AA should have the issuer status either "Positive" or "Stable"
(instead of "Negative"). The issuer rating refers to the rating given by the specific rating
agency that rates its bond. However, as more and more firms issue more than one bond,
it is highly probable that one issuer has conflicting issuer rating from different agencies
rating different bonds that the firm issues. Therefore, the policy released by CSRC
on October 24 further designate the issuer rating as the lowest one among all these
applicable ratings. In accordance with the policies, we make adjustment to the bond
rating grouping to guarantee the consistency of bonds' pledgeability. Specifically, for
the trading days after October 24, we define the issuer rating according to the "Lowest
Rule"; and by jointly considering bond rating, issuer rating and status, we re-categorize
all the bonds without repo eligibility into the "Low Rating" group.34


A.2        Construction of exchange premium
The exchange premium is the credit spread between the interbank yield and the exchange
yield for the same bond, based on the prices of either "simultaneous" or "same-day"
transactions from the two markets.
       The pairing procedure for "simultaneous trading" is as following:

   1. For days with interbank market trading, we match trading day t's interbank market
      credit spread with the closest exchange market daily credit spread within the
      window [t-2, t]. Specifically, if this bond has non-zero trading on day t in exchange
      market, the exchange premium is the difference between day t interbank market
      credit spread and day t exchange market credit spread. If this bond does not have
      any trading on day t on the exchange market but has non-zero trading on trading
      day t-1 (t-2), the exchange premium is the difference between day t interbank
      market credit spread and day t-1 (t-2) exchange market credit spread.

   2. For days with exchange market trading, we match day t's exchange market credit
      spread with the closest interbank market daily credit spread within the window
      [t-2, t]. Because we have already paired the same-day two-market trades in step 1,
      exchange market day t observation is dropped if the bond has non-zero interbank
  34
    Since for certain reasons, certain bonds not reaching the pledgeability criteria shows positive
converting rate, we perform a conservative practice in rating adjustment that only re-categorize those
below-criteria with very low converting rate (below 0.1) bonds into the "Low Rating" group.



                                                 52
      market trading on day t. Otherwise, the exchange premium is the difference between
      trading day t-1 (t-2) interbank market credit spread and trading day t exchange
      market credit spread.


A.3     Matching procedures of AA+ and AA enterprise bonds
        with AAA enterprise bonds
We match exchange market listed AA+ and AA-rated enterprise bonds with AAA-rated
enterprise bonds as benchmark in two dimensions: haircut and matching CDB credit
spread. The matching is conducted at bond-day level in the six-month window before
the event date, i.e., from June 9 to December 8, 2014. For any AA+/AA bond that
was ever traded in the six-month window after the event date (December 9, 2014 to
June 8, 2015), the average credit spread of all non-zero trading AAA bonds that belong
to the set of pre-event matched AAA bonds w.r.t. the AA+/AA bond is used as the
benchmark. The following steps describe the detailed pre-event matching procedure and
how we benchmark AA+/AA bonds with matched AAA bonds.

  1. For a daily observation of an AA+ or AA rated bond with non-zero exchange market
     trading in the [-6, 0] month pre-event window, five non-zero trading AAA-rated
     bonds that have the five smallest absolute differences in haircut w.r.t. the AA+/AA
     bond on the day of trade are kept as candidate benchmark bonds.

  2. To ensure that an AA+ or AA bond's haircut is close enough to those of the
     candidate AAA bonds, an AA+ or AA bond's bond-day observation is dropped if
     the fifth smallest absolute haircut difference between an AA+ or an AA bond and
     the candidate AAA bond is larger than the median value of all absolute haircut
     differences. The candidate AAA bond pool for the AA+ or AA bond i on day t is
     denoted by AAAhaircut
                       i,t   .

  3. For a daily observation of an AA+ or AA rated bond with non-zero exchange
     market trading in the [-6, 0] month pre-event window, five non-zero trading AAA-
     rated bonds that have the five smallest absolute differences in matching CDB
     credit spread w.r.t. the AA+/AA bond on the day of trade are kept as candidate
     benchmark bonds.

  4. To ensure that an AA+ or AA bond's matching CDB credit spread is close enough
     to those of the candidate AAA bonds, an AA+ or AA bond's bond-day observation
     is dropped if the fifth smallest absolute credit spread difference between an AA+
     or AA bond and the candidate AAA bond is larger than the median value of all

                                          53
      absolute credit spread differences. The candidate AAA bond pool for the AA+ or
      AA bond i on day t is denoted by AAAyieldspread
                                              i,t     .

    5. AAA bonds that belong to both AAAhaircut
                                           i,t  and AAAyieldspread
                                                          i,t      are denoted as
       matched set of AAA bonds for AA+ or AA bond i on day t, AAAmatched
                                                                   i,t    .

    6. For any AA+ or AA bond i day t observation in the six-month pre-event window,
       the average credit spread of AAA bonds belonging to AAAmatched
                                                               i,t    is taken as the
       benchmark.

    7. For any AA+ or AA bond i, the union of all its matched bond sets AAAmatched
                                                                              i,t
                                                            matched          matched
       across its non-zero trading days Ti is denoted by AAAi       = tTi AAAi,t     .

    8. For any AA+ or AA bond i day  observation in the six-month post-event window,
       the average credit spread of AAA bonds with non-zero trading on day  belonging
       to AAAmatched
               i      is taken as the benchmark.


B      Spot and Repo Transactions of Marginal Investors
In this subsection, we provide empirical evidence that the three groups of marginal
investors, including mutual funds, insurance companies, and securities firms, actively
traded on both the interbank and exchange markets during the sample period around
the 2014 policy shock.
    Figure A2 Panel A plots the share of enterprise bonds held by the marginal investors
over deposited enterprise bonds on each market. Over the one-year window from
2014/6/30 to 2015/6/30, enterprise bonds held by those marginal investors account for
more than 50% of interbank market deposited enterprise bonds, and the number is higher
than 70% on the exchange market. Figure A2 Panel B plots the share of enterprise bond
spot transaction by marginal investors over the four quarters around the policy shock.
Marginal investors' spot transactions account for 30% to 50% of all interbank market
enterprise bond trades, and these numbers are around 80% for the exchange market.
Overall, mutual funds, insurance companies, and securities firms are important traders
of enterprise bonds on both markets, not just before the policy shock, but also after the
policy shock.
    In Figure A3, we plot the monthly repo and reverse repo transaction shares by
participant type over the period of 2014:6 to 2015:5. Those marginal investors also
actively participate in the repo transactions on the interbank market: around 20% of repo
and 7% of reverse-repo transactions were conducted by them. We do not have detailed


                                           54
repo transaction data by participant type for the exchange market. But according to a
research report issued by Shanghai Stock Exchange,35 those three groups of marginal
investors account for 58.9% of repo transactions in 2014, while natural persons are the
single largest lenders on the reverse-repo market (44.5%), followed by general legal entities
(17.4%), and trusts (10.4%). Therefore, those three groups of institutions are important
net borrowers, i.e., leverage users, in both interbank and exchange repo markets.


C         Additional Results




  35
       url: http://bond.sse.com.cn/market/tradingm/strepo/


                                                 55
                        Figure A1: Dual-listed enterprise bonds
This figure plots the notional outstanding and the issuance of dual-listed enterprise
bonds in China from 2008 to 2017. Panel A plots enterprise bond outstanding in the
interbank and exchange markets. Panel B plots the issuance amount for all enterprise
bonds and dual-listed enterprise bonds.

Panel A: Dual-listed enterprise bond outstanding by depository market (billion RMB)




Panel B: Enterprise bond issuance (billion RMB)




                                           56
Figure A2: Marginal investors' holding and spot transaction shares on the two markets
This figure plots marginal investors' holding share and spot transaction share of enterprise bonds on the interbank
and exchange markets. Three groups of marginal investors include mutual funds, insurance companies, and securities
firms. Panel A plots the aggregate holding share of enterprise bonds by marginal investors over the deposited enterprise
bond outstanding on each market as of 2014/6/30, 2014/12/31, and 2016/6/30. Panel B plots marginal investors' spot
transaction share of enterprise bonds on the two markets in the four quarters from 2014Q3 to 2015Q2. Data on marginal
investors' holding and spot transaction shares of enterprise bonds on the exchange market are from Shanghai and Shen-
zhen exchanges. Data on marginal investors' holding share of enterprise bonds on the interbank market are from CCDC.
Data on marginal investors' spot transaction share of enterprise bond on the interbank market are estimated: (1) through
WIND, CFETS provides three snapshots on 2018/5/18, 2018/7/4, and 2018/8/13 of the three groups of investors' spot
transaction shares for enterprise bonds and all bonds; (2) Almanac of China's Finance and Banking provides quarterly
spot transaction shares of marginal investors for all bonds on the interbank market; (3) marginal investors' spot transac-
tion shares of the enterprise bonds on the interbank market from 2014Q3 to 2015Q2 are estimated assuming that the ratio
between their spot transaction share of all bonds and enterprise bonds is the same as of the average of the three snapshots.


Panel A: Marginal investors' holding share of enterprise bonds




Panel B: Marginal investors' spot transaction share of enterprise bonds




                                                            57
     Figure A3: Repo and reverse-repo transaction shares on the interbank market
This figure plots repo and reverse-repo transaction shares by participant type on the interbank
market. Three groups of marginal investors include mutual funds, insurance companies, and
securities firms. Special settlement members include policy banks, Ministry of Finance, and
PBOC. Panel A plots the monthly repo transaction shares by borrower type. Panel B plots the
monthly reverse-repo transaction shares by lender type. Data are from CCDC and downloaded
through WIND. The sample period is from 2014:6 to 2015:5.

Panel A: Repo transaction shares by participant type on the interbank market




Panel B: Reverse-repo transaction shares by participant type on the interbank market




                                              58
                        Table A1: China's bond market liquidity
This table reports various measures of China's bond market liquidity. ZDays is the time series
average of the fraction of bonds that do not trade on a given day. ZDaysw/trade is the time
series average of the fraction of bonds that do not trade on a given day, excluding bonds that
do not have any single trade over the sample period. Turnover is the average daily turnover
across all bond-day observations where a zero is recorded on days without trade. Amihud is the
average Amihud (2002) measure across all bonds, where a bond's Amihud measure is estimated
using its all non-zero daily trading observations and multiplied by 106 . Panel A presents the
comparison of liquidity between China's two bond markets and U.S. bond market. Panel B
presents the exchange market liquidity measures for all exchange-traded bonds, enterprise
bonds, and exchange-traded corporate bonds. Panel C presents the interbank market liquidity
measures for all interbank-traded bonds, enterprise bonds, mid-term notes, and commercial
papers. In Panel A, the sample period is 1/1/2012 to 12/31/2017 for China's two markets
and the sample period is 1/1/2010 to 12/31/2014 for the U.S. market, where the U.S. market
liquidity measures are from Anderson and Stulz (2017). In Panels B and C, the sample period
is 6/9/2014 to 6/8/2015.


                  Panel A: China and U.S. comparison
                                     China:         China:               U.S.
                                   Interbank       Exchange
                  ZDays             0.88856         0.81326             0.78820
                  ZDaysw/trade      0.88768         0.79798             0.70940
                  Turnover          0.01212         0.00099             0.00150
                  Amihud            0.00016         2.54233             0.48810

                  Panel B: China's exchange bond market liquidity
                                         All       Enterprise    Exchange-traded
                                                     bond        corporate bond
                  ZDays             0.80693         0.83215             0.75485
                  ZDaysw/trade      0.77092         0.80758             0.68604
                  Turnover          0.00109         0.00050             0.00231
                  Amihud            2.93788         3.79992             1.06712

               Panel C: China's interbank bond market liquidity
                                   All         Enterprise   Mid-term      Commercial
                                                 bond         note          paper
               ZDays             0.90284        0.92185       0.92419       0.83746
               ZDaysw/trade      0.89786        0.91462       0.92160       0.83451
               Turnover          0.00984        0.00801       0.00757       0.01647
               Amihud            0.00021        0.00040       0.00023       0.00005




                                                   59
                                    Table A2: Sample coverage
This table reports the sample coverage by rating. Panel A presents the number of bonds for the
simultaneous trading sample and the dual-listed enterprise bond sample.36 Panel B presents
the dual-listed enterprise bond sample coverage over all enterprise bonds. Panel C presents the
enterprise bond sample coverage over all corporate bonds. Sample coverage measures in Panels
B and C include number of bonds, notional RMB value, number of non-zero trading days, and
RMB trading volume.


        Panel A: Simultaneous-trading sample and dual-listed sample
                                      All         AAA         AA+           AA          AA-
        Nsimultaneous                1072          85          316           553         118
        Ndual-listed                 2493         378          755          1058         302
        Coverage (%)                43.0%        22.5%        41.9%        52.3%        39.1%

        Panel B: Dual-listed sample relative to all enterprise bonds
                                      All         AAA         AA+           AA          AA-
        Number of bonds             82.7%        63.2%        83.8%        86.7%        89.9%
        Notional value              79.3%        60.4%        85.5%        87.2%        90.5%
        Days with trades            91.7%        83.2%        91.9%        92.8%        95.8%
        RMB trading volume          82.6%        55.1%        78.4%        90.7%        92.4%

        Panel C: Enterprise bonds relative to all corporate bonds
                                      All         AAA         AA+           AA          AA-
        Number of bonds             28.8%        20.6%        33.6%        38.8%        15.0%
        Notional value              27.1%        19.7%        35.7%        50.7%        10.1%
        Days with trades            41.6%        24.0%        48.2%        51.4%        28.2%
        RMB trading volume          26.7%        13.2%        28.7%        59.6%         6.4%




  36
    Since our observations are at bond-rating level, we treat the same bond with different ratings at two
points in time as different bonds for the purpose of reporting the summary statistics in this table. The
number of unique dual-listed enterprise bonds is 1800 and the simultaneous sample covers 55% of all
these dual-listed enterprise bonds.


                                                   60
                    Table A3: Summary statistics: Same-day sample
This table reports the summary statistics the same-day trading sample from 6/9/2014 to
6/8/2015. The table presents number of observations, the mean, the standard deviation, the
10th percentile, the median, and the 90th percentile. Panel A presents the summary statistics
of key variables. Panel B presents the summary statistics of exchange premia by rating. Panel
C presents the summary statistics of haircuts by rating.

           Panel A: All variables
                                    N    Mean      STD      P10     Median    P90
           EX premium           3410      -0.06     0.44    -0.64    -0.03    0.50
             EX premiumpre      1655       0.06     0.39    -0.39     0.03    0.56
             EX premiumpost     1755      -0.17    0.46     -0.76    -0.13    0.40
           Haircut              3410      64.69    38.54    14.72   100.00   100.00
             Haircutpre         1655     32.70     24.47     7.40    30.44    72.08
             Haircutpost        1755     94.85     21.13   100.00   100.00   100.00
           Conversion           3410      37.33    40.86    0.00     0.00    90.00
             Conversionpre      1655     71.18     26.24    28.00    74.00    98.00
             Conversionpost     1755       5.42    22.24     0.00     0.00    0.00
           IB spread            3410       2.46    0.80      1.44     2.47    3.47
           EX spread            3410       2.51    0.85      1.37     2.58    3.49
           Maturity             3410       5.12     1.58     3.05     5.25     6.75
           Turnover             3410       0.08    0.09      0.02     0.06    0.18
           Market price         3410     105.50     3.96   100.82   105.26   110.70
           Volatility           3410      0.01     0.02      0.00     0.01    0.03
           CDBspot              3410       4.37     0.52     3.80     4.15    5.19
           Term spread          3410       0.55    0.31      0.28     0.45    0.97
           GC001-SHIBOR         3410       1.78    3.72     -0.46     0.53     5.46
           Retstock             3410       0.42     1.59    -1.13     0.29    2.44

           Panel B: Exchange premia by rating
           AAA                   160     0.15      0.43    -0.38      0.07    0.64
           AA+                  1046     -0.01     0.43    -0.57      0.00    0.54
           AA                   1783     -0.10     0.44    -0.69     -0.06    0.45
           AA-                   421     -0.06     0.46    -0.63     -0.05    0.50

           Panel C: Haircuts by rating
           AAA                   160     10.18      7.68    5.07      6.67    25.60
           AA+                  1046     62.06     40.74    7.01    100.00   100.00
           AA                   1783     62.78     35.97   18.50     43.65   100.00
           AA-                   421     100.00     0.00   100.00   100.00   100.00




                                              61
                   Table A4: IV estimation: [-3,3]-month event window
This table reports the results of IV regressions using the simultaneous trading sample in the
[-3,3]-month window around the event day. Panels A and B present the results for the first and
second stage regressions. Columns (1) and (2) present the results using full sample. Columns
(3) and (4) present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AA- bonds. Columns
(5) and (6) present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AAA bonds. The sample
period is 9/9/2014 to 3/8/2015. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics clustered by week are
reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

    Panel A: First stage
    Dependent:                     Full          AA+ & AA & AA-         AA+ & AA & AAA
    Haircut                  (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)
    Shock               72.10***      71.95***   71.19***    72.03***   73.99***   72.38***
                         (95.62)       (82.31)    (83.28)     (72.78)    (89.99)    (75.66)
    Controls               No            Yes        No          Yes        No         Yes
    Rating FE              Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
    Week FE                Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
    Bond FE                No            Yes        No          Yes        No         Yes
    N                     4391          4208       4107        3948       3830       3658
    R-square              0.93          0.98       0.92         0.98      0.91        0.97

    Panel B: Second stage
    Dependent:                     Full          AA+ & AA & AA-         AA+ & AA & AAA
    Exchange premia          (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)

    Haircut                -0.37***   -0.21***   -0.47***    -0.30***   -0.21***     -0.10
                            (-5.50)    (-3.45)    (-5.32)     (-3.15)    (-2.89)   (-1.39)
    Maturity                          3.46***                3.62***               3.71***
                                       (2.68)                 (2.73)                (2.74)
    Turnover                             0.01                  -0.00                 0.08
                                       (0.11)                 (-0.00)               (0.66)
    Market price                       0.01**                  0.01                0.01***
                                       (2.08)                 (1.25)                (2.70)
    Volatility                           0.08                  -0.01                 -0.08
                                       (0.12)                 (-0.02)              (-0.12)
    CDBspot                            -12.66                  -9.76                -14.51
                                       (-1.10)                (-0.85)              (-1.08)
    Term spread                       41.10**                 34.69*               49.36**
                                       (2.20)                 (1.78)                (2.47)
    GC001-SHIBOR                        -0.02                  0.02                  -0.11
                                       (-0.17)                (0.19)               (-0.91)
    Retstock                            -0.40                  -0.47                 -0.12
                                       (-0.81)                (-0.76)              (-0.24)
    Rating FE               Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes
    Week FE                 Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes
    Bond FE                  No          Yes           No       Yes       No          Yes
    N                       4391        4208          4107     3948      3830        3658
    R-square                0.10        0.49          0.09      0.48     0.10         0.50

                                                 62
                       Table A5: IV estimation: Same-day sample
This table reports the results of IV regressions using the same-day trading sample. The
dummy variable, Shock, serves as the instrument variable for bond haircut, which equals 1
for the treatment group (bonds with rating AA+ and AA) after the regulation change date
12/8/2014 and 0 otherwise. Panels A and B present the results for the first and second stage
regressions. Columns (1) and (2) present the results using full sample. Columns (3) and (4)
present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AA- bonds. Columns (5) and (6)
present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AAA bonds. The sample period is
6/9/2014 to 6/8/2015. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics clustered by week are reported
in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.
      Panel A: First stage
      Dependent:                    Full          AA+ & AA & AA-         AA+ & AA & AAA
      Haircut                (1)           (2)      (3)     (4)            (5)     (6)
      Shock              72.84***      67.16***   71.93***    64.02***   74.70***   71.73***
                         (100.85)       (22.46)    (92.48)     (14.24)    (75.17)    (84.52)
      Controls              No            Yes         No         Yes        No         Yes
      Rating FE            Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
      Week FE              Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
      Bond FE               No            Yes         No         Yes        No         Yes
      N                    3410          3145       3250        3004       2989       2737
      R-square             0.93           0.97       0.92       0.97       0.92        0.97

      Panel B: Second stage
      Dependent:                    Full          AA+ & AA & AA-         AA+ & AA & AAA
      EX premia              (1)           (2)      (3)     (4)            (5)     (6)

      Haircut            -0.54***      -0.46***   -0.65***    -0.62***   -0.25***   -0.17**
                          (-7.64)       (-4.95)    (-7.21)     (-5.13)    (-3.81)   (-2.01)
      Maturity                           -0.15                  -0.12                  0.41
                                        (-0.14)                (-0.11)               (0.34)
      Turnover                            0.09                  0.07                   0.15
                                        (0.82)                 (0.67)                (1.26)
      Market price                        0.01                   0.00               0.01***
                                        (1.47)                 (1.03)                (2.72)
      Volatility                          0.24                  0.10                   0.40
                                        (0.55)                 (0.23)                (0.54)
      CDBspot                           -18.60                 -14.34                -25.88
                                        (-1.37)                (-1.02)              (-1.55)
      Term spread                        -3.08                  -6.54                  1.53
                                        (-0.37)                (-0.65)               (0.22)
      GC001-SHIBOR                       -0.23                  -0.21               -0.40**
                                        (-0.86)                (-0.80)              (-2.29)
      Retstock                           -0.63                  -0.77                 -0.52
                                        (-1.56)                (-1.78)              (-1.32)
      Rating FE              Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes
      Week FE                Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes      Yes          Yes
      Bond FE                 No          Yes           No       Yes       No          Yes
      N                      3410        3145          3250     3004      2829        2596
      R-square               0.17         0.55         0.16     0.54      0.13         0.53


                                                  63
                                    Table A6: OLS estimation
This table reports the results of OLS regressions using the simultaneous trading sample.
Columns (1) and (2) present the results using full sample. Columns (3) and (4) present the
results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AA- bonds. Columns (5) and (6) present the
results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AAA bonds. The sample period is 6/9/2014 to
6/8/2015. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics clustered by week are reported in parentheses.
The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

    Dependent:                    Full           AA+ & AA & AA-         AA+ & AA & AAA
    Exchange premia         (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)         (6)
    Haircut              -0.38***     -0.23***   -0.43***   -0.26***    -0.22***      -0.10*
                          (-9.14)      (-4.94)    (-9.22)    (-4.78)     (-5.08)     (-1.88)
    Maturity                          2.19***               2.41***                  2.56***
                                        (3.00)               (3.20)                   (3.17)
    Turnover                              0.07                 0.05                     0.10
                                        (0.89)               (0.64)                   (1.15)
    Market price                      0.012***               0.01**                  0.02***
                                        (3.98)               (3.28)                   (5.05)
    Volatility                           0.06                 -0.02                    -0.01
                                        (0.25)               (-0.08)                 (-0.03)
    CDBspot                             -12.71               -11.78                   -16.38
                                       (-1.29)               (-1.21)                 (-1.39)
    Term spread                         9.27**                7.39*                  13.18**
                                        (2.16)               (1.83)                   (2.41)
    GC001-SHIBOR                       -0.25**              -0.26***                 -0.22**
                                       (-2.33)               (-2.62)                 (-2.00)
    Retstock                             -0.04                -0.09                     0.18
                                       (-0.14)               (-0.28)                  (0.53)
    Rating FE              Yes            Yes     Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes
    Week FE                Yes            Yes     Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes
    Bond FE                 No            Yes      No          Yes         No           Yes
    N                      9976          9799     9438        9282        8801         8631
    R-square               0.15           0.50    0.15         0.49       0.17         0.52




                                                 64
                 Table A7: IV estimation: Robustness with alternative controls
This table reports the results of IV regressions using the simultaneous trading sample with alternative control variables.
Turnoverex /Turnoverib is the bond-day-market level turnover. Turnoverex                    ib
                                                                           rating /Turnoverrating is the rating-day-market
level turnover. Panels A and B present the results for the first and second stage regressions. Columns (1) and (2) present
the results using full sample. Columns (3) and (4) present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AA- bonds.
Columns (5) and (6) present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AAA bonds. The sample period is 6/9/2014
to 6/8/2015. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics clustered by week are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **,
and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

      Panel A: First stage
      Dependent:                         Full               AA+ & AA & AA-                AA+ & AA & AAA
      Haircut                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
      Shock                    72.89***       68.17***      72.12***       65.41***       74.35***      72.32***
                               (113.42)        (29.78)      (109.08)        (17.33)        (93.15)      (105.62)
      Controls                    No             Yes           No             Yes             No          Yes
      Rating FE                  Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
      Week FE                    Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
      Bond FE                     No             Yes           No             Yes             No          Yes
      N                          9976           9799          9438           9282           8801          8631
      R-square                   0.93           0.97          0.92            0.96           0.92         0.97

      Panel B: Second stage
      Dependent:                         Full               AA+ & AA & AA-                AA+ & AA & AAA
      Exchange premia             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)

      Haircut                  -0.50***       -0.40***      -0.64***       -0.52***        -0.24**       -0.21***
                                (-8.64)        (-5.68)       (-8.68)        (-5.72)        (-3.55)        (-2.97)
      Maturity                                 1.99***                      2.13***                       2.40***
                                                (2.77)                       (2.79)                        (3.08)
      Turnoverex                                 0.52                          0.44                         0.33
                                                (1.34)                       (1.16)                        (0.83)
      Turnoverib                                 0.06                          0.05                         0.09
                                                (0.78)                       (0.60)                        (1.01)
      Market price                            0.01***                      0.01***                       0.01***
                                                (3.75)                       (2.97)                        (4.86)
      Volatility                                 0.08                         -0.03                         0.02
                                                (0.31)                      (-0.11)                        (0.04)
      Turnoverex
              rating                             -2.15                        -3.53                        -17.36
                                               (-0.11)                      (-0.16)                       (-0.91)
      Turnoverib
              rating                             -1.77                        -1.94                         0.62
                                               (-1.10)                      (-1.21)                        (0.38)
      CDBspot                                    -8.51                        -5.00                        -13.12
                                               (-0.89)                      (-0.52)                       (-1.14)
      Term spread                                5.22                          1.20                       10.83**
                                                (1.08)                       (0.20)                        (2.15)
      GC001-SHIBOR                             -0.25**                     -0.26***                       -0.24**
                                               (-2.35)                      (-2.60)                       (-2.14)
      Retstock                                   -0.15                        -0.27                         0.09
                                               (-0.48)                      (-0.70)                        (0.26)
      Rating FE                  Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
      Week FE                    Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
      Bond FE                     No              Yes            No            Yes           No             Yes
      N                          9976            9799           9438          9282          8801            8631
      R-square                   0.15             0.50          0.14           0.48         0.17            0.52

                                                           65
Table A8: IV estimation using same-day sample: Robustness with alternative controls
This table reports the results of IV regressions using the same-day trading sample with alternative control variables.
Turnoverex /Turnoverib is the bond-day-market level turnover. Turnoverex                    ib
                                                                           rating /Turnoverrating is the rating-day-market
level turnover. Panels A and B present the results for the first and second stage regressions. Columns (1) and (2) present
the results using full sample. Columns (3) and (4) present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA, and AA- bonds.
Columns (5) and (6) present the results using a subsample of AA+, AA and AAA bonds. The sample period is 6/9/2014
to 6/8/2015. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics clustered by week are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **,
and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

      Panel A: First stage
      Dependent:                         Full               AA+ & AA & AA-                AA+ & AA & AAA
      Haircut                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
      Shock                    72.84***       68.08***      71.93***       65.05***       74.70***      71.76***
                               (100.85)        (25.69)       (92.48)        (15.57)        (75.17)       (81.39)
      Controls                    No             Yes            No            Yes             No           Yes
      Rating FE                  Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
      Week FE                    Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
      Bond FE                     No             Yes            No            Yes             No           Yes
      N                          3410           3145          3250           3004           2889          2737
      R-square                   0.93           0.97           0.92           0.97           0.92         0.97

      Panel B: Second stage
      Dependent:                         Full               AA+ & AA & AA-                AA+ & AA & AAA
      Exchange premia             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)

      Haircut                  -0.54***       -0.46***      -0.65***       -0.61***       -0.25***       -0.20**
                                (-7.64)        (-5.33)       (-7.21)        (-5.09)        (-3.81)       (-2.30)
      Maturity                                  -0.11                        -0.07                          0.39
                                               (-0.11)                      (-0.07)                       (0.34)
      Turnoverex                                 0.62                         0.63                          0.46
                                               (1.24)                       (1.23)                        (0.84)
      Turnoverib                                 0.09                         0.07                          0.15
                                               (0.80)                       (0.63)                        (1.21)
      Market price                               0.01                         0.00                       0.01***
                                               (1.47)                       (1.05)                        (2.72)
      Volatility                                 0.22                        0.08                           0.38
                                               (0.51)                       (0.19)                        (0.51)
      Turnoverex
              rating                           -22.01                       -21.44                        -64.77
                                               (-0.71)                      (-0.68)                      (-1.61)
      Turnoverib
              rating                          -6.62***                     -6.24***                        -4.53
                                               (-2.85)                      (-2.61)                      (-1.44)
      CDBspot                                  -17.93                       -14.06                        -24.50
                                               (-1.36)                      (-1.03)                      (-1.52)
      Term spread                               -4.37                        -7.20                         0.27
                                               (-0.52)                      (-0.71)                       (0.04)
      GC001-SHIBOR                              -0.27                        -0.24                       -0.48**
                                               (-0.96)                      (-0.88)                      (-2.51)
      Retstock                                  -0.67                       -0.80*                         -0.57
                                               (-1.59)                      (-1.75)                      (-1.43)
      Rating FE                  Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Week FE                    Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
      Bond FE                     No             Yes             No           Yes            No             Yes
      N                          3410           3145            3250         3004           2989           2737
      R-square                   0.17            0.55           0.16          0.54          0.20            0.59

                                                           66
Table A9: IV estimation using matched AAA bonds as a benchmark: Robustness with
alternative controls
This table reports the results of IV regressions using the matched AAA bonds as a benchmark
 using alternative control variables. The pledgeability premium is the credit spread between
AA+/AA dual-listed enterprise bonds and their matched AAA bonds, where the matching
 criteria include credit spread and haircut before 12/8/2014. Control variables indicated with
"bmk" refer to the average value of matched AAA bonds. Turnoverex                   ib
                                                                    rating /Turnoverrating is the
 rating-day-market level turnover. Panels A and B present the results for the first and second
 stage. The sample period is 6/9/2014 to 6/8/2015. Heteroscedasticity consistent t-statistics
 clustered by week are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical
 significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


         Panel A: First stage
         Dependent: Haircut                             (1)                  (2)
         Shock                                       86.89***             85.64***
                                                      (89.77)              (77.58)
         Controls                                        No                  Yes
         Rating FE                                      Yes                  Yes
         Bond FE                                         No                  Yes
         N                                             9961                 9916
         R-square                                       0.98                0.99




                                               67
Table A9 (cont.): IV estimation using matched AAA bonds as benchmark: Robustness
with alternative controls


       Panel B: Second stage
       Dependent: Pledgeability premium          (1)           (2)
       Haircut                                 -0.74***      -0.81***
                                               (-30.87)      (-20.21)
       Maturity                                                 -0.07
                                                              (-0.98)
       Turnover                                              1.99***
                                                               (2.73)
       Market price                                           0.02***
                                                               (4.72)
       Volatility                                                0.34
                                                               (0.76)
       Maturity bmk                                           0.02**
                                                               (2.32)
       Turnover bmk                                          -5.36***
                                                              (-2.76)
       Market price bmk                                          0.00
                                                               (1.43)
       Volatility bmk                                            1.48
                                                               (1.27)
       Turnoverex
               rating                                          45.85
                                                               (1.00)
       Turnoverib
               rating                                            1.01
                                                               (0.24)
       CDBspot                                                  -2.57
                                                              (-0.68)
       Term spread                                               4.96
                                                               (0.92)
       GC001-SHIBOR                                             -0.14
                                                              (-0.52)
       Retstock                                                  0.35
                                                               (0.74)
       Rating FE                                Yes              Yes
       Bond FE                                   No              Yes
       N                                        9961            9916
       R-square                                 0.15             0.63




                                          68
