                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        MEASURING AND USING HAPPINESS TO SUPPORT PUBLIC POLICIES

                                       John F. Helliwell

                                     Working Paper 26529
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26529


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




This is a draft chapter for Matthew T. Lee, Laura D. Kubzanzsky, and Tyler J. VanderWeele
(Eds.) Measuring Well-Being: Interdisciplinary Perspectives from the Social Sciences and the
Humanities. New York: Oxford University Press. In revising the draft I have been greatly aided
by suggestions from Paul Allin, Ed Diener, Jon Hall, Dan Haybron, Laura Kubzansky, Richard
Layard, Matt Lee, Steve Mulhall, Max Norton, Grant Schellenberg, Louis Tay, and Tyler
VanderWheele. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John F. Helliwell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Measuring and Using Happiness to Support Public Policies
John F. Helliwell
NBER Working Paper No. 26529
December 2019
JEL No. D6,I31,Z18

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper summarizes the philosophical and empirical grounds for giving a primary role to the
evaluations that people make of the quality of their lives. These evaluations permit comparisons
among communities, regions, nations and population subgroups, enable the estimation of the
relative importance of various sources of happiness, and provide a well-being lens to aid the
choice of public policies to support well-being. Available results expose the primacy of social
determinants of happiness, and especially the power of generosity and other positive social
connections to improve the levels, distribution and sustainability of well-being.


John F. Helliwell
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca
Introduction
Over the past half century, and especially over the past 25 years, research and widespread public
interest have combined to create possibilities for using happiness data to broaden the methods
and content of public policies. Happiness data offer the possibility to restore to economics the
breadth of purpose and methods it had two centuries ago, when happiness was considered the
appropriate goal for private actions and public policies. They can also help guide health sciences
as they move beyond the treatment of illness to the creation and maintenance of good health.
More generally, happiness data can enable ethics and welfare economics to be driven by
evidence rather than assumptions. What types of data and research are most likely to support
these changes?


The importance of measuring the quality of life
Among the many ways of defining and measuring happiness, the most central, from both
philosophical and policy perspectives, are the evaluations that individuals make of the quality of
their own lives. From a philosophical standpoint, it has been argued that ancient ethical
philosophy `gets its grip on the individual at this point of reflection: am I satisfied with my life as
a whole, and the way it has developed and promises to develop?' (Annas 1993, 28). There are
ancient and modern philosophical arguments about which aspects of thought and experience are
most central to a good life. Ryan and Deci (2001) distinguish two opposing approaches, one
hedonic and the other eudaimonic, with the former emphasizing a balance of pleasures over pain,
thereby echoing the ancient Epicurean view, and the other emphasizing the development of
human potential in a virtuous form, echoing the ancient Stoic philosophers. Ryff et al (2020), in
their chapter in this volume, make use of the hedonic vs eudaimonic division proposed by Ryan
and Deci, and emphasize Aristotle's contributions to the latter branch. For both Aristotle and
Epicurus, happiness (eudaimonia) was the objective, and a life of virtue a likely route to get there
(Annas 1987).


In my view, Aristotle's most important contributions to the modern reframing of applied ethics
lie not in his emphasis on excellence and purpose, but on two other fronts: first, hypothesizing
that a good life is likely to combine elements of the viewpoints later identified as Epicurean and
Stoic 1, and second that the right answers require evidence as much as introspection. `We must



                                                  1
therefore survey what we have already said, bringing it to the test of the facts of life, and if it
harmonises with the facts we must accept it, but if it clashes with them we must suppose it to be
mere theory' (Nicomachean Ethics, Book 10, 1179, 20­23, from Helliwell (2003, 333)). 2 I
therein see Aristotle advocating the use of data from everyday life, not to isolate different
theories of well-being, but to see how these theories cohere or compete in supporting people's
judgments about how their lives are going. 3 I agree with Owen Flanagan's (2007) proposal that
this line of necessarily inter-disciplinary inquiry should be called Eudaimonics.


Therefore I would argue that life evaluations are not just part of a measurement strategy for a
philosophy based on the achievement of a favorable balance of pleasure over pain, as would be
implied by classing them as hedonic variables. They are much more than that. They provide a
central mediating device that can be used to establish the relative importance of various values
and experiences, to measure the quality of life, and to support policy choices likely to improve
human flourishing. What are the specific characteristics of life evaluations that enable them to do
all this?


Because they are overall assessments, they provide an umbrella measure of the quality of life. If
they are collected in sufficient numbers from representative samples, they can be used to
measure the quality of life in communities of all sizes, from the neighbourhood to the nation and
beyond.


Because they are umbrella measures, they can be used to power research into the relative
importance of various aspects of life, and hence to inform policy judgments requiring choices
among alternative ways to design and deliver public services.


Because they are umbrella measures that can nonetheless be collected with any desired degree of
granularity, they are able not just to measure differences in the quality of life in different
locations and population sub-groups, but also to explore the reasons for those differences.


Another advantage of direct measurement is that the distributions of responses can be used to
estimate the statistical significance of differences over time and among population sub-groups.



                                                   2
Life evaluations ask how well life is going, rather than what is going wrong. As such, they have
more resonance with emerging trends within a number of disciplines to focus on understanding
and improving the positive features of life, rather than on identifying and repairing what has
gone wrong (Farrelly 2020, this volume). The underlying presumption is that such a shift in
focus will broaden the range of scientific understanding in important directions, and thereby
offer better ways to sustainably improve lives in organizations and communities large and small.


In summary, life evaluations provide umbrella measures that grasp life at its central point. They
can be used not just to measure but also to explain why people differ in their life evaluations,
thereby providing a focus of attention for the general public and policy-makers alike as they
search for something that is able to encompass and reconcile otherwise competing measures of
welfare. This centrality of life evaluations as an empirical construct capable of deep meaning
was recognized by ancient philosophers, and has in modern times made them the most relied-
upon measure of subjective well-being. Are they also measures of happiness? Here it is crucial to
distinguish two quite separate uses of the term `happiness', one relating to a felt emotion, and the
other to a cognitive judgement about the extent to which one is happy about something. 4 People
quite clearly know whether they are being asked about the emotion, or alternatively about how
they value something. Hence answers to questions about happiness yesterday are quite different
from answers to life evaluation questions asking people about how happy they are with their
lives as a whole. In the latter case, the answers are structurally similar to answers about life
satisfaction or other life evaluations. In the former case, the answers clearly relate to the current
emotional context. Thus those who are asked both types of question are quick to see the context
in which they are asked about happiness, and answer appropriately in both cases, reflecting their
ability to see the logic of the conversational context (Grice 1975). This should help dispel fears
that the abundance of terms necessarily creates a confusion of results. Indeed, the fact that the
answers differ in just the ways that theory would suggest should increase confidence in both
types of measure.


How does this approach differ from alternative ways of measuring human progress?
This approach differs fundamentally from three other ways of assessing human progress:



                                                  3
GDP and similar measures.
National accounts of income and expenditure provide a well-established measure of market-
based economic activity. To use Gross Domestic Product (GDP) or Gross National Product
(GNP) as measures of national welfare has long been recognized as mistaken. Almost 50 years
ago, Nordhaus and Tobin (1972) proposed an experimental Measure of Economic Welfare
(MEW) that attempted to correct for many of the recognized short-comings of GNP accounting.
They realized that their measure was still far too narrow to represent welfare more broadly
construed, but felt that `the "social indicators" movement of recent years still lacks a coherent,
integrative conceptual and statistical framework' (Nordhaus & Tobin, 1972, 9). Life evaluations
are now seen by many as providing a plausible way to fill that gap.


Healthy life expectancy.
Healthy life expectancy involves an adjustment to reduce life expectancy by an amount
reflecting some estimate of the welfare costs of morbidity. As welfare accounting moves towards
a broader use of subjective well-being to assess the welfare costs of ill health (Peasgood et al.
2019), the measure of healthy life expectancy is likely to be further adjusted to reflect the value
that individuals place on good health when reporting their life satisfaction. Even the current data
have been found to have a strong role in explaining international differences in life satisfaction
(e.g. Table 2.1 in World Happiness Report 2019). 5


Indexes of economic and social progress
Composite social indicators constructed by experts based on their own conceptions of what a
good life comprises have been used for more than fifty years ­ as documented in a special issue
of Social Indicators Research 6 celebrating fifty years of social indicators research ­ to
supplement or perhaps replace GDP as means of gauging social progress. Within the social
indicators movement there has long been a tension between those who value having multiple
social indicators, with each being seen as important in its own light and right, and those who see
the importance of having a single composite measure that could provide a way beyond relying on
GDP per capita as the default proxy measure of progress. The essential difficulty with such
indexes is their reliance on somebody's decisions about which aspects of life to consider, how to
empirically represent their quality, and, most importantly, how to weight the different sectoral



                                                  4
measures to provide a single overall indicator. Such indicators differ according to the policy
preferences and theoretical presumptions of their designers. In the absence of some overall
primary measure of well-being, there is no empirical way to choose among competing indexes.
Their constructed nature means that they cannot be used to estimate the relative importance
people place on various aspects of their lives, since those weights have already been built into
the index itself.


Thus, for example, the Human Development Index (HDI) prepared by the United Nations
Development Programme is an equally weighted average of three indicators, one for GDP per
capita, one for healthy life expectancy, and one for average education levels (Anand & Sen
1994). By its very nature, it cannot provide information about the relative importance of these
different aspects of development, nor about what may be missing from the picture. The choice of
items included owes much to Sen's capabilities approach (Sen 1994), although none would argue
that the coverage is comprehensive, or that the relative importance of the components is as
assumed by the equal weighting. The Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development's (OECD) Better Life Index (Durand 2015) finesses the weighting question by
presenting a dashboard of indicators and inviting individual users to choose their own weights to
develop an overall indicator. That procedure leaves equal weighting as the default option for the
media and most users.


A better way of making use of the diverse measures used in indexes of human progress is to treat
them as variables that can be used to explain variations over time or among communities and
countries in a primary umbrella measure. The primary measures are interesting in themselves,
but their real value to public understanding and policy only appears when it becomes possible to
uncover some plausible reasons for their effects on well-being over time and among population
sub-groups. The various social and economic indicators included in composite measures are
often ideal candidates for explanatory roles, since they reflect topics and aspects of life long
thought to be important to human progress. They can then be used, in combination with often-
ignored social context variables, to help explain life evaluations, with the results being used to
estimate the relative importance of the various factors. Measures of domain satisfaction can
likewise be used to help unravel the relative importance of different aspects of life, while multi-



                                                  5
item measures of subjective well-being, such as the ten questions in five domains of flourishing
proposed by VanderWheele (2017), can be used to help unpack the movements in overall life
evaluations, or alternatively as independent items to be linked to different aspects of life.
Understanding the interplay among alternative ways of measuring well-being deserves to remain
a central focus for research.


Specific Measurement issues


One question or many?
If and when there is agreement to use life evaluations as a primary measure, there will remain
issues about how they should be measured. There are four questions or groups of questions that
have been widely used. These include:
- the Diener et al. (1985) 5-question Satisfaction with Life Scale (SWLS),
- the Cantril ladder question used in the Gallup World Poll,
- a satisfaction with life as a whole (these days, now, or nowadays) question, as recommended by
the OECD (2013) and used by the EU and many national statistical offices, and
- a question asking respondents how happy they are with their lives (one of the two life
evaluation questions used in the European Social Survey).


There is a general research case to be made for surveys to include some redundancy in life
evaluations, first to build understanding of how these alternatives are related, and second because
there is evidence in favour of the presumption that multiple measures can help to increase the
signal to noise ratio. There is, however, always a trade-off to consider between asking more
questions of the same respondents versus increasing the overall sample coverage. In the case of
the 5-question SWLS, it has been found that most of the overall information comes from answers
to the life satisfaction question. This suggests that to use a single life satisfaction question in
large population-based samples might represent the best use of survey resources. Research
comparing the SWLS and a single-item SWL question in three large surveys finds that the two
measures provide essentially the same information (Cheung & Lucas 2014), thereby justifying
single-item measures as a preferred choice in large scale surveys where survey space needs to be
rationed.



                                                   6
Where two different life evaluation questions have been used in the same survey, they have been
found to attach similar relative importance to the chosen sets of explanatory variables, and to
produce slightly tighter fits if their average value is used. This was first shown for the Gallup
World Poll, when the Cantril ladder and the life satisfaction question were both asked of the
same respondents, on the same 0 to 10 scale, in one survey wave (Helliwell et al 2010, Table
10.1). The same was found using data from the European Social Survey, which regularly asks
two life evaluation questions, one on life satisfaction and the other on happiness with life as a
whole, each on the same 0 to 10 scale. Once again, although the means and distribution shapes
were slightly different, the coefficient estimates were very similar, and tighter estimates were
obtained by averaging responses to the two questions (Helliwell, Huang & Wang 2018). One of
the advantages of having different questions asked in the same survey is that it allows one to
discern with greater assurance whether surveys that use different question forms are thereby
getting answers that are materially different. For example, before there was life satisfaction data
from the Gallup World Poll, it was hypothesized that the larger income effects being found in the
Gallup World Poll than from earlier work using World Values Survey data were due to the
particular ladder framing used for the Cantril ladder. This hypothesis was rejected by the data,
because the results based on the life satisfaction answers were essentially the same as those from
the Cantril ladder. Without having both questions asked in the same survey, this would not have
been discovered.


What about emotions and purpose?
Much earlier research has shown that positive and negative affect have different correlates and
structure from each other (Diener & Emmons 1984), and from life evaluations. This led the UK
Office for National Statistics (ONS) in 2011 to introduce a set of four key questions, on a 0 to 10
scale, in their Annual Population survey: one life satisfaction question, one on positive emotion
(happiness yesterday), one on negative emotion (anxiety yesterday), and one asking whether
overall respondents feel that the things they do in their lives are worthwhile. These questions
were chosen, as documented in Allin (2020), on the basis of prevalence in previous surveys and
public consultations. Should these four questions be seen as alternatives or complements? Within
the framework proposed in this chapter, and also adopted in the World Happiness Reports, the



                                                  7
life evaluation question provides the central evidence recommended by Aristotle, while positive
and negative emotions, and a sense of life purpose, are all to be expected to play a role in
explaining life evaluations. The affect measures, because of their short-term focus, are ideally
suited to laboratory experimental contexts in which the interventions considered are so small in
magnitude or duration that changes in overall life evaluations would not be expected. When
asked in general surveys, affective measures can also help to disentangle the channels through
which changes in life circumstances come to influence life evaluations. The aggregate results in
successive editions of the World Happiness Reports (WHR) have suggested a strong positive
role for positive affect in explaining life evaluations, with little or no effect coming from the
indicators of negative affect, all of which are also less prevalent and less influential than the
positive emotions in the Gallup World Poll data. The social variables that are so strong in the
WHR findings are mediated to an important extent through positive affect. 7 There is a
presumptive role for a sense of life purpose (Ryff et al., this volume), but this question has not
been widely enough asked in large-scale surveys for general conclusions to be reached. There is
also need for more comparisons among a wider variety of measures of psychological well-being
(Margolis et al, this volume).


How many response options?
Life evaluations are now generally asked on an 11-point scale anchored by 0 and 10. All of the
available evidence suggests that longer scales carry more information than shorter ones. The UK
ONS asks its affect questions on the same 0 to 10 scale. The Gallup World Poll asks its affect
questions on a binary yes/no scale. There are two advantages in using the same 0 to 10 scale for
all subjective well-being questions. First, it enables easier comparison of the information
provided by life evaluations and affect measures. Second, the longer scale permits the
distribution of well-being to be measured and its consequences analyzed. By contrast, from the
binary answers one can only learn what fraction of the population has the attribute in question.
The binary nature of such data means that they cannot provide a meaningful measure of
inequality.


Method effects




                                                  8
Survey methods are in flux, as face-to-face interviews are being replaced by cheaper methods,
land line phones are being supplanted by cell phones, and various on-line completion methods
are coming into greater use. Online methods are more easily adapted for increasing the
longitudinal component of repeated population-based surveys at modest cost, but at some risk of
misrepresentation. Given the persistence of a digital divide, on-line methods require cross-
validation by other methods, since some recent evidence (Arimk & Schellenberg 2019) shows
that selection effects may lead to on-line panels delivering life satisfaction estimates that differ
seriously from population-based life evaluations. There is also some evidence of method effects,
with one analysis of the ONS life evaluations finding higher life evaluations for telephone than
for face-to-face interviews (Dolan & Kavetsos 2016).


Survey context effects
It is to be expected that survey answers may depend on the context in which they are asked. Thus
US survey respondents who were asked the Cantril ladder question gave on average lower
responses if immediately prior to that question they were asked a question about national
politics, with the negative effect being concentrated among respondents who held unfavorable
views about the current political context (Deaton & Stone 2016). In a similar vein, it has been
found that life satisfaction answers in different rounds of the Canadian General Social Survey
(GSS) differ according to the overall topic of the survey, for example being lower in the time-use
cycle (Bonikowska et al. 2014). These findings have been seen by some as a caution against
reliance on survey responses. The ease with which framing effects can be delivered in laboratory
settings more or less guarantees that similar issues would arise in a survey context. What is
encouraging is how these effects are of a direction and size indicating that people take the
questions seriously and answer them appropriately. For example, middle-aged respondents
reporting themselves to be having trouble juggling competing demands for their time are those
whose life satisfaction is lower in the time-use waves of the Canadian GSS. This makes any such
effects easier to guard against and easier to allow for when samples are being pooled. In the case
of the Canadian GSS, the coefficients on all the key variables of interest are very similar for each
of the GSS waves. Therefore a fixed-effects adjustment for each survey wave permits the data to
be efficiently pooled. In general, there is a case to be made for including life evaluations in a
demographic block, with a similar structure for each survey, and at sufficient remove from



                                                  9
questions or contexts that have been found (or might be expected) to influence responses. For
example, in the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS), which asks the life satisfaction
question as part of the demographic block, and has a similar content from wave to wave, there
are no differences in the years where differences appeared among GSS waves with a different
subject focus. In summary, survey context matters, but its effects can be minimized and
adjustments can be made where context differences remain.


What do life evaluations reveal about the sources of a happy life?
Possibilities for learning about the sources of happier lives depend crucially on what data are
available and used in research. Much of the earliest individual-level research relied mainly on
age, gender, education and income, since those were among the relatively few variables available
in experimental and survey studies. This led to corresponding conclusions that only a small
proportion of the individual-level happiness differences could be explained, and the analogous
inferences that most of the variance was due to idiosyncratic personality differences, including
individual set-points with a potentially large genetic component. This conclusion illustrates the
importance of measuring what matters to people.


It is not sufficient to know how satisfied people are with their lives, since nothing can be done
with this information without an informed view of what makes for better lives. To know more
about what features of life are conducive to health and happiness requires that all the relevant
aspects of life need to be measured and considered. This is difficult to achieve in the large-scale
surveys required to benchmark happiness for a variety of geographic and demographic
groupings. Providing a full range of explanatory variables requires a mix of variety and coverage
that is achieved by including at least a core set of subjective well-being questions in all of a
nation's population-based surveys. These include especially the whole range of social surveys,
whether their focus is on health, employment, education, aging, neighbourhoods, or the social
context. To help unpack causal directions and to isolate the effects of confounding factors, it is
also essential to monitor subjective well-being before, during and after any significant policy
changes. This also applies to experimental studies, regardless of whether or not their well-being
consequences are the driving force in the policy design process. Measuring several dimensions of
psychological well-being also permits a clearer understanding of the multiple possible pathways



                                                 10
from higher psychological well-being to improved physical health (Trudel-Fitzgerald,
Kubzansky, & VanderWeele 2020, this volume).


In the absence of much larger samples of survey and experimental data, it is impossible to draw
definitive conclusions about the relevant importance of various aspects of life, especially in the
presence of complicated feedbacks and many confounding factors. But emerging evidence
suggests that the social sources of well-being, especially those delivered in person, are of even
greater importance than previously thought. In recent World Happiness Reports, six factors have
been found to explain three-quarters of the differences in average life evaluations among
countries and over time. Two of these factors have already been mentioned: GDP per capita and
healthy life expectancy. The other four factors, all reflecting some aspect of the social fabric,
widely construed, are having someone to count on in times of trouble, a sense of freedom to
make life choices, generosity and a trustworthy environment, as proxied by the absence of
corruption in business and government. Calculations in the World Happiness Report 2017
(Helliwell et al 2017, p.37) show that to move those in the countries with the lowest values of
each of the four social variables up to the world average would raise life evaluations by almost
two points (1.97) on the zero to 10 scale. Such a change is about half as great as the entire range
of national average life evaluations, and is more than that associated with similar changes in both
income per capita and healthy life expectancy (from the bottom to world average). The largest
gains come from the measure of social support (having someone to count on in times of trouble
(1.19 points)). This difference is about equal to the gains from the 16-fold increase in per capita
incomes required to shift the three poorest countries up to world average income levels. The
importance of the social variables does not disappear, even at higher happiness levels. If
countries with world average levels of the four social variables could raise them to the average of
the three top countries for each of the four social variables, life evaluations would be higher by
an additional 1.29 points. These calculations, being based on correlations rather than more
directly causal evidence, are intended mainly to reveal the relative size of the likely effects of
social factors in comparison to the more established measures of income and good health. 8


Research based on surveys with a larger range of potential driving variables shows even greater
primacy of the social, and within the social, the dominance of the local. 9 To feel a sense of



                                                 11
belonging, in an atmosphere of mutual support and trust, is of first-order importance. This goes
far beyond being free from the risk of attack by others (e.g., as measured by fear of walking the
streets at night, with remedies promised by the gated community); it is the capacity to feel
embedded in a community where trust, belonging, and mutual support are the accepted norms.


Among the social variables, the one that has received the least previous research and policy
attention is generosity. Generosity, and prosocial behaviour in general, is much more prevalent,
and has greater links to subjective well-being, than people and policy-makers think (Aknin et al.
2019). The fact that people enjoy being engaged in social activities that help others opens the
door to a wide range of win-win policy choices (for example where school children and those in
elder care get the chance to care for and to teach each other, creating valuable resources while
enriching lives). 10 The fact that benevolent acts make the benefactor happier increases their
chances of being repeated. But the related fact that people underestimate their own happiness
rewards from benevolence should perhaps be ignored, because much of the happiness gain from
benevolent acts arises if and when they are done unselfishly. This information gap is perhaps
best filled by the Golden Rule, with its central role in all religious doctrines and moral
philosophies, thereby providing a norms-based incentive to act in ways that increase happiness
for givers and receivers of generous thoughts and actions.


To expand the opportunities for making positive social connections will, however, require
reversing some of the increasingly risk-averse professionalism of recent decades in the social
services, and will require flatter and more open administrative structures for decision and action.
To harness pro-social actions most effectively requires that people be offered more chances to
engage with others in joint searches for better lives. This will involve changes not only in the
content of policies, but also in the ways they are designed and delivered. 11


Measuring the distribution of well-being, and why it matters


If life evaluations provide an umbrella measure of the quality of life, it would seem theoretically
obvious that well-being inequality would provide a broader measure of inequality than could be
derived from the separate measures of inequality in income and wealth, health, education, and



                                                 12
friendship. Most previous studies of inequality have relied on income inequality when studying
the effects of inequality on health (Pickett & Wilkinson 2015) and happiness (Alesina et al.
2004). But recent research (Goff et al 2018, Nicholls & Reinhart 2019) has shown that inequality
in the distribution of life evaluations is more powerful than income inequality in several
explanatory roles where inequality is thought to be a factor. This is an important finding. If
average life evaluations are an appropriate measure of community welfare, then the effect of
happiness inequality on life evaluations provides an empirical measure of a society's aversion to
inequality (Helliwell 2020). In the absence of this evidence, moral philosophers and policy-
makers alike have had to assume the weights needed to construct a social welfare function. The
distribution of costs and benefits among the population must always be a central aspect of policy
evaluation. The evidence suggests that people significantly prefer less inequality in the
distribution of well-being, and these estimates provide the basis for comparing policies with
differing impacts on the distribution of well-being. This in turn suggests, but does not necessarily
require, a policy framework that explicitly targets those most in misery, because there is also
evidence that policies which generally improve the social context (for example increasing social
trust or community belonging) may provide their largest benefits to those in circumstances least
likely to make them happy ­ in particular ill-health, unemployment, and discrimination. 12


Measuring and Understanding Community and National Well-being


Does the average level of life evaluations in a community provide the best measure of well-being
in that community? That is certainly what is assumed when national averages are measured and
taken to represent quality of life within a nation. At the national level, there are qualms and
qualifications based on possible linguistic and cultural differences in response styles that might
raise problems of comparability. Although response style differences have been shown to exist,
they do not appear to be large enough to disturb the general finding that life evaluations are
comparable across countries, since they are found to depend on the same factors, to roughly the
same extent, throughout the world (Helliwell, Huang & Harris 2009). This conclusion is also
supported by evidence showing immigrants to have life valuations similar to those born locally,
despite coming from countries with very different institutions, histories and cultures.




                                                 13
What about comparisons among communities within a country? At this level there is more
uniformity of language and culture, but also greater potential for selection effects that cause
happy and unhappy people to end up in different neighbourhoods based on their tastes,
education, ethnicity, and incomes. Also, for a variety of reasons, communities can come to have
their own characteristics, partly shaped by their histories, and driven by the quality of the
interactions among those who live there. Various features of a neighbourhood have been found
to have important effects on the subsequent life experiences of those who move there (Chetty &
Hendren 2018). Such studies that track individuals as they move are relatively rare. In the larger
range of studies that find correlations between neighbourhood characteristics and average
individual happiness, there is a prevailing difficulty in accounting for selection effects and, more
generally, in unpacking the expected two-way causal linkages between individual happiness and
various measures of community characteristics, especially ones that track the social context.


Returning to the central question of measuring community-level happiness, how should we
answer the frequent suggestion that community-level well-being somehow lies above and
beyond the average subjective well-being of the people that live there? If we are interested in
assessing the quality of what is added by the community to the happiness of its residents (and its
visitors and non-resident workers - two important categories often ignored), then it is clearly
necessary to adjust for differences between communities in respect of the characteristics of the
individuals who live there. There are two methods for doing this. One is to obtain independent
measures of community-level factors that have been assumed or found to improve resident
happiness, and combine these into an index of community well-being. 13 The problems with such
indexes are the same as those outlined earlier for national indexes ­ how to choose, and then
weight, the components, and how to tell whether the resulting differences between communities
are significantly large. The second method is to collect information about the characteristics of a
community as a whole, and of the individuals in that community, and then to use empirical work
and available natural and controlled experiments to explain the life evaluations of residents. This
can help to establish the relative importance of different aspects of community life. As noted by
VanderWeele (2020, this volume), the communities of interest may include not just those
defined by geographical boundaries, but also by common interests, activities, beliefs and
friendships that span geographic boundaries.



                                                 14
In my view, the most appropriate measure of the quality of life in a community (and in a country
or region) is the average reported life satisfaction of its residents. To help unpack the role played
by qualities specific to a community, rather than by qualities brought to the table by those living
there, is and will always remain a difficult research question. 14 Answering that question is aided
greatly by the collection and use of variables of the sort proposed as candidate components of a
community well-being index.


Using Happiness Data and Research to Support Public Policies


Happiness data and research require widespread measurement if they are to have any impact on
public policies. But will the availability of data be enough to trigger public policies based on
well-being? Paul Allin (2020, this volume) notes that the translation of UK subjective well-being
data into research and policy applications has been relatively slow. What is needed to encourage
the process? Successful transition is likely to require several further steps once the data are
available and in easy reach. First, policy interest will be greater when there is widespread public
interest in and acceptance of happiness data. This can be initiated by widespread distribution and
preliminary analysis by national statistical agencies.


At the global level, the availability of internationally comparable life evaluations from the Gallup
World Poll has spurred widespread interest in how happiness compares across countries, which
in turn has led to many books and articles, and even new research institutions, examining the
lives and policies of the happiest countries, most particularly the Nordic countries.


Once data are made readily available to outside users, along with matching data on a variety of
those features of life likely to support better lives, this should spur academic and institutional
research covering a wide range of national and sectoral policy issues. This research base can in
turn support the reform of benefit cost analysis so that it compares policies on the basis of how
much they improve the levels and distribution of life satisfaction. This is perhaps the most
important step in the transition, since it can be done piecemeal and without fanfare, not requiring
any high-profile political pre-commitments to a new policy focus. It gives policy analysts a



                                                 15
better set of tools, and the capacity to bring a broader view of life into policy discussions and
decisions. 15 For new policy evaluation methods to be effectively designed and widely accepted
will require, over the longer run, training new generations and retraining older ones, within
academic disciplines and public policy schools, to rethink the assumptions and methods
ingrained in established texts and curricula. A corresponding process has been underway for a
few years longer in the study of global warming and other environmental issues. The shift
towards subjective well-being as a practical focus for public attention and policy design will take
longer. It permeates a range of disciplines, and requires similar transdisciplinary approaches if it
is to succeed. If it does succeed, then it should foster more appropriate and sustainable solutions
to all policy problems, including those facing the social, political and physical environments, at
all levels, from the neighbourhood to the globe.


References

Aknin, L.B., Whillans, A.V., Norton, M.I., & Dunn, E.W. (2019). Happiness and prosocial
behavior: An evaluation of the evidence. In Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. eds., World
Happiness Report 2019, 67-86. http://worldhappiness.report/ed/2019/happiness-and-prosocial-
behavior-an-evaluation-of-the-evidence/

Alesina, A., Di Tella, R., & MacCulloch, R. (2004). Inequality and happiness: are Europeans and
Americans different? Journal of public economics, 88(9-10), 2009-2042.

Allin, P., & Hand, D. J. (2017). New statistics for old?--measuring the wellbeing of the
UK. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 180(1), 3-43.

Allin, P. (2020) Reflections on the introduction and use of official measures of subjective well-
being in the UK. In this volume.

Anand, S., & Sen, A. (1994). Human Development Index: Methodology and Measurement.
World Development Report Occasional Paper.

Annas, Julia, (1987). Epicurus on Pleasure and Happiness. The Society for Ancient Greek
Philosophy Newsletter. 146. https://orb.binghamton.edu/sagp/146

Annas, J. (1993). The Morality of Happiness. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Arim, R. & Schellenberg, G. (2019). An Assessment of Non-probabilistic Online Survey Data:
Comparing the Carrot Rewards Mobile App Survey to the Canadian Community Health Survey.
Statistics Canada Analytic Studies: Methods and References, No. 021,June 4, 2019.
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/11-633-x/11-633-x2019002-eng.htm



                                                 16
Bonikowska, A., Helliwell, J. F., Hou, F., & Schellenberg, G. (2014). An assessment of life
satisfaction responses on recent statistics Canada surveys. Social Indicators Research, 118(2),
617-643.

Chetty, R., & Hendren, N. (2018). The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility I:
Childhood exposure effects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 1107-1162.

Cheung, F., & Lucas, R. E. (2014). Assessing the validity of single-item life satisfaction
measures: Results from three large samples. Quality of Life research, 23(10), 2809-2818.

Cohn, M. A., Fredrickson, B. L., Brown, S. L., Mikels, J. A., & Conway, A. M. (2009).
Happiness unpacked: positive emotions increase life satisfaction by building
resilience. Emotion, 9(3), 361.

Daley, A., Phipps, S., & Branscombe, N. R. (2018). The social complexities of disability:
Discrimination, belonging and life satisfaction among Canadian youth. SSM-population
health, 5, 55-63.

Deaton, A., & Stone, A. A. (2016). Understanding context effects for a measure of life
evaluation: How responses matter. Oxford Economic Papers, 68(4), 861-870.

Diener, E., & Emmons, R. A. (1984). The independence of positive and negative affect. Journal
of personality and social psychology, 47(5), 1105.

Dolan, P., & Kavetsos, G. (2016). Happy talk: Mode of administration effects on subjective well-
being. Journal of Happiness Studies, 17(3), 1273-1291.

Durand, M. (2015). The OECD better life initiative: How's life? and the measurement of well
being. Review of Income and Wealth, 61(1), 4-17.

Durand, M., & Exton, C. (2019). Adopting a well-being approach in central government: Policy
mechanisms and practical tools. In Global Happiness Council, Global Happiness and Wellbeing
Policy Report 2019, 140-162. http://www.happinesscouncil.org

Durand, M. and Smith, C. (2013). The OECD approach to measuring subjective well-being. In
Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds.) World Happiness Report 2013, 112-137.
http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/09/WorldHappinessReport2013_online.pdf

Farrelly, C. (2020). "Positive Biology" and well-ordered science. In this volume.

Flanagan, O. (2007) The Really Hard Problem: Meaning in a material world. MIT Press.

Fletcher, G. (2020). Philosophy of Well-Being for Social Scientists: A Primer. In this volume.

Goff, L., Helliwell, J., & Mayraz, G. (2018). Inequality of subjective well-being as a
comprehensive measure of inequality. Economic Inquiry 56(4), 2177-2194.


                                                17
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and
Semantics, Vol. 3, Speech Acts (pp. 41-58), New York: Academic Press.

Haybron, D. M., & Tiberius, V. (2015). Well-being policy: What standard of well-
being?. Journal of the American Philosophical Association, 1(4), 712-733.

Helliwell, J. F. (2003). How's life? Combining individual and national variables to explain
subjective well-being. Economic modelling, 20(2), 331-360.

Helliwell, J.F. (2019) How to open doors to happiness. In Global Happiness Council, Global
Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report 2019, 9-26. http://www.happinesscouncil.org

Helliwell, J.F. (2020) Three questions about happiness. Behavioural Public Policy. Forthcoming.

Helliwell, J. F., & Aknin, L. B. (2018). Expanding the social science of happiness. Nature human
behaviour, 2(4), 248.

Helliwell, J. F., Aknin, L. B., Shiplett, H., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2018). Social capital and
prosocial behavior as sources of well-being. Handbook of well-being. Salt Lake City, UT. DOI:
nobascholar. com

Helliwell, J. F., & Barrington-Leigh, C. P. Harris. A., & Huang, H. (2010). International
evidence on the social context of well-being. International differences in well-being, 291-325.

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Harris, A. (2009). International differences in the determinants of
life satisfaction. In New and enduring themes in development economics, 3-40.

Helliwell, J.F., Huang, H., Grover, S. and Wang, S. (2014). Good governance and national well-
being: What are the linkages? OECD Working Papers on Public Governance No 25.
DOI:10.1787/5jxv9f651hvj-en

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2018). New evidence on trust and well-being In
Uslaner, R., Ed. The Oxford Handbook of Social and Political Trust. New York: Oxford
University Press. 409-446.

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2017). The social foundations of world
happiness. World Happiness Report 2017, 8-47.

Helliwell, J.F. and Putnam, R.D. (2004). The social context of well-being. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 359(1449), 1435-1446. Reprinted in Huppert, F.A., Keverne,
B. and Baylis N. (Eds.) (2005). The Science of Well-Being. London: Oxford University Press,
435-459. DOI:          10.1098/rstb.2004.1

Helliwell, J.F. and Wang, S. (2011). Trust and wellbeing. International Journal of Wellbeing
1(1), 42-78. http://www.internationaljournalofwellbeing.org/index.php/ijow/article/view/3/85



                                                18
Keyes, C. L., & Annas, J. (2009). Feeling good and functioning well: Distinctive concepts in
ancient philosophy and contemporary science. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 4(3), 197-
201.

Land, K. C., & Michalos, A. C. (2018). Fifty years after the social indicators movement: Has the
promise been fulfilled? Social Indicators Research, 135(3), 835-868.

Layard, R., with Ward, G. (2020). Can We Be Happier? Evidence and ethics. Penguin Books
Limited.

Lucas, R. E., & Donnellan, M. B. (2012). Estimating the reliability of single-item life satisfaction
measures: Results from four national panel studies. Social Indicators Research, 105(3), 323-331.

Margolis, S., Schwitzgebel, E., Ozer, D., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2020) Empirical relationships
among five types of well-being. In this volume.

Nichols, S. & Reinhart, R.J. (2019) Well-being inequality may tell us more about life than
income. https://news.gallup.com/opinion/gallup/247754/wellbeing-inequality-may-tell-life-
income.aspx

Nordhaus, W. D., & Tobin, J. (1972). Is growth obsolete? In Economic Research: Retrospect
and prospect, Volume 5, Economic growth (pp. 1-80). National Bureau of Economic Research.

OECD. (2013). OECD Guidelines on Measuring Subjective Well-being. OECD Publishing.
http://www.oecd.org/statistics/Guidelines%20on%20Measuring%20Subjective%20Well-
being.pdf

Peasgood, T., Foster, D., & Dolan, P. (2019). Priority setting in healthcare through the lens of
happiness. In Global Happiness Council, Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report
2019,27-52. http://www.happinesscouncil.org

Pickett, K. E., & Wilkinson, R. G. (2015). Income inequality and health: a causal review. Social
science & medicine, 128, 316-326.

Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2001). On happiness and human potentials: A review of research on
hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. Annual review of psychology, 52(1), 141-166.

Ryff, C.D., Boylan, J.M., & Kirsch, J.A. (2020) Linking Eudaimonic and Hedonic Well-Being to
Health: An Integrative Approach. In this volume.

Sampson, R. J., Morenoff, J. D., & Gannon-Rowley, T. (2002). Assessing "neighborhood
effects": Social processes and new directions in research. Annual review of sociology, 28(1),
443-478.




                                                19
Sen, A. K. (1994). Well-being, capability and public policy. Giornale degli economisti e annali
di economia, 333-347.

Sen, A.K. (2003). Sraffa, Wittgenstein, and Gramsci. Journal of Economic Literature 43(4),
1240-1255.

Stutzer, A., & Frey, B. S. (2006). Political participation and procedural utility: An empirical
study. European Journal of Political Research, 45(3), 391-418.

Trudel-Fitzgerald, C., Kubzansky, L.D., & VanderWeele, T.J. (2020) A review of psychological
well-being and mortality risk: Are all dimensions of psychological well-being equal? In this
volume.

VanderWeele, T. J. (2017). On the promotion of human flourishing. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(31), 8148-8156.

VanderWeele, T. (2020) Measuring Community Well-Being: A Template. In this volume.

Van Ham, M., & Manley, D. (2012). Neighbourhood effects research at a crossroads. Ten
challenges for future research Introduction. Environment and Planning A, 44(12), 2787-2793.

Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.




1
  "Aristotle argues that all our actions are, in some way, for the sake of a single end. Obviously,
people are not all aiming at the same determinate end; the final end is a highly unspecific end
that nonetheless unifies our actions. The only halfway specific thing we can say about it is that
everyone agrees that it is eudaimonia. This doesnt help much , because people disagree as to
what eudaimonia is, some thinking that it is pleasure, others virtue, others virtue exercised in
favorable conditions. Epicurus will defend the first option, the Stoics the second, Aristotle
himself the third: this sets the framework of ancient ethical debate that continues to this day
(Annas, 1993)." As quoted by Keyes & Annas (2009, pp. 197-8).
2
  This has modern echoes in the `pragmatic subjectivism' of Haybron & Tiberius (2015).
3
  This led me to appoint myself as Aristotle's research assistant, a position made possible through
the increasingly widespread availability of answers to the central question he proposed. I
similarly expect that ethical philosophy will develop an empirical aspect. This may be slow in


                                                 20
coming, as Fletcher (2020, this volume) reports that modern philosophers still think that
empirical work based on data from ordinary lives cannot help to mediate or resolve philosophical
debates about the relative importance of different theories of the sources of happiness.
4
  Amartya Sen utilized linguistic philosophy to make this distinction in his keynote address to the
January 2013 Rome Science Congress. His primary reference was to the later Wittgenstein
(1953), with roots attributed to Gramsci via Sraffa, as described in Sen (2003). Gramsci's view
of `spontaneous philosophy', whereby meaning is derived from everyday linguistic usage, was
also central to English linguistic philosophy, partly through Wittgenstein (1953), wherein
meaning is based on the logic of the conversations in which words are used (e.g. Grice 1975).
5
  Richard Layard has suggested (2020, p. 205) that for valuing health policies and perhaps more
broadly, healthy life expectancy should be given even more weight by multiplying average life
satisfaction by health life expectancy (or Health Adjusted Life Years, HALYs). If the current
measures of life satisfaction already embody the full value that individuals attach to healthy life
expectancy, then to multiply life satisfaction by the number of healthy years would exaggerate
their relevance to average national happiness.
6
  The overview paper by Land and Michalos (2018) is followed by a series of invited comments.
7
  Cohn et al. (2009) additionally find increased resilience to be a pathway from positive affect to
life satisfaction.
8
  Because the social factor answers come from the same surveys as the life evaluations, there is a
risk that they might be correlated, even at the aggregate level, because of idiosyncratic happiness
differences that might affect life evaluations and the answers to the social questions. This risk
was tested for by dividing the national samples randomly in two, and then using the average
social variable responses from one half of the sample to explain the average life evaluations of
the other half. The results were almost completely unaffected, as shown in Table 10 of online
Statistical Appendix 1 of World Happiness Report 2018.
9
  For example, the Canadian General Social Survey has asked separately about a sense of
belonging to one's local community, province, and to Canada as a whole. All are significantly
positive, but the power of the local belonging is significantly the largest, more than three-
quarters of a point on the 0 to 10 life satisfaction scale even holding constant the significant
effects from trust in co-workers and trust in neighbours. (Helliwell & Wang 2011, Table 4-1)
10
   For examples and references, see Helliwell (2019).
11
   The `how' aspects are sometimes referred to as `procedural utility' (Stutzer & Frey 2006). For
more examples, see Helliwell (2019) and Part III of Helliwell, Huang, Grover & Wang (2014).
12
   See Helliwell, Aknin, et al. (2018, Figure 4) for evidence from the European Social Survey
that people living in a high trust environment are more resilient in the face of each of these
negative circumstances, while Daley et al. (2018) show that a sense of community belonging
protects youth with disabilities from the negative well-being effects of perceived discrimination.
13
   See VanderWeele (2020, this volume) and the references therein.
14
   For reviews of open issues, see Sampson et al. (2002) and Van Ham & Manley (2012).
15
   On this point, see also Exton and Durand (2019).




                                                21
