                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          HIDDEN IN PLAIN SIGHT:
              VENTURE GROWTH WITH OR WITHOUT VENTURE CAPITAL

                                        Christian Catalini
                                         Jorge Guzman
                                           Scott Stern

                                       Working Paper 26521
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26521


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019


We thank Theresa Amabile, Tania Babina, Iain Cockburn, Shane Greenstein, Josh Lerner,
Ramana Nanda, Giorgia Piacentino, Manju Puri, Tim Simcoe, and Jane Wu for helpful
comments, as well as participants at the Dartmouth Venture Capital and Private Equity
Conference, the NBER Productivity Lunch, the Kauffman Scholars Conference, and seminar
participants at Brandeis University, Michigan University, Kellogg School of Management, and
Columbia Business School. We also acknowledge and thank the Kauffman Foundation for their
support of our research agenda, including the Uncommon Methods and Metrics Grant and the
Kauffman Dissertation Fellowship, as well as the Jean Hammond (1986) and Michael Krasner
(1974) Entrepreneurship Fund and the Edward B. Roberts (1957) Entrepreneurship Fund at MIT.
Yupeng Liu provided excellent research assistantship. All errors and omissions are of course our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26521.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christian Catalini, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hidden in Plain Sight: Venture Growth with or without Venture Capital
Christian Catalini, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 26521
December 2019
JEL No. G24,L26

                                         ABSTRACT

The majority of IPOs and acquisitions are achieved without venture capital financing, yet
research has focused mostly on VC backed firms. Using founding choices and a predictive
analytics approach on virtually all US registered businesses, we shed light into these "missing"
growth firms. Founding choices that predict raising venture capital also strongly predict equity
exits without VC. Firms with growth potential are similar to each other, irrespective of funding
source. Moreover, matching firms that are born with identical observables, but only differ in
whether they receive venture capital, suggests an upper bound to the returns to venture capital of
600%.

Christian Catalini                              Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School of Management                  MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-480                        100 Main Street, E62-476
Cambridge, MA 02142                             Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                        and NBER
catalini@mit.edu                                sstern@mit.edu

Jorge Guzman
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall, 711
116th St & Broadway
New York, NY 10027
jag2367@gsb.columbia.edu
I.       INTRODUCTION


         The skewed nature of firm growth outcomes is a striking feature of the process through
which entrepreneurship influences broader economic performance. From a financial
perspective, only a very small fraction of firms (less than 1 in 2000) reaches a successful
financial exit in the form of an IPO or successful acquisition. Most of what we know about
these growth firms comes from carefully constructed samples of firms funded by venture
capitalists and angel investors (Lerner, 1995; Hellman and Puri, 2000; Chemmanur, Nandy,
and Krishnan, 2011; Lerner et al 2015; Puri and Zarutskie, 2012). By following startups from
their earliest funding rounds to an exit, this stream of research surfaced the central role
professional investors play in enabling and accelerating startup growth. Although VCs only
fund a very small number of startups each year (approximately a thousand in the US), they
account for a disproportionate share of growth events: Kaplan and Lerner (2010) estimate that
venture-backed companies account for an impressive 30% to 70% of "startup" IPOs (1995-
2009)2, and, more recently, Ritter (2016) traces back 37% of startup IPOs to a VC funding
event (1980-2015).
         Whereas these shares are a testament to the role VCs play in the selection and nurturing
of high potential startups, they also indirectly highlight how little we know about the sizable
share of firms that achieve growth without ever being associated with a venture capital firm.
Of course, given that VC activity is concentrated within a few regions and sectors, it is possible
that firms that grow without VC are simply coming from areas and industries that have not yet
developed a thriving venture capital ecosystem. Under this hypothesis, we would anticipate
that the firms that ultimately growth without venture capital would be in many respects similar
at founding to the firms that growth with venture capital, although their growth trajectories
could be somewhat different. For example, it is possible that growth without venture capital
would be concentrated among firms that are of even higher quality at founding, since a less
favorable funding environment ­ either within a non-hub region or during a VC downturn ­
would select out many ventures that could succeed if only venture capital were available. In


2
  Startup IPOs are all IPOs after excluding financial IPOs, blank check companies, re-listings, reverse LBOs,
real estate investment trusts (REIT), and special purpose acquisition companies (SPAC).


                                                                                                                2
the absence of VC, growth may also take longer to materialize, as firms have to slowly
bootstrap their development through alternative sources of capital such as revenues from sales,
loans, government grants etc.
       An alternative hypothesis is that despite regional, industry and economic cycle
differences, multiple routes to equity growth exist, and that the broader availability of data on
VC-backed firms has skewed researchers' focus towards just one of the possible paths to
growth. Conditional on alternative paths to growth actually existing, this raises the question of
how they may differ (if at all) from the venture capital one, and what types of firms are more
likely to select into one versus the other. The underlying, key welfare question is one of how
society allocates capital to novel, high potential ideas and encourages their development from
concept to market.
       By design, the study of selection into alternative paths to growth requires first defining
the full population of firms at risk of growth, and then following their outcomes independent
of funding source and path chosen. This has prevented previous studies from systematically
examining this process, as most research either: a) starts from a selected sample (e.g. the set of
firms that raise venture capital, qualify for a government grant, etc.) and then matches it to
controls along idiosyncratically chosen dimensions; or b) directly compares VC-funded firms
to the general population of firms, the vast majority of which is never really at risk of growing
in the first place. Whereas the first approach typically misses firms with growth potential that
do not fit the venture capital `playbook', the second one overestimates the role of VC on growth
because it confounds selection and treatment.
       The objective of this paper is to characterize the differences between firms that achieve
a significant growth outcome with versus without venture capital. To identify the full set of
firms with growth potential ­ irrespective of future funding source ­ we extend Guzman and
Stern's (2015, 2017, 2019) predictive analytics approach, and estimate a `VC-likelihood' for
all incorporated firms based on information that is available at the time of their founding. We
then use this estimate to match VC-funded firms to comparable control firms from the non-
VC-funded part of the sample. Our empirical approach follows three steps, which we describe
in more detail below.




                                                                                                3
         In the first step, we train a model on a random subsample of all incorporated firms3 to
learn as much as possible, using historical data on VC funding events, from the selection
process performed by venture capitalists. In this step, our objective is to extract key observable
dimensions VCs select on when trying to predict the future growth potential of a firm, and then
use the results from this predictive analytics exercise to calculate a VC-likelihood for all the
firms in our sample (irrespective of them receiving VC funding or not). This measure allows
us to replicate elements of the screening process VCs perform on every firm in the economy,
including firms VCs may have turned down or never had a chance to evaluate in the first place
(e.g. because they do not operate in the region the firm is located, were not aware of the deal,
or the company did not look for venture capital funding). Of course, VCs collect substantially
more information than we do when deciding to invest in a startup or not through face-to-face
meetings, due diligence, etc. At the same time, as long as some of the dimensions they care
about are captured by our data, then our method should be able to replicate at least part of their
screening heuristics.
         We train our model on venture capitalists because their objective is to maximize the
chances of an equity growth event: i.e., by studying the observables that correlate with their
decision to invest, we are able to identify firm characteristics that VCs believe can predict
future growth. Whether or not these observables have any actual predictive power (beyond the
self-fulfilling component resulting from the VCs `treatment effect' on the firms) is an empirical
question. It is also not clear, a priori, if the same dimensions VCs select on would be predictive
of growth within the sample of non-VC-funded firms. If VCs endogenously match with firms
that they know would benefit the most from their approach to scaling startups, then non-VC-
funded firms that grow could be fundamentally different than VC-funded ones. If instead there
is a single playbook for firm growth, and VCs are able to capture some of the early signals of


3
   A practical requirement for any growth-oriented entrepreneur is business registration (as a corporation,
partnership, or limited liability company). These public documents allow us to observe a "population" sample of
entrepreneurs observed at a similar (and foundational) stage of the entrepreneurial process. Moving beyond simple
counts of business registrants (Klapper, Amit, and Guillen, 2010), we are able to measure characteristics related
to entrepreneurial quality at or close to the time of registration. These characteristics include how the firm is
organized (e.g., as a corporation, partnership, or LLC, and whether the company is registered in Delaware), how
it is named (e.g., whether the owners name the firm eponymously after themselves), and how the idea behind the
business is protected (e.g., through an early patent or trademark application). These startup characteristics may
reflect choices by founders who perceive their venture to have high potential. As a result, though observed startup
characteristics are not causal drivers of startup performance, they may nonetheless represent early-stage "digital
signatures" of high-quality ventures.


                                                                                                                 4
a firm's future potential, then we would expect non-VC-funded firms that grow to be similar,
on at least some of the dimensions VCs care about, to VC-funded firms. Our paper tests these
competing hypotheses.
        To do so, in the second step of our approach, we use the estimates resulting from our
prediction of the VC-likelihood to explore the growth process among firms that did not receive
venture capital.4 One can think of our VC-likelihood as a proxy--based on firm observables--
for the probability that a VC firm would have invested in a focal firm based on what was known
about it around the time of its birth. The intuition behind this step is to check if the determinants
of venture capital financing are similar to the determinants of growth outside of the venture
capital sample. If venture growth in the absence of VC is fundamentally different from growth
with VC (i.e. if these two paths to growth have little in common), then this analysis would
surface the observables that are associated with VC funding, but are not associated with growth
within the non-VC sample. If instead the two paths to growth are similar, then we would expect
many of the determinants across the two models to be the same, and the VC-likelihood would
be a good proxy for growth potential also in the absence of venture capital (since it distills
some key predictors of growth VCs select on).
        In the third step, since the VC-likelihood can be calculated for all firms independent of
funding source, we explicitly use it to identify, for each firm that raised VC, a comparable,
`VC-type' firm among the firms that did not receive venture capital. This allows us to perfectly
match each VC-funded firm with a control firm from the non-VC sample of the same
observable estimated quality (at least from our model). We use this last step to describe both
the process of selection into venture capital starting from the full population of new firms, and
to estimate an upper bound to the returns from VC.
        We apply this three-step approach to a dataset covering all business registrants in 49
US states and Washington D.C. (comprising 99.6% of US GDP) from 1995-2005. This data
is part of the Startup Cartography Project (Andrews, et al, 2019). Relative to other work in
this agenda, our paper is the first to consider the determinants of venture capital selection in
the population of firms, rather than equity alone growth (Guzman and Stern, 2015, 2017, 2019),



4
  We leverage the fact that, although rare, we observe both the receipt of venture capital (though data on the
precise amount and valuation is somewhat noisy) and meaningful growth outcomes for those firms that realize
such outcomes (e.g., for equity growth, we can observe firm for example IPO or high-value acquisitions).


                                                                                                            5
or the interaction of financing and gender (Guzman and Kacperczyk, 2019). An additional
improvement upon this prior work is an expanded dataset from 32 US states to now include
data from 49 states (and Washington, DC), as well as improved measures of venture capital
financing across these firms.
         Our analysis delivers several novel findings about the process of venture growth with
versus without venture capital. While our estimates of the incidence of venture-backed IPOs
are similar to prior estimates in the literature, they nonetheless highlight the important role that
non-VC-backed companies play in economic growth: about 85% of all firms that achieve an
equity growth event do so without venture capital financing (69% of IPOs, in our data).
Furthermore, our results show that the process of selection into venture capital, similar to the
process of equity growth (Guzman and Stern, 2015, 2017, 2019), is highly skewed, and can be
characterized through a small number of firm observables at birth.5
        When we use our estimates from the predictive analytics approach to understand
growth within the non-VC sample, we find that a doubling in the estimated VC-likelihood more
than doubles the probability of an equity growth outcome, with almost 45% of all non-VC-
backed equity growth outcomes estimated to be in the top 5% of the VC-likelihood distribution.
Among firms that did not raise venture capital, a firm in the top 0.5% of our estimated VC-
likelihood distribution is 118X more likely to achieve an equity growth outcome than a firm in
the bottom 50% of the distribution. The results highlight the striking similarity between the
determinants of venture capital and the determinants of equity growth in the absence of venture
capital. With the exception of trademark, which is more salient among non-venture-backed
firms, all other startup characteristics are comparable across the two models. The relationship
between our estimated VC-likelihood and equity growth within the non-VC-backed sample is
also quite stable across time periods where venture capital was more versus less abundant, and
across geographies (startup hubs versus not).
        The stability of these estimates supports the view that our predictive analytics approach
is able to capture fundamental firm characteristics that are predictive of growth irrespective of
funding source and VC presence in a region or sector. The same estimates also allow us to



5
  Firms that have short names are 356% more likely to receive venture capital, while eponymous firms are more
than 80% less likely to receive VC; firms that register in Delaware and receive or apply for a patent within a
year of founding are 140X more likely to receive venture capital.


                                                                                                             6
revisit the question of the role of venture capital in the process of equity growth, as they can
be used to carefully match each venture-backed firm with a control firm with similar growth
potential from birth. The method provides us with an upper-bound estimate of the returns to
venture capital investment on equity growth, as VCs also select firms based on characteristics
that are unobservable to us. We find that relative to a "naïve" estimate where venture capital
is associated with a 400X increase in the probability of equity growth, our matching results
suggest up to a 6X boost to equity growth from venture capital. Interestingly, in our data, the
returns to venture capital are lower in the upper tail of the estimated VC-likelihood distribution
(e.g., firms in the top 0.05% of the distribution receive only a 2.3X increase in their probability
of growth). The estimated VC effect is also lower within startup hubs and during the .com
market crash.
       The contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, by using a predictive analytics
approach to estimate the probability of receiving venture capital investment, we provide a more
direct comparison of firms that grow with and without venture capital. Though prior work has
highlighted the mechanisms that lead to incomplete venture capital investment markets
(Hochberg et al, 2010; Ewens et al, 2013; Ewens and Townsend, 2019; Piacentino, 2019), and
assessed the incidence of venture capital in initial public offerings (Ritter, 2016; Kaplan and
Lerner 2010), our paper is the first to document the process of growth without VC
systematically for all firms in the economy. A critical contribution in this respect is considering
the founding observables of firms, and then be able to characterize the similarity of companies
from founding to exit across these two financing paths. Second, we are able to use this
comparison to offer a novel complementary approach to a growing literature on the "returns"
to venture capital investment (Chemmanur, et al, 2011; Puri and Zarutskie, 2012). Our upper
bound estimate is consistent with that of Puri and Zarutskie (2012), and provides additional
evidence on the returns to VC, during our time period.
       More generally, our results evidence important facts on the sources of venture capital
selection and follow-on performance. They suggest that not only multiple financing paths to
growth exist, but that there are strong similarities between firms that grow through either of
these routes. And, once the estimated VC-likelihood is accounted for, the gap between VC-
funded and other firms of comparable potential is much smaller than simpler approaches would
lead to believe. In our companion paper, Catalini et al (2019), we build on the results in this



                                                                                                 7
paper to consider more carefully the relative incidence of "passive" versus "active" growth in
the context of a structural model considering the interplay between the early-stage choices of
founders and venture capitalists.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the process of selection into venture
capital and equity growth. Section 3 develops our predictive analytics approach. Section 4
introduces the data and descriptive statistics, before turning to the main empirical findings in
Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 concludes.


II.     VENTURE QUALITY, SELECTION INTO VENTURE CAPITAL, AND GROWTH


        Over the past decade, there has been increasing appreciation for the skewed nature of
entrepreneurial outcomes, and for the disproportionate impact high quality new ventures have
on innovation, employment and productivity growth. Starting from founding, firms exhibit
substantial heterogeneity in quality, and only a very small fraction of successful startups is
responsible for the economy-wide benefits from entrepreneurship (Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-
Kropf, 2014, Guzman and Stern, 2019). While there is increasing understanding of the
importance of accounting for such heterogeneity in the measurement and impact of
entrepreneurship on the economy (Schoar, 2010; also see Hurst and Pugsley, 2010, Lerner,
2009, and Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014, Guzman and Stern, 2015, 2019),
systematic measurement of new venture quality has been challenging. In the area of
entrepreneurial finance, researchers often rely on samples of firms that have reached rare
milestones such as raising venture capital. While this facilitates the examination of the
dynamics of high-potential firms, it also creates a disconnect between these small, selected
samples of firms and the overall population of new ventures.6 As emphasized by Hathaway
and Litan, the challenge in directly incorporating heterogeneity is fundamentally a
measurement problem: "The problem is that it is very difficult, if not impossible, to know at
the time of founding whether or not firms are likely to survive and/or grow. This is true even
with venture-capital backed firms..." (Hathaway and Litan, 2014).




6
 One notable and insightful exception is the positive relationship between organizing your firm as a corporation
and entrepreneurial income highlighted by Levine and Rubinstein (2017).


                                                                                                              8
        Though it is certainly the case that entrepreneurship is a highly uncertain activity, it is
nonetheless also the case that entrepreneurs and investors make (somewhat) informed
decisions at a relatively early stage of the life of a firm, based on their best assessment of the
growth potential of that firm. For example, given the objective of predicting and enabling
startup growth, venture capital firms explicitly seek to identify new ventures that have a higher
likelihood of achieving an equity growth outcome over a relatively bounded period of time
(i.e., typically the lifetime of the fund). After selecting a firm, they also do not rely on a passive
investment strategy, but actively support the ventures they add to their portfolio in order to
accelerate their path to growth. At the same time, as shown by multiple studies in this area,
their search and investment activities are concentrated not only in specific industries and
geographies, but also disproportionately focus on specific types of firms, founding teams and
technology trends. VCs are more likely to fund ventures that have secured (or are in the process
of securing) formal intellectual property, and do not currently have a sizable stream of revenues
(Hellman and Puri, 2000). Their investments tend to be focused on a narrow range of industries
(Gans and Stern, 2003), on firms located in close proximity to their offices (Lerner, 1995) and
startup hubs (Chen et al., 2014), on sectors where they have previous investment experience
(Sorenson and Stuart, 2001), and where they expect follow-on capital to be available (Nanda
and Rhodes-Kropf, 2013). They also prefer to invest in teams with a strong track-record
(Gompers et al., 2016) and in serial entrepreneurs (Gompers, Lerner, and Sharfstein, 2005;
Gompers et al, 2010). Interestingly, in a recent paper, whereas Nanda, Samila and Sorenson
(2018) find evidence of VCs being able to select good investments, they do not find evidence
of them being able to correctly identify, ex-ante, the very top right tail outcomes. This speaks
to both VCs' ability to identify key predictors of future firm growth, but also to the presence
of residual uncertainty about the prospects of the high potential candidates that enter their
portfolios.
        On the other hand, while it is possible that venture capitalists do identify many of the
firms with growth potential, the full population of growth firms may be quite different (as
emphasized, among others, by Bhide (2000)). Differences between the process of selection
into venture capital and the overall process of firm growth might be driven both by supply and
by demand-side factors. On the supply side, it is possible that differences in regional and
industry composition may result in a relatively lower rate of entrepreneurial activity for certain



                                                                                                    9
types of businesses. As well, if VCs face higher search costs outside of regional startup hubs
or specific industries they have experience in, then some firms with high growth potential
might be excluded from venture capital investment because they do not fall within the
traditional VC `search space'. On the demand side, firms that can bootstrap through other
means and generate enough cash flow to sustain their growth may have little demand for
venture capital to begin with and may want to avoid the loss of equity and control that is
associated with raising external funding.
        Understanding the process of selection into venture capital and how it relates to the
broader process of firm growth--even in the absence of VC funding--matters for estimating
how efficiently society allocates resources to new ventures, and for regional policies targeted
at sustaining entrepreneurship and economic growth outside of startup hubs. If VC-backed
firms and non-VC-backed firms are similar, but VC funding drastically increases the odds of
firm growth, then from a policy perspective it is useful to examine the barriers to venture
financing in regions or industries where it is lacking, and what can be done to remove them. It
would also suggest that the prior literature's focus on venture capital has not overlooked an
alternative, critical path to firm growth, but that instead venture capital is a critical accelerant
of growth within a single growth `playbook'. If instead VC-funded and non-VC-funded firms
that achieve growth are fundamentally different (and need different types of resources,
investors and policies), then efforts targeted at expanding venture capital to these different
types of firms, sectors, and regions, may be completely ineffective at accelerating them, and
different types of interventions may be needed to support their alternative path to an equity
growth outcome. Empirically, to adjudicate between these competing hypotheses, we need to
develop a methodology which allows us to identify the growth potential of firms at founding
­ irrespective of future funding source ­ and systematically compare firm characteristics and
growth outcomes between these possibly different paths to growth. Our next section presents
in detail a predictive analytics approach which, by leveraging the information contained in VCs
funding decisions, helps us make progress in this direction.




                                                                                                 10
III.   A PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS APPROACH FOR STUDYING THE PATHS TO
       FIRM GROWTH


       To break through this impasse, we develop a predictive analytics approach that allows
us to take advantage of the process of selection into venture capital to identify firm
characteristics that are predictive of future growth. We then use the resulting `VC-likelihood'
estimate to study growth within the sample of firms that do not receive venture capital. Our
goal is to estimate the relationship between an informed signal of growth potential (i.e.,
receiving venture capital), early firm characteristics and founder choices, and the resulting
probability of growth for all firms in the economy.
       Building on Guzman and Stern (2015, 2017, 2019), our approach takes advantage of
three interrelated insights. First, a practical requirement for any entrepreneur trying to achieve
a growth outcome is business registration (as a corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company). This practical requirement allows us to form a population sample of entrepreneurs
"at risk" of growth at a similar (and foundational) stage of the entrepreneurial process. Second,
we are able to distinguish among different types of business registrants through the
measurement of characteristics related to entrepreneurial quality observable at or close to the
time of registration. For example, we can capture firm characteristics such as whether the
founders name the firm after themselves (eponymy), whether the firm is organized in order to
receive equity financing (e.g., registering as a corporation or in Delaware), or whether the firm
seeks intellectual property protection (e.g., a patent or trademark). Third, we leverage the fact
that, though rare, we observe both a signal of an informed investor's willingness to invest in a
firm with growth potential (receipt of venture capital) as well as equity growth outcomes such
as IPOs or acquisitions for all firms in our sample.
       We combine these insights to develop a predictive analytics model that leverages the
fact that venture capital is an informed (although imperfect) signal of growth potential to
characterize the potential of firms that do not receive venture capital. In particular, we begin
by estimating a predictive analytics model of the process of selection into venture capital.
Specifically, for a firm i at time t, with startup characteristics , , we observe the receipt of
venture capital ,+ s years after founding and estimate:




                                                                                               11
                               , = (,+ |, ) = ( + , )                                                  (1)


         This model allows us to predict quality as the probability of receiving venture capital
given the focal startup characteristics at founding, and estimate a `VC-likelihood' (a proxy for
quality and potential as assessed by venture capitalists) as , . We use these estimates to

characterize whether the same startup characteristics of firms that do not receive venture capital
are similarly informative for achieving an equity growth exit within the non-VC-backed
sample. Specifically, from (1), we are able to form an estimate of the `VC-likelihood', , ,

and then consider how informative this estimate is within a regression where we estimate the
probability of growth among firms that do not receive venture capital:


                           ,+ =  +  , + , if ,+ = 0                                                 (2)


         To the extent that the estimate in (2) is informative (i.e. to the extent that
determinants of growth within VC-backed firms are similar to the determinants of growth
within the non-VC sample), we can also use our `VC-likelihood' estimates to construct
matched sample control groups to evaluate the returns to venture capital on equity growth
itself, and separate the role of selection into venture capital (based on observables), from
treatment:
                                     , = (,+ |, )                                                   (3)


         IV. DATA AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS


         Our analysis uses business registration records, which are public records created when
an individual registers a new business as a corporation, LLC or partnership (Guzman and Stern,
2015; 2017; 2019).7 We rely on all registrations from 1995 to 2005 in 49 US states and
Washington D.C,8 representing virtually the totality of the United States venture capital. We


7
  This section draws heavily from this prior work, where we introduce business registration records and many of
the measures used in this paper.
8
  We only exclude firms that are local to the state of Delaware which, due to the unique role Delaware
jurisdiction plays in the United States, we are not able to differentiate statistically from high growth startups.


                                                                                                               12
build this dataset from the underlying data in the Startup Cartography Project (Andrews et al,
2019), a systematic effort to measure entrepreneurship in the United States. Portions of this
dataset have also been used in our prior work (e.g., Guzman and Stern, 2019; Guzman, 2018;
Fazio et al, 2019; Guzman and Kacperczyk, 2019). Relative to these prior studies, we have
expanded the data in two dimensions. First, we increased the coverage from 32 U.S. states to
49 U.S. states plus Washington D.C., allowing us to virtually cover the whole U.S. economy,
and, second, we have added venture capital databases allowing us to develop measures of
venture capital financing for all firms within our data.
        While it is possible to found a new business without appearing in these data (e.g., a sole
proprietorship), the benefits of registration are substantial, and include limited liability, various
tax benefits, the ability to issue and trade ownership shares, and credibility with customers.
Furthermore, all corporations, partnerships, and limited liability companies must register with
a Secretary of State9 in order to take advantage of these benefits, as the act of registering the
firm triggers the legal creation of the company. As such, these records reflect the population
of businesses that take a form that is a practical prerequisite for growth. Our analysis draws on
the complete population of firms satisfying one of the following conditions: (a) a for-profit
firm in the local jurisdiction or (b) a for-profit firm whose jurisdiction is Delaware but whose
principal office address is in the local state. In other words, our analysis excludes non-profit
organizations as well as companies whose primary location is not in the state. The resulting
dataset contains 13,231,305 observations.10 For each observation we construct variables
related to: (a) growth outcomes (IPO or significant acquisition); (b) venture capital financing
events; (c) firm characteristics based on business registration observables; and (d) firm
characteristics based on external data that can be directly linked to the firm (e.g. patents,
trademarks). We briefly review each one in turn.
        Growth Outcomes. The growth outcome used in this paper, Growth, is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if the firm has an initial public offering (IPO) or is acquired at a meaningful

9
  Or Secretary of the Commonwealth.
10
  The number of firms founded in our sample is substantially higher than the US Census Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD), done from tax records. For example, for Massachusetts in the period 2003-2012, the LBD
records an average of 9,450 new firms per year and we record an average of 24,066 firm registrations. On the
other hand, our number is lower than the total number of tax-paying entrepreneurs reported when including non-
employer firms by Fairlie, Miranda and Zolas (2019). The number of business registrants thus seems to strike a
middle ground between only employer companies (missing many startups), and all tax paying self-employed
(which includes many non-startups) .


                                                                                                           13
positive valuation within 10 years of registration as reported in the Thomson Reuters SDC
database. Between 1995 and 2005, we identify 17,494 firms that achieve growth, representing
0.13% of the total sample of firms.
        Venture Capital Financing. We collect information on Series-A venture capital
financing events from multiple databases: AngelList, CapitalIQ, Preqin, and Thompson
Reuters VentureXpert, from which we create two measures., Gets Venture Capital, is a dummy
equal to 1 if a firm receives financing and 0 otherwise, and Gets Venture Capital in 2 Years is
only equal to 1 if the firm raises this financing in the first two years11
        Firm Characteristics. We develop two types of firm characteristics: (a) those based on
business registration data, and (b) those based on external indicators of quality that are
observable at or near the time of business registration.
        a. Measures based on business registration data. In the first category, we first create
             two binary measures that relate to how the firm is registered: Corporation, which
             captures whether the firm is a corporation rather than an LLC or partnership, and
             Delaware, equal to one if the firm is registered in Delaware. We then create five
             additional measures based directly on the name of the firm. Eponymous is equal to
             1 if the first, middle, or last name of the top managers is part of the name of the
             firm itself.12 Our last measure relates to the structure of the firm name. Based on
             our review of naming patterns of growth-oriented startups versus the full business
             registration database, a striking feature of growth-oriented firms is that the vast
             majority of their names are at most two words (plus perhaps one additional word to
             capture the organizational form, e.g. "Inc."). We define Short Name to be equal to
             one if the entire firm name has three or less words, and zero otherwise.13 We then
             create several measures based on how the firm name reflects the industry or sector
             within which the firm is operating, taking advantage of the industry categorization
             of the US Cluster Mapping Project ("US CMP") (Delgado, Porter, and Stern, 2016)


11
   As shown in Figure A1, about 70% of all firms that raise venture capital financing do so within the first two
years from their founding date.
12
   Belenzon, Chatterji, and Daley (2017, 2019) perform a more detailed analysis of the interaction between
eponymy and firm performance finding an important negative relationship between an intent to use equity
financing and eponymy.
13
   Companies such as Akamai or Biogen have sharp and distinctive names, whereas more traditional businesses
often have long and descriptive names (e.g., "New England Commercial Realty Advisors, Inc.").


                                                                                                             14
              and a text analysis approach. We develop seven such measures. The first three are
              associated with broad industry sectors and include whether a firm can be identified
              as local (Local), traded (Traded) or resource intensive (Resource Intensive). The
              other five industry groups are narrowly defined high technology sectors that are
              typically associated with high growth firms, including whether the firm is within
              the biotech (Biotech Sector), e-commerce (E-Commerce), other information
              technology (IT), medical devices (Medical Devices) or semiconductors
              (Semiconductor) space.
         b. Measures based on External Observables. We also construct two measures related
              to quality based on data from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. Patent is equal
              to 1 if a firm holds a patent application within the first year and 0 otherwise. We
              include patents that are filed by the firm within the first year of registration and
              patents that are assigned to the firm within the first year from another entity (e.g.,
              an inventor or another firm). Our second measure, Trademark, is equal to 1 if a firm
              applies for trademark protection within a year from registration.


Descriptive Statistics. Table 1 reports summary statistics. There are 13,231,305 firms in our
data: 0.13% of these firms achieve an equity growth outcome within ten years from
incorporation, and 0.08% receive venture capital (0.05% within 2 years)14. 0.2% of firms have
a patent (within 1 year from birth), and 0.08% have a trademark. 57% of firms are corporations,
47% have a short name, 10% are eponymous and 2.6% are registered in Delaware.
         In Table 2, we directly compare the share of firms in our sample that grow with versus
without VC: although only 0.15% of non-VC-funded firms achieve growth, this share is 34%
for VC-funded firms (Panel A). If we only focus on IPOs, whereas 1 out of 22 VC-funded


14
   This number of investments is not comparable with the number of investments in these states within those years
for at least three reasons. First, we only include firms registered after 1995, but investments occurring in the early
part of our sample could be on firms registered earlier than 1995, which we do not observe. Second, we only
include local firms, but some regions such as Silicon Valley or Boston, have a history of firms that are not local
but instead move to these locations after receiving venture capital financing, and might receive follow-on
financing in these regions. For example, many Israeli firms move to the United States after receiving their first
round of financing. Our dataset is designed to exclude these firms. Finally, naturally, our matching cannot be
perfect. While we have applied to matching improvements developed by Balasubramanian and Sivadasan (2008)
and Kerr and Fu (2008), our focus has intently been on avoiding as many false-positives as possible. We have
high confidence that the investments we observe reflect the true investment as stated in Thompson Reuters
VentureXpert. Through manual checks, we do not believe the number of false-positives to be many.


                                                                                                                  15
firms achieves this milestone, among the remaining firms it is only 1 every 10,000 firms.
Similarly, while approximately 1 out each 3 VC-funded firms is successfully acquired, only 1
out of 700 non-VC-funded firms does so.


V. WHAT THE PROCESS OF SELECTION INTO VENTURE CAPITAL REVEALS
ABOUT THE PROCESS OF GROWTH IN THE ABSENCE OF VENTURE CAPITAL


       We now proceed to use predictive analytics to characterize the process of selection into
venture capital, and then estimate the likelihood of receiving venture capital financing for all
business registrants (including firms that never received VC funding). Following the approach
outlined in Section III, in Table 3 we estimate a predictive model that relates observables at
founding to ex-post VC financing. The observables we use in the logit regressions are the same
as Guzman and Stern (2015, 2017, 2019), although the dependent variable (Gets Venture
Capital) in this case is equal to 1 if the firm receives VC funding, and 0 otherwise. To avoid
overfitting and ensure the robustness of our estimates of `VC-likelihood', in this first step we
use a random, 50% subsample of the data. This allow us to calculate an `out of sample' VC-
likelihood for the excluded, 50% of firms (including those that do not receive VC-funding),
which we will base the rest of our analysis on. For ease of interpretation, coefficients are
presented as incidence rate ratios.
       Table 3 explores the correlation between business registration observables and
selection into venture capital financing within a random, 50% sample of all firms (our `training
set' for studying the determinants of venture capital). Column 1 does not control for intellectual
property variables nor industry characteristics, which are respectively introduced in Columns
2 and 3. In Column 1, firms registered as corporations are 5.6 times more likely to receive VC
funding, firms with a short name are 5 times more likely to reach the same milestone,
eponymous firms are 87% less likely to be VC-backed, and Delaware registered firms are 30
times more likely to get VC capital. Column 2 relates only intellectual property measures to
venture capital: Consistent with VCs selecting ventures of high quality and that have secured
(or are in the process of securing) intellectual property protection, firms with a trademark are
3 times more likely to attract VC, and firms with a patent are 78 times more likely to do so.




                                                                                               16
         Column 3 represents our main predictive model, which brings all of our observables
together. While we could use a more flexible and complex functional form (and improve our
predictive performance), we opt for a simple one to allow for easy interpretation of our next
sets of results, and a higher degree of transparency on what the predictive model is based on.
In Column 3, corporate form observables are quite informative of whether a firm will receive
VC or not: Corporations are 4.3 times more likely to raise venture capital than non-
corporations15, and Delaware firms are 22 times more likely to raise VC. The naming choices
of the firms are also predictive of future funding source. Firms with a short name are 3.6 times
more likely to raise VC, and eponymous firms are 84% less likely to raise VC16. Firms with
intellectual property are also more likely to raise VC. Firms with a trademark are 102% more
likely to raise VC, and firms with a patent are 38 times more likely to receive VC financing.
Firms that hold both a patent and are Delaware incorporated are significantly more likely to
receive venture capital - 140 times more than other firms. The name-based industry coefficients
are also significant, and sectors typically associated with the VC `search space', such as IT,
biotechnology, e-commerce, medical devices, and semiconductors are all more likely to
receive venture capital financing.
         We define VC Likelihood as the predicted probability resulting from this regression.
This estimate is a useful summary statistic for how similar a specific firm is to other `VC-type'
firms.It is also a proxy of firm quality from a venture capitalist's perspective. Since we have
the observables it is based on for the full set of incorporated firms, we can calculate the VC
Likelihood also for firms that never received VC (either because they were rejected by
professional investors, or because they never tried to raise from a VC firm in the first place).
Furthermore, the measure is independent from the relative availability of VC in the region or
time period the firm is created in.
         Of course, VCs observe substantially more information than us when screening
candidates for investment, as our approach only captures quality on dimensions that are public
around the time of incorporation. If VCs predominantly select firms on measures of quality
that are unobservable to us, then our VC Likelihood estimate would not be able to perfectly


15
   Though it might seem counter-intuitive that any venture-backed firm is not a corporation, the data during the
late 1990's does include several LLCs that received venture capital financing.
16
   The negative effect of eponymy in the financing dynamics of firms is explored more systematically by
Belenzon, Chatterji, and Daley (2017).


                                                                                                              17
separate, at birth, VC-backed firms from other firms, as our observables would be too noisy of
a predictor for future VC investment. We would still expect to see more VC-funded firms for
higher levels of observable VC Likelihood, but the relationship could be possibly very noisy.
Notwithstanding these limitations, the measure, is highly informative: In Figure 1, we plot the
share of venture-backed firms in each of twenty, 5 percent bins in the distribution of predicted
VC Likelihood. To avoid overfitting, we estimate this through a 10-fold cross validation
approach: we separate our sample into 10 random groups, and calculate this summary statistic
ten times, each time with one of these 10 groups as the out of sample group and the other 9 as
the ones with which the model is built. This is the preferred testing approach in machine
learning applications, since it also allows all data-points to be included in the test only once.
The maximum, minimum, and mean of this statistic across the quality distribution are reported
inside each bar. The distribution is highly skewed and the predictive capacity of our estimate
is significant: 77% of all venture-backed firms are in the top 5% of the VC Likelihood
distribution, and 57% are clustered in the top 1%.
       Together, these results highlight three key findings. First, when looking at population-
level data, VC activity is disproportionately concentrated on the right tail of the observable
quality distribution that can be built, from the perspective of a venture capitalists, using firm
characteristics at the time of founding. Whereas it is known that VCs invest in high quality
firms, from a policy perspective it is interesting to benchmark these firms to the broader
population in their respective regions and sectors. Second, our simple model based only on
observables around birth is clearly able to effectively separate firms with some possibility of
raising VC from the vast majority of incorporated firms. Third, some VC investment takes
place all the way down to the 50th percentile of the quality distribution, suggesting that
professional investors may be screening on dimensions that are sometimes not visible to the
econometrician.
       The VC Likelihood ­ a measure of firm quality and potential from the VC perspective
­ can also be used to identify how likely it would have been for a firm to raise VC, independent
of the funding actually taking place. To begin testing the relationship between growth within
the non-VC-backed firm sample and the VC Likelihood, we repeat the out of sample cross
validation procedure but use non-VC-backed growth outcomes as our dependent variable. The
resulting estimates, reported in Figure 2, tell us where in the distribution of VC Likelihood are



                                                                                              18
the non-VC-funded firms that ended up achieving an IPO or significant acquisition. Similar to
the findings illustrated in Figure 1, the relationship between VC Likelihood and growth
outcomes is substantial: 43% of non-VC growth firms are in the top 5% of VC likelihood, and
52% in the top 10%.
       We further explore this relationship within a regression framework in Table 4, where
we compare the role of the VC Likelihood in predicting non-VC-funded growth in the 50% test
sample that was not used to build the original VC Likelihood model (Table 3). The regression
uses Growth as the dependent variable and includes state and year fixed effects. All VC-backed
firms are excluded from the sample. Standard errors are clustered at the level of state-year pairs
to better account for unobserved local factors in cohorts of firms. In Column 1, we introduce
the VC Likelihood in an OLS regression. The coefficient is 0.6 and significant. Given a mean
of Growth of 0.0013, and a standard deviation of VC Likelihood of 0.008, the effect is
substantial. Increasing the predicted value of VC by one standard deviation increases the
probability of growth by about 3X. In Column 2 we instead consider the log VC likelihood.
Columns 3 and 4 instead consider a logit model and report the incidence rate ratios of the
coefficients. Column 3 shows an IRR of 2.0, implying there is a one-to-one mapping of sorts
between the two: a doubling of the likelihood of VC relates to a similar 100% increase in the
probability of firm growth. Finally, we consider differential probability of growth across our
distribution in Column 4 by using indicators for different ranges of the VC likelihood. We
observe the that the big difference between the likelihood of growth occurs at the very top end
of our distribution. While firms between the 95th and 99th percentile are only 10 times more
likely to growth, firms between the 99th and 99.5th are 36 times more likely to grow, those in
the 99.5th to 99.9th range are 83 times more likely to grow, and those in the top 0.1% are an
impressive 355 times more likely to grow. While considering the top the top 0.1% of our test
sample could seem like a slim group, this group still represents 13,232 firms. This is about the
same as the total number of venture backed companies during our time period.
       To further unpack the relationship between the VC Likelihood and growth in the non-
VC sample, in Table 5 we compare the role the different observables play in predicting growth
(Columns 2 to 4) relative to the role they play in predicting venture capital financing (Column
1). The main comparison of interest is between Columns 1 and 4. In general, we see the same
sign and statistical significance across coefficients, though we do observe them attenuated for



                                                                                               19
the equity grow outcomes. Perhaps the largest differences are in the predictive role of being a
corporation and of holding a trademark. The importance of being a corporation is significantly
lower for explaining non-VC growth, suggesting that, though firms may benefit from the
stronger corporate governance tools offered by this incorporation form, a large portion of the
benefit might be related to the ability to sell shares to investors. We also see a much higher
importance of having an early trademark (an indicator that the firm is planning to
commercialize a product or service) for growth without venture capital, an effect consistent
with these firms bootstrapping through sales. The role of naming appears to be different, with
short names predicting VC financing much more closely than equity growth, though it is
unclear if this reflects differences in VC preferences or in the underlying types of firms and
industries represented by each group. More interestingly, the role of Delaware jurisdiction and
patenting -- the two indicators with the most predictive power in both regressions -- is
surprisingly similar across specifications. Firms with ideas that can be protected through
intellectual property rights, and firms that seek the more flexible (but also more expensive)
protection of Delaware incorporation are substantially more likely to both receive venture
capital financing, and achieve equity growth even in the absence of VC funding, reflecting
large similarities in the at-birth observables of firms across these two groups.
       Last, in Table 6 repeats our estimate of the association between the log-odds of VC
Likelihood and equity growth outcomes for non-VC-backed firms across different geographies
and time-periods. The coefficient is stable and similar across all columns, suggesting that the
relationship we have identified between observables at the time of incorporation, how VCs
interpret them, and ultimately firm growth within a sample of firms that never raised VC, holds
across very different types of regions and time periods.


VI. THE RETURNS TO VENTURE CAPITAL FINANCING


       We now turn to studying the full population of firms and the role venture capital
financing plays in their ability to reach a growth outcome (IPO or acquisition). In Table 7, our
objective is to partially separate VC selection (on observables) from treatment using the
estimates from our predictive analytics approach. Raising venture capital is an informative
signal of quality: as we have seen in Section V, VCs select startups that are on the extreme



                                                                                             20
right tail of the observable VC Likelihood distribution. They also contribute to the success of
the firms they invest in by providing capital, offering mentorship, performing monitoring,
helping or replacing founding teams, connecting firms to possible customers and suppliers etc.
Hence, in the absence of exogenous variation, any estimate of the correlation between VC
funding and growth will always be a composition of the VCs' role in the selection of higher
quality firms as well as in increasing their chances of success. Both effects will also vary with
the underlying quality of the investors involved, as high quality VCs will not only see better
deals, but may also provide better support to their portfolio companies (e.g. through their
networks, etc.).
        To account for selection on observables, we rely on our approach to deliver us a proxy
for a firm's quality and potential -- from the perspective of VCs -- around the time of birth.
As we are unable to fully control for firm differences (since VCs also select firms based on
variables that are unobservable to us), accounting for such a measure when estimating the
association between VC and growth should return an upper bound on the VC treatment effect
(as we are likely underestimating selection).
        Before introducing the summary measure directly, in Table 7 we progressively add the
controls we used so far in Columns 1 to 4. In each column, we perform logit regressions with
Gets VC in 2 Years (a binary measure indicating whether a firm receives VC financing within
the first two years)17 as the main independent variable, and our binary outcome measure
Growth -- achieving an equity growth outcome in 10 years-- as the dependent variable.
Results are reported as incidence rate ratios, and standard errors are clustered at the state-year
pair level. All the remaining tables in the paper only use the 50% random test subsample we
did not use to develop our predictive approach.
        Column 1 of Table 7 compares VC-funded firms to non-VC-funded firms within the
subsample. The probability of growth for firms that raise venture capital is 405times higher
than that of a random firm in the sample. Selection is obviously a major concern here, as the
vast majority of firms in the sample have an extremely low probability of achieving an IPO or


17
  As documented in Appendix Figure A2, the majority of firms that eventually raise VC do so within 2 years
(about 25% receives financing within 3 months, 56% within a year, 75% within 2 years). The short time-frame
between firm birth and VC financing motivates our choice to focus the rest of our analyses on receiving a series
A investment within two years, which has the additional benefit of allowing us to evaluate firms across time
without running into truncation issues.


                                                                                                             21
acquisition in the first place, and therefore are not a credible control group for VC funded
firms. Adding state and year fixed effects, and controlling for traditional proxies for quality
such as the presence of patents and trademarks reduces this estimate by an order of magnitude
in Column 2. Nonetheless, VC-funded firms are still 78 times more likely to grow than non-
VC-funded firms. Interestingly, the introduction of our basic firm observables revealed at
incorporation in Column 3 leads to a sizable reduction in the coefficient, bringing VC firms
fairly close to firms of comparable characteristics in terms of outcomes. Once all our measures
are accounted for in Column 4, VC-funded firms are only 16 times more likely to grow than
other firms. Column 5 instead includes the predicted VC Likelihood as a fourth order
polynomial directly, rather than the observables themselves. The coefficient is reduced slightly
and VC-funded startups are now 13 times more likely to grow.
        Column 6 is our preferred estimate. In this column we extend approach for separating
selection on observables from treatment by performing an exact matching procedure.18 For
each VC-backed firm, we randomly select a non-VC-backed firm founded in the same year
and geographic region, with the same exact value of observable VC Likelihood. The matching
is at the same zip code level for 86% of firms, with remaining firms matched at the MSA and
state level. After matching, we estimate the differences in the odds of achieving an equity
growth outcome between our `treated' firms (i.e. the firms that received VC funding) and our
`control' firms (i.e. firms that did not raise VC funding, but that have exactly the same VC
Likelihood of doing so at birth). The incidence rate ratio drops from 13.8 to 7.0. This estimate
is significant: conditional on the VC Likelihood, firms that raise VC are still 6 times more likely
to achieve an equity growth outcome than non-VC-funded firms. However, the coefficient is
also two orders of magnitude lower than the original, naïve estimate from Column 1. While
the implied role of venture capital on firm performance is meaningful, 98% of the difference
in outcomes between VC-backed and non-VC-backed firms is accounted for by characteristics
that are observable at founding. Interestingly, our estimate is comparable to those of
Chemmanur et al. (2011) and Puri and Zarutskie (2002), even though there are important
differences in the specifications and samples we use since we start from the full population of
incorporated firms.


18
  Imbens and Rubin (2015) recommend using exact matching on propensity score estimators to improve
balance.


                                                                                                     22
         Table 8 extends the previous table by introducing a series of additional fixed effects to
control for regional and microgeographic heterogeneity in our matching estimator. Consistent
with the idea that unobservables may be less of a concern after we perform our matching on
VC Likelihood, adding state-year pair fixed effects, MSA fixed effects, or controls for the
average quality of the zip code level neighbors of the focal firm does not change our estimates:
VC-funded firms continue to be approximately 6 times more likely to grow than their
counterparts, irrespective of which controls we introduce.
         It is important to stress that the estimate based on matching is still likely to be an upper
bound on the true effect of VCs on firm growth, as the firms in our sample are still likely to
differ on unobservable quality. Nevertheless, given the informational imbalance between the
VC partners actually making the investment decisions and our regressions, it is surprising to
see how much of the variance in outcomes we are able to explain. Furthermore, our VC
Likelihood measures are defined many years before the actual acquisition or IPO takes place,
i.e. when the uncertainty surrounding a startup is still extremely high.
         Taken together, results from Tables 7 and 8 highlight just how much of the initial
difference in the probability of growth between VC-funded-firms and other firms is driven by
selection. Whereas in the most naïve estimation VC-funded firms are 405 times more likely to
grow than other firms, this premium is reduced to only 6 times using our matching approach.
This is consistent with our descriptive results on selection presented in Figures 1 and 2, and
confirms that VCs select firms that are already of very high quality based on observables.19
Our exercise places an upper bound on how much value, on average, VCs may be adding to
the firms they invest in.
         In Table 9, we re-estimate our model for firms on the right tail of the observable VC
Likelihood distribution (firms in the top 5%, 1%, 0.1% and 0.05%). As we move up our quality
distribution, the marginal contribution of VCs to growth is drastically reduced, possibly
because for these right tail firms we do have a better measure of actual growth potential (i.e.
our information gap relative to the VCs is smaller). For firms that exhibit extremely high,
observable quality at incorporation (Column 5), VC-funded firms are only 2.3 times more



19
  In terms of the type of growth outcomes we observe, VCs are associated with a larger increase in the probability
of an acquisition than in the probability of an IPO, which is consistent with them supporting their portfolio firms
in the search for potential buyers through their professional network.


                                                                                                               23
likely to grow than similar firms that do not receive VC funding. This group, however,
represents a sizable share of all VC funded firms (34%).
       Last, in Table 10 we divide the sample by startup hubs versus not (Columns 2 to 4),
and over economic cycles (Columns 5 to 7). Estimates for the role of VC are higher outside of
hubs, where VC-funded firms are 9 times more likely to grow than their counterparts, and
when follow-on capital is more likely to be available (as in the .com boom period). The first
effect suggests that the marginal VC-funded company in a non-hub region may be of higher
quality than the marginal VC-funded firm in a hub, and is consistent with the results Catalini
and Hui (2017) find when looking at US equity crowdfunding investments.


VII. CONCLUSION
       Our results support the presence of multiple alternative paths to startup growth, but also
emphasize a common profile for high potential firms which is independent of funding source.
Though a large portion of firms grow without venture capital, many characteristics of these
startups are strikingly similar to the characteristics of startups that are typically selected by
VCs. Almost 50% of the firms that never raise VC are in the top 5% of our estimated VC
Likelihood distribution, and non-VC-backed firms in the top 1% of the same estimate are over
350 times more likely to achieve an equity growth outcome (compared to the bottom 50%).
Our estimates of the `VC-effect', while inherently imperfect because of our inability to capture
many of the firm and founder characteristics VCs observe through their due diligence and
screening process, place an upper bound on the contribution of VCs to growth. In our matched
sample estimates, VC funded firms are 6 times more likely to grow than non-VC-funded firms
of comparable quality. Furthermore, when we focus on the right tail of the estimated VC
Likelihood distribution, the `VC-effect' is substantially reduced: firms in the top 0.05% of our
quality measure at birth, are only 2.3 times more likely to grow with VC funding than without
it.
       Our effort to have comprehensive coverage of all firms in the economy has necessitated
some tradeoffs. For example, our study has focused on relatively coarse binary measures of
financing and equity outcomes. We fully recognize that the terms of the financing events, the
underlying firm valuations, and the size of each equity outcome, are all also relevant margins
of study. We expect follow-on work to focus on these issues more clearly.



                                                                                              24
       Finally, an obvious follow-on question from our results, given the striking similarity
between firms that grow with and without, is to ask what share of all growth outcomes in the
economy are from startups that fit a common growth profile. In our companion paper (Catalini
et al, 2019) we target this issue by developing a simple structural model that ties growth
intention to founding choices, and use these to assess the relative importance of two modes of
startup growth. The first, a passive growth model--such as random growth (Gibrat, 1931) and
passive learning (Jovanovic, 1982)--assumes all startups start with similar growth orientation,
and startup outcomes are the result of self-selection based on realized performance. The
second, an active growth model, instead considers entrepreneurs different in their intention and
ability at founding--such as Ericson and Pakes (1995)--and growth is the result of active
conscious investment by those startups that have the ability and intention to grow at founding.
We find that at least half of all IPOs and acquisitions is active growth, a share that increases
for locations with more VC-oriented firms and when we limit only to larger outcomes, such as
valuations over $100 million dollars.
       Overall, our findings highlight the importance of selection in accounting for the
perceived contribution of venture capital to startup growth. Given how simple the observables
from our prediction model are, their public nature, and the fact that they are collected many
years before an exit event, it is striking to see how much they explain of the process of selection
into VC and startup growth both for VC-backed and non-VC-backed firms. Further exploring
how these alternative paths to growth differ, should be a fruitful research area for scholars
interested in how society allocates capital to novel, high potential ideas and converts them from
ideas to massively scalable businesses.




                                                                                                25
REFERENCES

Akcigit, Ufuk and William R. Kerr. 2018. "Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations"
    Journal of Political Economy. 126 (4): 1374-1443.

Andrews, Raymond J, Catherine Fazio, Jorge Guzman, Yupeng Liu, and Scott Stern. 2019.
    "The Startup Cartography Project". Working Paper.

Balasubramanian, N, and J Sivadasan. 2008. "NBER Patent Data-BR Bridge: User Guide and
    Technical Documentation." Working Paper. ftp://tigerline.census.gov/ces/wp/2010/CES-
    WP-10-36.pdf (May 18, 2014).

Barnes, Beau Grant, Nancy L. Harp, and Derek Oler. 2014. "Evaluating the SDC Mergers and
    Acquisitions Database." Financial Review 49(4): 793­822.

Belenzon, Sharon, Aaron Chatterji, and Brendan Daley. 2017. "Eponymous Entrepreneurs."
    American Economic Review 107(6): 1638-55.

Belenzon, Sharon, Aaron Chatterji, and Brendan Daley. 2019. "Choosing Between Growth
    and Glory". Management Science. Forthcoming.

Bhide, A., 2000. The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford University Press on
    Demand.

Catalini, Christian, and Hui, X. 2017 "Can Capital Defy the Law of Gravity? Investor
     Networks and Startup Investment", Working Paper, MIT.

Catalini, Christian, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern. 2019. "Passive versus Active Growth:
     Evidence from Founder Choices and Venture Capital Investments". NBER Working
     Paper #26073.

Chemmanur, Thomas J., Karthik Krishnan, and Debarshi K. Nandy. 2011. "How Does Venture
    Capital Financing Improve Efficiency in Private Firms? A Look beneath the Surface."
    Review of Financial Studies 24(12): 4037­90.

Chen, Henry, Paul A. Gompers, Anna Kovner, and Josh Lerner. "Buy Local? The Geography
    of Successful Venture Capital Expansion." Journal of Urban Economics 67, no. 1

C. Churchwell. 2016. "Q. SDC: M&A Database". Baker Library ­ Fast Answers. Url:
http://asklib.library.hbs.edu/faq/47760. Accessed on January 17, 2017.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2014. "The Role of
    Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 28(3): 3­24.



                                                                                     26
Delgado, Mercedes, Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern. 2016. "Defining Clusters of Related
    Industries." Journal of Economic Geography 16(1): 1­38.

Efron, Bradley. 1979. "Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jacknife." The Annals of
    Statistics 7(1): 1­26.

Ericson, Richard, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. "Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework
     for Empirical Work". Review of Economic Studies. 62:53-82.

Ewens, Michael, Charles Jones, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2013. "The price of diversifiable
   risk in venture capital and private equity" Review of Financial Studies. 26 (8): 1854-1889

Ewens, Michael and Richard R. Townsend. 2019. "Are early stage investors biased against
   women?" Journal of Financial Economics. forthcoming

Fairlie, R. W., Miranda, J., & Zolas, N. 2019. "Measuring job creation, growth, and survival
     among the universe of start-ups in the United States using a combined start-up panel data
     set." ILR Review, 72(5), 1262-1277.

Fazio, C., Guzman, J. and Stern, S., 2019. "The Impact of State-Level R&D Tax Credits on the
     Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gibrat, Robert. 1931. Les inégalités économoques. Paris. Libraririe du Recueil Sirey.

Gans, J., & Stern, S. 2003. "When does funding research by smaller firms bear fruit?: Evidence
    from the SBIR program." Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 12(4), 361-384.

Gompers, Paul, William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. 2016. "How do
   Venture Capitalists Make Decisions" NBER Working Paper Series .#22587

Gompers, P., Lerner, J. and Scharfstein, D., 2005. "Entrepreneurial spawning: Public
   corporations and the genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999." The journal of Finance,
   60(2), pp.577-614.

Gompers, Paul A., Josh Lerner, David Scharfstein, and Anna Kovner. "Performance
   Persistence in Entrepreneurship and Venture Capital." Journal of Financial Economics
   96, no. 1 (April 2010): 731­764.

Guzman, Jorge. 2018. "Go West Young firm: Agglomeration and Embeddedness in Startup
   Migrations to Silicon Valley". SSRN Working Paper #3175328

Guzman, Jorge, and Aleksandra Kacperczyk. 2019. "Gender Gap in Entrepreneurship"
   Research Policy. 48 (7): 1666-1680

Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2015. "Where Is Silicon Valley?" Science 347(6222): 606­
   9.


                                                                                           27
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2017. "Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality
   and Performance." NBER/CRIW Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current
   Knowledge and Challenges conference (December): 67.

Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2019. "The State of American Entrepreneurship: New
   Estimates of The Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 32 US States, 1988-2014."
   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. Forthcoming`

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri. 2000. "The Interaction Between Product Market and
    Financing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital." The Review of Financial Studies 13(4):
    959­84.

Hochberg, Yael, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu. 2010. "Networking as a barrier to entry
    and the competitive supply of venture capital." The Journal of Finance 65 (3): 829-859.

Hsu, DH. 2004. "What Do Entrepreneurs Pay for Venture Capital Affiliation?" The Journal of
     Finance          LIX(4).            http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1540-
     6261.2004.00680.x/full (September 2, 2013).

Hurst, Erik, and BW Pugsley. 2011. "What Do Small Businesses Do?" Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity (Fall): 73­128. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17041 (May 8, 2014).

Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. 2015. Causal inference in statistics, social, and
    biomedical sciences. Cambridge University Press.

Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. "Selection and the Evolution of Industry". Econometrica. 50
    (3):649-670.

Kaplan, Steven N, and Josh Lerner. 2010. "It Ain't Broke: The Past, Present, and Future of
    Venture Capital." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 22(2): 36­47.

Kaplan, Steven N, and Per Strömberg. 2003. "Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
    World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts." The Review of Economic
    Studies 70(2): 281­315. http://restud.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1111/1467-
    937X.00245.

Kaplan, Steven N, and Per Strömberg. 2004. "Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions:
    Evidence from Venture Capital Analyses." Journal of Finance LIX(5): 2173­2206.

Klapper, Leora, Raphael Amit, and MF Guillén. 2010. "Entrepreneurship and Firm
    Formation across Countries." International Differences in Entrepreneurship. Eds Josh
    Lerner and Antoinette Schoar. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c8220.pdf (May 18, 2014).

Kerr, William R., and Shihe Fu. 2008. "The Survey of Industrial R&D--patent Database Link
     Project."      The     Journal    of   Technology      Transfer    33(2):   173­86.
     http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10961-007-9078-3 (July 8, 2014).


                                                                                           28
Kerr, W. R., Lerner, J., & Schoar, A. (2014). The consequences of entrepreneurial finance:
     Evidence from angel financings. Review of Financial Studies, 27(1), 20-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1998.
    "Law and Finance." The Journal of Political Economy 106(6): 1113­55.

Lerner, Josh. 1995. "Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms." The Journal of
    Finance. 50 (1): 301-318

Lerner, Josh. 2009. Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Effort to Boos
    Entrepreneurship and Venture Capital Have Failed-and What to Do about It. Reprint
    Ed. Princeton University Press.

Lerner, Josh, et al. 2015. The globalization of angel investments: Evidence across countries.
    No. w21808. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

Marx, M., D. Strumsky, and L. Fleming. 2009. "Mobility, Skills, and the Michigan Non-
    Compete Experiment." Management Science 55(6): 875­89.

Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. 2013. "Investment cycles and startup innovation." Journal of
    Financial Economics, 110(2), 403-418.

Nanda, Ramana, Sampsa Samila, and Olav Sorenson. 2018. "The persistent effect of initial
    success: Evidence from venture capital". No. w24887. National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

Netter, Jeffry, Mike Stegemoller, and M. Babajide Wintoki. 2011. "Implications of Data
     Screens on Merger and Acquisition Analysis: A Large Sample Study of Mergers and
     Acquisitions from 1992 to 2009." Review of Financial Studies 24(7): 2317­57.

Piacentino, Giorgia. 2019. "Venture Capital and Capital Allocation." The Journal of Finance.
     74 (3): 1261-1314

Puri, Manju, and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2012. "On the Life Cycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital-
     and Non-Venture-Capital-Financed Firms." The Journal of Finance 67(6): 2247­2293.

Ritter, Jay. 2016. "Initial Public Offerings: VC-backed IPO Statistics Through 2015".
     Working Paper.

Schoar, Antoinette. 2010. "The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational
    Entrepreneurship." Innovation Policy and the Economy 10(1): 57­81.

Sorenson, O., & Stuart, T. E. 2001. "Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of
    venture capital investments." American journal of sociology, 106(6), 1546-1588.




                                                                                            29
SSTI. 2015. Useful Stats: Venture Capital Investment Dollars, Deals by State, 2009-2014.
    Url: http://ssti.org/blog/useful-stats-venture-capital-investment-dollars-deals-state-2009-
    2014. Accessed on: January 17, 2017.

Sorensen, Morten. 2007. "How Smart Is Smart Money? A TwoSided Matching Model of
    Venture Capital." The Journal of Finance 62(6): 2725­62.




                                                                                            30
                                                            TABLE 1
                                                         Summary Statistics
                                      Source                             Description
         Measure                                                                                           Mean      Std. Dev.
Firm Outcomes
Gets Venture Capital            Multiple              Whether the firm receives any financing.             0.0008      0.028
Gets Venture Capital in 2                             Whether the firm receives any financing within
                                Multiple                                                                   0.0005      0.021
years                                                 2 years of founding.
Equity Growth (IPO or           SDC Platinum          Whether the firm has an equity growth event in
                                                                                                           0.0013      0.036
Acquisition)                    IPO and M&A.          the first 10 years.
Business Registration Observables
                                                      1 if a firm is a corporation (not an LLC or
Corporation                     Business Reg.                                                              0.565       0.496
                                                      partnership)
Delaware                        Business Reg.         If the firm's jurisdiction is Delaware               0.026       0.160
                                                      If the firm's name length is 3 words or less
Short Name                      Business Reg.                                                              0.466       0.499
                                                      (including firm type (e.g. "inc."))
                                                      Business Reg. If the president or CEO share the
Eponymous                       Business Reg.                                                              0.097       0.296
                                                      name of the firm.
Intellectual Property Observables
                                                      If the firm acquires for a trademark within 1
Trademark                       USPTO                                                                      0.0008      0.029
                                                      year of founding.
                                                      If the firm acquires for a patent application
Patent                          USPTO                                                                      0.0023      0.048
                                                      within 1 year of founding.
USCMP Name Based Industry Measures
                                                      If firm name is associated to an industry group
Industry Dummies                Business Reg.
                                                      (see Appendix for details).

Observations                                                                                                   13,231,305
This table represents our full dataset, comprised of all registered firms registered within the years 1995 and 2005 in 49 US
states. These states account for 99.6% of US GDP and 95% of US venture capital investments in 2015. All measures defined
in detail in Section III of this paper. Venture capital outcomes are taken for all firms reported in Thompson Reuters
VentureXpert, Prequin, Capital IQ, and AngelsList. Business registration records are public records created endogenously
when a firm registers as a corporation, LLC, or partnership. IP observables include both patents and trademarks filed by the
firm within a year of founding, as well as previously filed patents assigned to the firm close to founding. All business
registration observables, IP observables, and industry measures are estimated at or close to the time of firm founding. Further
information on all measures can also be found in Guzman and Stern (2015), Guzman and Stern (2016), and Guzman and
Stern (2017). Growth IPOs include only `true' startup IPOs, we exclude all financial IPOs, REITs, SPACs, reverse LBOs,
re-listings, and blank check corporations.




                                                                                                                           31
                                    TABLE 2
               Distribution of Equity Outcomes with and without VC

                       Panel A. Growth with and without VC
                                                                            Firms
                                                Firms with VC            without VC
Firms without Growth                                 6,597               13,200,904
(Share)                                             (65.6%)               (99.85%)

Firms with Growth                                    3,454                  20,350

(Share)                                             (34.4%)                (0.15%)


Growth Split by IPO and Acquisition
Share that IPO                                       4.50%                  0.01%
 Share that are Acquired                            29.9%                   0.14%
We perform an analysis of all firms that achieve IPO or acquisition (at any point) vs
those that do not. IPOs are taken from SDC Capital and exclude all re-listings,
reverse LBOs, SPACs, REITs, blank check companies, and financial IPOs.




                                                                                        32
                                              TABLE 3
                             Determinants of Venture Capital Financing
                            Training Sample (50% Random Sub-Sample)
                            Logit model. Incidence Rate Ratios Reported

                                                                Gets Venture Capital
                                                   (1)                (2)                   (3)
Business Registration Observables
  Corporation
                                                6.557***                                 5.277***
                                                 (0.588)                                  (0.480)
  Short Name
                                                5.821***                                 4.559***
                                                 (0.367)                                  (0.287)
  Eponymous
                                                0.128***                                 0.157***
                                                (0.0178)                                 (0.0223)
  Delaware
                                                30.96***
Intellectual Property                            (3.461)
   Trademark
                                                                   4.291***              2.024***
  Patent                                                            (0.771)               (0.338)

                                                                   78.86***
Patent Delaware Interactions                                        (6.638)
  Delaware Only
                                                                                         23.40***
                                                                                          (2.215)
  Patent Only
                                                                                         38.83***
                                                                                          (2.742)
  Patent and Delaware
                                                                                         141.4***
USCMP Industry Dummies                                                                    (18.70)
  Local Industry
                                                                                         0.299***
                                                                                         (0.0316)
  Traded Industry
                                                                                         0.722***
                                                                                         (0.0330)
  Resource Intensive Industry
                                                                                         0.658***
                                                                                         (0.0455)
  IT
                                                                                         2.971***
                                                                                          (0.155)
  Biotechnology
                                                                                         3.785***
                                                                                          (0.421)
  E-Commerce
                                                                                         1.501***
                                                                                         (0.0969)
  Medical Devices
                                                                                         1.314***
                                                                                         (0.0992)
  Semiconductor
                                                                                          2.131***
                                                                                           (0.381)
State F. E.                                           Yes                 Yes                Yes
Year FE                                               Yes                 Yes                Yes
N                                                  6,606,756           6606756            6606756
pseudo R-sq                                          0.292               0.190              0.349
This table reports a logit model estimating the determinants of firm growth for all firms without
venture capital in a 50% random subsample of our data. Using firms without VC allows us to
measure the possibility of growth independent of this input. We use this as a training sample for our
predictive analytics model of entrepreneurial quality. Incidence rate ratios reported. Robust standard
errors in parenthesis clustered at the state-year level.** p < .01 , *** p < .001




                                                                                                         33
                                                        TABLE 4

                                Does VC Likelihood Predict Equity Growth for non-VC Firms?
                                           Dependent Variable: Equity Growth
                                      50% Test Sample, excluding all VC-backed firms.
                                                   (1)                 (2)               (3)                         (4)
                                                  OLS                  OLS              Logit                       Logit
VC Likelihood ( )                               0.602***
                                                (0.0322)

Log VC Likelihood (ln( ))                                             0.00101***             2.013***
                                                                      (0.0000795)            (0.0205)
Distribution of VC Likelihood
Baseline: < 50%. ( < .0001 )

             50% - 90%                                                                                            2.294***
           (  [.0001 , .0009])                                                                                    (0.0863)

             90% - 95%                                                                                            5.260***
           (  [.0009 , .0020])                                                                                     (0.286)

             95% - 99%                                                                                            12.09***
           (  [.0020 , .0072])                                                                                     (1.181)

              99% - 99.5%                                                                                         38.66***
            (  [.0072 , .017])                                                                                     (3.22)

               > 99.5%                                                                                            83.98***
            (  [.017 , .097])                                                                                      (6.991)

               > 99.5%                                                                                           355.65***
             (  [.097 , .89])                                                                                     (68.67)

State F.E.                                           No                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Year F.E.                                            No                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                                     6610610                6601590               6601590               6610610
R-squared                                          0.017                  0.003
Pseudo R-squared                                                                                0.131                 0.129
Log-Likelihood                                                                                -50283.8              -50420.3
VC Likelihood is the predicted probability that a firm gets venture capital given its characteristics at founding, predicted from
(3-3). It has a mean of .0008 and a standard deviation of .0083. Standardized VC Likelihood changes this measure to have a
standard deviation of 1. The mean value of the outcome variable is 0.0013. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered at
the state-year level. *** p < .001.




                                                                                                                                    34
                                                         TABLE 5
                                       Determinants of Growth without Venture Capital
                                        Training Sample (50% Random Sub-Sample)
                                        Logit model. Incidence Rate Ratios Reported
                                                                              Equity Growth without Venture Capital
                                                Gets Venture Capital          Financing (VC-Backed firms Excluded)
                                                          (1)                          (2)            (3)               (4)
Business Registration Observables
  Corporation
                                                       5.277***                    2.040***                         1.807***
                                                        (0.480)                    (0.0869)                         (0.0724)
  Short Name
                                                       4.559***                    2.055***                         1.873***
                                                        (0.287)                    (0.0717)                         (0.0621)
  Eponymous
                                                       0.157***                    0.289***                         0.328***
                                                       (0.0223)                    (0.0163)                         (0.0185)
  Delaware
                                                                                   15.24***
Intellectual Property                                                               (0.805)
   Trademark
                                                       2.024***                                    12.41***         6.030***
  Patent                                                (0.338)                                     (1.483)          (0.628)

                                                                                                   31.47***
Patent Delaware Interactions                                                                        (1.648)
  Delaware Only
                                                       23.40***                                                     11.04***
                                                        (2.215)                                                      (0.611)
  Patent Only
                                                       38.83***                                                     14.28***
                                                        (2.742)                                                      (1.250)
  Patent and Delaware
                                                       141.4***                                                     72.48***
USCMP Industry Dummies                                  (18.70)                                                      (5.355)
  Local Industry
                                                       0.299***                                                     0.395***
                                                       (0.0316)                                                     (0.0219)
  Traded Industry
                                                       0.722***                                                     1.174***
                                                       (0.0330)                                                     (0.0422)
  Resource Intensive Industry
                                                       0.658***                                                        0.926
                                                       (0.0455)                                                      (0.0457)
  IT
                                                       2.971***                                                     1.820***
                                                        (0.155)                                                     (0.0924)
  Biotechnology
                                                       3.785***                                                     1.966***
                                                        (0.421)                                                      (0.277)
  E-Commerce
                                                       1.501***                                                     1.198***
                                                       (0.0969)                                                     (0.0621)
  Medical Devices
                                                       1.314***                                                     1.228***
                                                       (0.0992)                                                     (0.0750)
  Semiconductor
                                                         2.131***                                                      1.837**
                                                          (0.381)                                                      (0.359)
State F. E.                                                 Yes                          Yes             Yes             Yes
Year FE                                                     Yes                          Yes             Yes             Yes
N                                                        6606756                      6604792         6604792         6604792
pseudo R-sq                                                0.349                        0.117          0.078            0.146
This table reports a logit model estimating the determinants of firm growth for all firms without venture capital in a 50%
random subsample of our data. Using firms without VC allows us to measure the possibility of growth independent of this
input. We use this as a training sample for our predictive analytics model of entrepreneurial quality. Incidence rate ratios
reported. Robust standard errors clustered at the state-year level in parenthesis. ** p < .01 , *** p < .001




                                                                                                                                 35
                                                            TABLE 6
                                                      Growth without Venture Capital
                                                            Logit Regression.
                                                        50% Test Random Sample
                                                         Place Heterogeneity                               Time Heterogeneity
                                                                                             .com Boom           .com Crash       Recovery
                                            Silicon           Startup          Non Startup    1995-Sept,         Sept, 1999-       2001-
                              All Firms     Valley             Hubs              Hubs           1999                2001            2005
                                 (1)          (2)               (3)                (4)           (5)                 (6)            (7)
 Log VC Likelihood (ln( ))    2.013***     2.082***          2.131***          1.949***      1.971***             2.098***        2.015***
                              (0.0205)     (0.0517)          (0.0328)           (0.0208)      (0.0229)            (0.0420)        (0.0344)
State F. E.                     Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes           Yes                 Yes             Yes
Year of Incorporation F. E.     Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
N                             6601590       102185            732775            5867050      1709191              1078218         3795782
pseudo R-sq                    0.131         0.211             0.226             0.105         0.124               0.159           0.115
Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered at the state-year level. *** p < .01




                                                                                                                             36
                                                                          TABLE 7
                                     Venture Capital and Growth Outcomes Controlling for Observables and VC Likelihood
                                                  DV: Equity Growth: 1 if Firm Achieves IPO or Acquisition
                                                                                                                         Exactly Matched
                                                                             All Firms                                     Sub-sample
                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)                     (6)
Gets VC in 2 Years                            405.6***         79.09***      26.40***    16.64***    13.89***               7.011***
                                               (30.53)          (8.716)       (3.177)     (1.741)     (1.424)                (0.893)
Business Registration
Observables
  Corporation                                                                2.111***    1.876***
                                                                             (0.0874)    (0.0748)

  Short Name                                                                 2.156***    1.990***
                                                                             (0.0733)    (0.0645)

  Eponymous                                                                  0.306***    0.338***
                                                                             (0.0221)    (0.0250)

  Delaware                                                                   13.77***    9.754***
                                                                              (0.773)     (0.543)
Intellectual Property
   Patent                                                      18.56***                  6.226***
                                                                (1.197)                   (0.349)

  Trademark                                                    15.10***                  6.150***
                                                                (1.334)                   (0.540)
USCMP Industry Dummies
  Local Industry                                                                         0.425***
                                                                                         (0.0247)

  Traded Industry                                                                        1.142***
                                                                                         (0.0444)

  Resource Intensive Industry                                                              0.929
                                                                                         (0.0449)

  IT                                                                                     1.695***
                                                                                         (0.0785)

  Biotechnology                                                                          1.830***
                                                                                          (0.242)

  E-Commerce                                                                             1.228***
                                                                                         (0.0553)

  Medical Devices                                                                        1.320***
                                                                                         (0.0741)

  Semiconductor                                                                           1.199
                                                                                         (0.259)
Entrepreneurial Quality Controls
  Log VC Likelihood (ln( ))                                                                            0.995
                                                                                                      (0.150)

  Log VC Likelihood (ln( ))^2                                                                        0.803***
                                                                                                     (0.0430)

  Log VC Likelihood (ln( ))^3                                                                        0.978***
                                                                                                     (0.00540)

  Log VC Likelihood (ln( ))^4                                                                         0.999**
                                                                                                    (0.000194)
State F. E.                                         No            Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes                   Yes
Incorporation Year F.E.                             No            Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes                   Yes
N                                                6615653       6615653        6615653    6615653     6606633                  5276
pseudo R-sq                                       0.070         0.136          0.176      0.200       0.194                   0.140
Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered at the state-year level *** p < .01


                                                                                                                                      37
                                                       TABLE 8
                                      VC Financing and Equity Growth Outcomes
                                        Logit Regression on Matched Sample.
                       DV: Equity Growth Outcome: 1 if firm achieves IPO or Acquisition
                                            Baseline Model                       Extra Controls
                                                 (1)                  (2)             (3)               (4)
     Gets VC in 2 Years                       7.011***              7.504***       7.144***       7.001***
                                               (0.893)              (1.038)         (0.927)         (0.885)
     Year F. E.                                  Yes                                  Yes             Yes
     State F. E.                                 Yes
     State X Year F. E.                                               Yes
     MSA F. E.                                                                        Yes
     Control for Average Neighbor Quality                                                               Yes
     N                                          5276                 4827            4683            5229
     Pseudo R-sq                               0.140                 0.157            0.154         0.153
     Matching approach uses exact quality values to match firms. All regressions run only on the 50% test
     sample not included in training the entrepreneurial quality model in Table 3. Some observations
     dropped when including State X Year Fixed Effects, MSA Fixed Effects, and average neighbor
     quality. Control for neighbor quality is natural log of the average quality of the ZIP Code excluding
     the focal firm. Matching algorithm matches each company that gets VC finance to another company
     with the same quality, born in the same year and ZIP Code. In about 20% of the sample, we do not
     find a match in the same ZIP Code and use a match in the same MSA instead. Incidence rate ratios
     reported.Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered at the state-year level. *** p < .001

                                                       TABLE 9
                                     Logit Regression, Matched Firms.
                      DV: Equity Growth Outcome. 1 if firm achieves IPO or Acquisition.
                            All Firms                                 Within the Quality Distribution
                                                         Top 5%       Top 1%        Top 0.1%         Top 0.05%
                                (1)                          (2)         (3)           (4)                (5)
Gets VC in 2 Years          7.011***                     6.506***     5.344***      4.004***            3.284***
                             (0.893)                     (0.836)       (0.785)       (0.771)            (0.699)
N                              5276                       4400          3313          1310                797
Pseudo R-sq                     0.140                       0.129        0.113         0.085              0.070
State fixed effects and year fixed effects included in all regressions. Matching algorithm matches each
company that gets VC finance to another company with the same quality, born in the same year and ZIP Code.
In about 20% of the sample, we do not find a match in the same ZIP Code and use a match in the same MSA
instead. Incidence rate ratios reported. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered at the state-year level.
*** p < .001




                                                                                                                    38
                                               TABLE 10
                                    VC Financing and Equity Growth Outcomes.
                                     Logit Regression, Odds Ratios Reported.
                                     Matched Sample. Heterogeneous Effects.
                               DV: Equity Growth. 1 if firm achieves IPO or acquisition
                                           Place Heterogeneity                       Time Heterogeneity
                                                                       .com Boom        .com Crash        Recovery
                                                             Non          Born:            Born:
                                   Silicon       Startup    Startup     1995-Sept,      Sept, 1999-         Born:
                   All Firms       Valley         Hubs       Hubs         1999             2001           2001-2005
                      (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)       (5)              (6)               (7)
Gets VC in 2
Years              7.011***       6.153***      6.463***   9.019***     9.539***          5.090***         8.691***
                    (0.893)        (1.124)       (0.925)    (1.501)      (2.516)          (0.673)           (1.440)
State F.E.            Yes                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes
Year F.E.             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
N                    5276           1796          2778       2621         1402             2290              1447
Pseudo R-sq          0.140        0.125         0.125        0.134        0.171            0.109             0.157
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. State fixed effects excluded from regressions that vary location, year fixed
effects excluded from regressions that vary time, to allow differences in each dimension to show in the coefficient
Matching algorithm matches each company that gets VC finance to another company with the same quality, born in
the same year and ZIP Code. In about 20% of the sample, we do not find a match in the same ZIP Code and use a
match in the same MSA instead. VC Quality only observed for California, Massachusetts, New York state, Texas,
and Washington state. Incidence rate ratios reported. Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered at the state-year
level. *** p < .001




                                                                                                             39
                                            FIGURE 1




Note: We perform a 10 fold out of sample cross validation procedure to study the predictive
capacity of our VC likelihood estimate. Bars indicate the average share of all out of sample VC-
backed firms in different points of the predicted VC distribution, by 5 percent bins. Lines indicate
the minimum and maximum estimate in this test.




                                                                                                 40
FIGURE 2




           41
                                                  APPENDIX

Appendix A ­ Business Registration Requirements and Data
        Business registration is the act of forming a firm as a corporation, limited liability company
(LLCs), or partnership. In the process of providing financing, venture capitalists invest in
registered businesses20 by providing capital in exchange for ownership in the company21. The
rights and obligations between the firm and the VC firm are then governed by the entity type, the
jurisdiction, and the by-laws of each company. Being a shareholder in a corporation provides
several benefits to venture capitalists relative to partnerships. In particular, minority shareholders
have stronger rights in the corporation, which can be further augmented through provisions in the
by-laws of the company, its operating agreements, or other contracts with the VCs. It also allows
stricter governance. Finally, only corporations can be publicly traded companies, hence only
corporations can exercise an initial public offering (IPO)--one of the main exit strategies for VCs.
In the United States, the ability to exercise specific rules governing the VC contract depends on
the state jurisdiction under which the firm operates. Due to a historical accident, there is a
precedent of strong predictability of corporate law in the state of Delaware, and venture capitalist
(as well as over half of all public companies) have a strong preference for firms registered under
Delaware corporate law, even when this comes at an extra cost to the firm.
        Entrepreneurs (and their lawyers) take these trade-offs into account as they convert their
intentions for the firm into a legal structure. For example, they might prefer to register in Delaware
if they expect to grow or seek VC financing. They also need to choose a name for the firm, whether
to file for intellectual property protection through trademarks and patents, whether to be a
corporation, partnership or LLC, etc. These choices are of strategic importance, and self-reveal
part of the entrepreneur's ambition and own signal about the potential of the firm.
        The timing of registration, while flexible, is influenced by similar considerations. While
the cost of registration itself is low ($100 in California) and the process can usually be completed
online in less than two hours, founders might struggle to register if they are not ready to choose a
governance structure. As such, registration represents a moment in time when the core idea of the
firm is developed enough to make these choices. Last, business registration is extremely useful in
building a population-level dataset, as it is comprehensive and a necessary condition for equity



20
   This is an empirical fact rather than a theoretical requirement.
21
   In the case of LLCs and partnerships, purchasing ownership effectively make venture capital firms partners of the
target firm. In the case of corporations, they become shareholders. While most venture capital investment occurs
through the purchase of corporation shares, there are a few LLC companies invested on during the 1980s as well as
the dot-com boom that where not corporations.
                                                                                                                 42
       financing. This allows us to build a complete population of firms at risk of venture capital without
       selecting firms along idiosyncratic dimensions.



                                                           TABLE A1
                                              Summary Statistics of industry measures
                               Source                                    Description
       Measure                                                                                             Mean      Std. Dev.
USCMP Name Based Industry Measures
Local Industry                  Business Reg.         If firm name is associated to a local industry.      0.191       0.393
Traded Industry                 Business Reg.         If firm name is associated to a traded industry.     0.544       0.498
                                                      If firm name is associated to a resource intensive
Resource Intensive Industry     Business Reg.                                                              0.127       0.333
                                                      industry.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the IT industry
IT                              Business Reg.                                                              0.025       0.155
                                                      cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the Biotechnology
Biotechnology                   Business Reg.                                                              0.002       0.042
                                                      industry cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the E-Commerce
E-Commerce                      Business Reg.                                                              0.051       0.221
                                                      industry cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the Medical
Medical Devices                 Business Reg.                                                              0.029       0.169
                                                      Devices industry cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the Semiconductor
Semiconductor                   Business Reg.                                                              0.0004      0.020
                                                      industry cluster.
Observations                                                                                                   13,231,305
This table represents our full dataset, comprised of all registered firms registered within the years 1995 and 2005 in 49 US
states. These states account for 99.6g% of US GDP and 95% of US venture capital investments in 2015. All measures defined
in detail in Section III of this paper. Venture capital outcomes are taken for all firms reported in Thompson Reuters
VentureXpert, Prequin, Capital IQ, and AngelsList. Business registration records are public records created endogenously
when a firm registers as a corporation, LLC, or partnership. IP observables include both patents and trademarks filed by the
firm within a year of founding, as well as previously filed patents assigned to the firm close to founding. All business
registration observables, IP observables, and industry measures are estimated at or close to the time of firm founding. Further
information on all measures can also be found in Guzman and Stern (2015), Guzman and Stern (2016), and Guzman and
Stern (2017). Growth IPOs include only `true' startup IPOs, we exclude all financial IPOs, REITs, SPACs, reverse LBOs,
re-listings, and blank check corporations.




                                                                                                                           43
                                                        TABLE A2

                    Comparison of Means Between Growth, No Growth, VC Backed and Non VC Backed firms.
                     No Equity     Equity                                                No Equity      Equity
                      Growth       Growth      All                                         Growth       Growth    All

Corporation                                                         Eponymous

  No VC Financing      0.564        0.713     0.565                   No VC Financing       0.097       0.042    0.097

  VC Financing         0.869        0.950     0.897                   VC Financing          0.015       0.012    0.014

  All                  0.564        0.748                             All                   0.097       0.038



Delaware                                                            Patent

  No VC Financing      0.025        0.254     0.026                   No VC Financing       0.002       0.088    0.002

  VC Financing         0.471        0.611     0.520                   VC Financing          0.199       0.302    0.235

  All                  0.026        0.306                             All                   0.002       0.119



Short Name                                                          Trademark

  No VC Financing      0.466        0.652     0.466                   No VC Financing       0.001       0.039    0.001

  VC Financing         0.849        0.897     0.866                   VC Financing          0.030       0.050    0.037

  All                  0.466        0.688                             All                   0.001       0.041




                                                                                                           44
                                             TABLE A3

                            Share of firm in IPO and Acquisition Samples
                                     that Raise Venture Capital
                                                           IPO        Acquisition
             Firms with VC Financing                       452             3,002
              (Share)                                     (31%)            (13%)
             Firms without VC Financing                   1,028            19,322
              (Share)                                  (69%)           (87%)
             Our estimates are based on firms founded between 1995 and 2005
             in our sample of states that eventually IPO. Reitter (2015) estimates
             that the average VC incidence for firms that IPO between 1990 and
             2015 as 37%. Kaplan and Lerner (2010) show this highly fluctuates
             through time.


                                             TABLE A4

            Relationship of VC Likelihood to Equity Growth Outcomes for all firms
                   Dependent Variable: Equity Growth (IPO or Acquisition)
                                      50% Test Sample.

                                                  All Firms that Achieve Growth
                                         (1)                           (2)
Log VC Likelihood (ln( ))             2.013***
                                      (0.0205)

VC Likelihood (Standardized)                                     1.116***
                                                                (0.00605)
State F. E                            Yes                           Yes
Year F E                              Yes                           Yes
N                                  6601590                       6601590
pseudo R-sq                          0.131                         0.067
Robust standard errors in parenthesis clustered at the state-cohort level. VC likelihood is
the estimated likelihood of raising venture capital given the at-birth characteristics of a
company, it is estimated in a separate training sample, showing in Table 4.




                                                                                              45
                                                 FIGURE A1
                                             Time to VC Financing




Notes: This graph shows the time to financing by years (in pink) and months (in blue) for all firms that receive VC,
estimated as the number of months between incorporation date and date of first VC investment.




                                                                                                                 46
