                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE FIRM'S ROLE IN DISPLACED WORKERS' EARNINGS LOSSES

                                       Brendan Moore
                                     Judith Scott-Clayton

                                      Working Paper 26525
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26525


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2019




We thank Bruce Fallick, Ben Hyman, Gregor Jarosch, Wilbert van der Klaauw, Marta
Lachowska, Rasmus Lentz, Bentley MacLeod, Suresh Naidu, Christina Patterson, and Aysegul
Sahin for feedback on earlier drafts of this paper. We gratefully acknowledge Lisa Neilson and
the staff of the Ohio Education Research Center, who helped facilitate our use of the restricted
data in this study. For citation of the most recent version of this paper, please email Brendan
Moore        (brendan.moore@columbia.edu)          and      Judith     Scott-Clayton     (scott-
clayton@tc.columbia.edu). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Brendan Moore and Judith Scott-Clayton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Firm's Role in Displaced Workers' Earnings Losses
Brendan Moore and Judith Scott-Clayton
NBER Working Paper No. 26525
December 2019
JEL No. J31,J63,J65

                                          ABSTRACT

We use employer-employee matched administrative data from Ohio to study the role of firm pay
premiums in explaining the large, persistent earnings losses of displaced workers. We estimate
that earnings for displaced workers from the mid-2000s are depressed by 22 percent after four
years, consistent with prior work. Drawing upon empirical approaches from the displaced worker
and firm heterogeneity literature, we then estimate how much of this earnings loss can be
explained by the forfeiture of a favorable employer-specific pay premium. Our preferred estimate
attributes one quarter (24 percent) of long-run earnings deficits to lost firm pay premiums. Such
firm rents explain up to half the earnings deficits for those laid off from manufacturing firms and
employers with particularly generous pay policies. We test for sensitivity to different samples
from which we derive firm specific-pay premiums and definitions of displacement. Our estimates
persist in a narrow range between 16 and 24 percent for the share explained by firm rents, adding
to the evidence that firm rents do not explain the majority of earnings or wage losses sustained by
displaced workers in the United States.


Brendan Moore
Columbia University
bdm2133@columbia.edu

Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 W.120th Street, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu
1     Introduction

Labor economists have long recognized that workers who experience job displacement suffer large
and persistent earnings losses for many years after their initial separations ­ a pattern not exhibited
by voluntary job movers. This scarring effect was first documented twenty-five years ago by the
seminal work of Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) who found that high-tenure workers in
Pennsylvania displaced in the early 1980s sustained long-term losses of 25 percent. Many researchers
have since used administrative data to study different settings and time periods, all concluding that
displacement leads to long-term earnings losses, typically between 15 and 30 percent (Couch, 2001;
Jacobson et al., 2005; Von Wachter et al., 2009; Schmieder et al., 2010; Couch and Placzek, 2010).
Davis and Von Wachter (2011) find that earnings losses are not only deep and sustained, but
also highly countercyclical ­ deficits are twice as large in present-value terms for layoffs when the
unemployment rate is below 6 percent than when it exceeds 8 percent. Schmieder and Von Wachter
(2010) show displacement wipes out workers' wage gains even during tight labor markets.
    The explanation for these persistent earnings losses is less clear. The inability of traditional
models used to study unemployment (Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994) to capture the magnitude and
persistence of earnings losses has motivated research aimed at understanding their sources. Jarosch
(2015) models a labor market in which jobs vary in both levels of productivity and security. The
newly unemployed accept positions lower on the job ladder which are not only lower-paying but also
less stable. Krolikowski (2017) also proposes a job ladder model in which the recently re-employed
have higher unemployment risk. Huckfeldt (2016) notes that earnings losses are concentrated among
workers who find reemployment in lower-paying occupations than they previously held. He then
posits that relatively skilled workers search for lower-skilled jobs during a recession with a model
that accounts quantitatively for cyclical earnings losses.
    A separate possible explanation concerns specific human capital, defined as the knowledge and
skills workers acquire which are unique to their current employer or industry but are not valued
by other firms or sectors (Topel, 1991; Neal, 1995; Kletzer, 1998). As the stock of specific human
capital increases with tenure, earnings likewise rise. However, its value is destroyed upon a worker's

                                                  2
separation, resulting in large and perhaps persistent earnings losses. Similarly, certain types of
workers and firms can be good matches for each other, enhancing productivity. Lachowska et al.
(2018) argue that the loss of a favorable firm-specific match is the main driver of persistent scarring.
   A third hypothesis for persistent earnings losses involves the firms themselves. Economists have
documented that some firms pay higher wages than others for equally-skilled workers (Krueger and
Summers, 1988; Van Reenen, 1996), a conclusion bolstered by the proliferation of studies using
employer-employee matched data (Abowd et al., 1999; Bronars and Famulari, 1997; Card et al.,
2013; Song et al., 2018). Sustained earnings losses could arise if workers are systematically displaced
from high-pay premium firms and subsequently hired and retained by employers offering relatively
lower pay premiums. Graham et al. (2019) illustrate a specific mechanism for layoff risk involving
firm premiums. Using data from the U.S. Census Bureau, the authors calculate the implied wage
premium demanded by workers of a firm with a greater risk of bankruptcy, since highly-leveraged
firms are also more likely to shed employees.
   Investigating this lattermost channel, Fackler et al. (2017) use administrative data from Germany
and find that long-run wage losses are fully explained by the forfeiture of firm wage premiums,
implying no role for other channels. Schmieder et al. (2018) likewise use German administrative
data to determine that workers switching to smaller and lower-paying firms after job displacement
is an important factor in the persistent declines in wages. They estimate upwards of 80 percent of
wage losses after three years can be attributed to forgone firm pay premiums.
   In stark contrast to Fackler et al. (2017) and Schmieder et al. (2018), the only extant study in the
United States finds that firm premiums play a minimal role in explaining earnings losses. Lachowska
et al. (2018) builds on Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) (henceforth JLS) and Abowd,
Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) (henceforth AKM) with administrative data from Washington state.
The authors conclude that the firm-specific component of pay assumes only a negligible role in the
earnings losses of those displaced during the Great Recession (just 9 percent of overall losses). They
instead attribute most of losses to forfeited job-specific matches--time-invariant factors which forge
a particularly valuable employee-employer pairing--and residual displacement effects, such as loss


                                                   3
of seniority (52 percent and 39 percent of losses, respectively).
   Given these contrasting findings, a natural question is whether the minimal role of firm pay
premiums found by Lachowska et al. (2018) generalizes to the United States more broadly. With that
motivation, we use employer-employee matched administrative data from Ohio to investigate the role
of firm pay premiums in explaining losses of displaced workers. We first confirm external validity by
showing that workers displaced in Ohio between 2002 and 2008 suffer large and persistent earnings
losses on the order of 22 percent four years after initial displacement. Although earnings exhibit
a partial rebound after the first full post-displacement quarter, recovery stagnates in the following
years, consistent with findings from JLS and subsequent literature. We explore heterogeneity by
industry, showing earnings losses are even more pronounced for workers displaced from industries
besides finance and insurance and for those displaced from manufacturing firms.
   Further, we find that forfeiture of a favorable employer-specific pay premium depresses earnings
by 5.3 percent after four years, or in other words, nearly one quarter (24 percent) of overall earnings
losses. Our regression-adjusted estimates condition on an individual's industry of employment,
meaning the loss of favorable firm wage policies is not a simple reflection of displacement from
high-wage industries such as manufacturing, which tends to be more unionized and exhibits greater
degrees of rent-sharing.
   Interpreted alongside Lachowska et al. (2018), our results bolster the evidence that unlike in
Germany, firm rents do not explain the majority of earnings losses sustained by displaced workers
in the United States. Nevertheless, our estimates are more than twice as large as Lachowska et al.
(2018) and suggest firm premiums are an important factor in at least some U.S. labor markets.
Because our approach, like the rest of the displaced worker literature, necessarily involves many
precise decisions about sample restrictions, we subject our results to a battery of sensitivity checks.
We show that different minimum tenure requirements for displaced workers does not change our
baseline estimate for the role of firm effects. The "share explained" estimate is also unaffected by
more stringent post-layoff labor force attachment conditions.
   We also test the sensitivity of our findings to construction of the economy-wide sample on


                                                  4
which AKM is estimated. Typically, the AKM specification is estimated on the largest group of
workers and firms available in an employee-employer matched dataset because identification relies
on individuals moving between jobs. In our case, we choose to omit post-layoff observations of
displaced workers from the AKM sample so that firm premium estimates are not a function of
the same depressed earnings we seek to decompose. While we prefer this minimal restriction, an
alternative approach--one implemented by Lachowska et al. (2018)--involves discarding displaced
workers and stably employed comparison workers from the AKM sample entirely. When we instead
employ this alternative sample, we find that long-term earnings are depressed by only 3.5 percent by
lost firm rents--smaller than our preferred estimate of 5.3 percent. This implies that firm-specific
pay premiums losses constitute 16 percent of overall displaced worker earnings losses in the Ohio
data, rather than 24 percent.
   This difference in AKM sample selection accounts for roughly half of the difference between
our preferred estimates and those of Lachowska et al. (2018) using Washington data (who estimate
long-run earnings decreased by 1.5 percent due to lost firm premiums, accounting for just 9 percent
of overall losses). Beyond AKM, there are numerous institutional settings that might explain the
remaining difference in our estimates. For example, the majority of workers in our sample were
displaced during a reasonably tight labor market, in contrast with those tracked by Lachowska
et al. (2018) who were laid off during the Great Recession. Davis and Von Wachter (2011) show
that in the U.S., overall earnings losses are amplified during recessions. Moreover, Schmieder et al.
(2018) use German data and show that losses due to firm-specific characteristics are likewise greater
during economic downturns, rendering their relative contribution to total losses during a recession
ambiguous. Although our panel does not allow us to fully investigate potential cyclicality, we find
that the employment-weighted average pay premium of firms with mass layoffs rises sharply in 2008
as the unemployment rate rises. While not definitive, this suggests losses due to firm premiums
could be even higher in Ohio during the recession than during the mid-2000s.
   Lastly, we discuss the implications that differences in institutional settings may have in explaining
differences between the lost firm premium estimates. While the Ohio and Washington displaced


                                                  5
samples have the same share of workers who separate from manufacturing, it may be that aerospace
producers of the Pacific Northwest offer a smaller firm pay premium than rubber and glass manufacturers
in the Industrial Midwest. Additionally, jobs at high-premium firms may be more available to laid
off manufacturers in Washington than in Ohio
        Despite the difference in magnitude of our estimates, our results are still broadly consistent
with the conclusion that firm premiums are less important for displaced worker earnings losses in
the U.S. than in Germany. Further work is needed to determine why the magnitude of the effect
varies across regions and potentially over the business cycle in the United States. We proceed by
describing the data in section 2. Section 3 outlines the empirical strategy based on AKM and JLS.
Section 4 reviews our findings, and section 5 concludes.



2         Data

The state of Ohio requires all employers, as part of the state's Unemployment Insurance (UI) payroll
tax requirements, to report quarterly earnings for all employees. We utilize two Ohio administrative
data sources to study the links between displacement and firm-specific pay premiums. These data
are made available through the Ohio Education Research Center (OERC), which assembles data
from multiple state agencies, including the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services (ODJFS),
into a repository known as the Ohio Longitudinal Data Archive (OLDA).1
        The first dataset includes information on both firms and private sector, state, and local public
employees subject to UI contributions in Ohio between 1999Q3 and 2013Q1. Thus, an observation
exists for every quarter an individual has positive earnings at a covered employer in the state of
Ohio during this time period. Individual identifiers allow us to identify the quarter of a displaced
worker's separation and subsequent employment over time.
    1
    The Ohio Longitudinal Data Archive is a project of the Ohio Education Research Center
(http://www.oerc.osu.edu/oerc.osu.edu) and provides researchers with centralized access to administrative data.
The OLDA is managed by The Ohio State University's CHRR (https://chrr.osu.edu/chrr.osu.edu) in collaboration
with Ohio's state workforce and education agencies (http://www.ohioanalytics.gov/ohioanalytics.gov), with those
agencies providing oversight and funding. For information on OLDA sponsors, see http://chrr.osu.edu/projects/ohio-
longitudinal-data-archive.



                                                        6
   The second dataset includes firm-level variables such as an anonymized employer identifier, three-
digit North American Industry Classification Systems (NAICS) codes, and county of the employer.
The identifiers, all derived from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), allow for
construction of a firm-size variable by summing across the records associated with a given employer
in each quarter. The firm identifiers are consistent across the two datasets, allowing us to link firms
and workers.
   The Ohio administrative data is particularly advantageous for the purposes of studying displaced
workers' earnings patterns. Ohio is the seventh largest U.S. state by population and lies at the
heart of America's manufacturing region that has experienced several decades of deindustrialization.
Relative to other states, Ohio has large employment shares in manufacturing, a sector more likely
to produce displaced workers. Like the rest of the United States, Ohio experienced recessions in
2001-2002 and 2008-2009, time frames both included in our sample period.
   There exist several limitations with the Ohio data. First, we are unable to distinguish between
workers who leave Ohio, drop out of the labor force, or begin working for non UI-covered employers
in the state. Second, UI administrative records rarely include demographic characteristics, and only
collect characteristics on workers who ultimately claim Unemployment Insurance. We choose not
to impose that displaced workers claim UI benefits to be eligible for our sample. From 1989-2012,
23% of Americans eligible for UI benefits did not claim them (Auray et al., 2019). By restricting
the displaced sample to only unemployed insurance claimants, we would omit a substantial share
of the population of interest. Thus, our sample lacks demographic information.
   We use the Ohio administrative records to construct two distinct samples: one for implementing
the AKM approach to estimate firm-specific pay premia (or "firm fixed effects") (described in
section 3.1), and a considerably smaller sample for analyzing the earnings losses of displaced workers
(described in sections 3.2 and 3.3). Below, we first describe the sample used for AKM estimation
and subsequently summarize the displaced worker sample.




                                                  7
2.1       AKM Sample

The AKM sample is constructed from the Ohio quarterly earnings records for calendar years 1999
to 2012. Because the data do not include hours worked and we seek to approximate firm-specific
pay premiums paid to full-time employees, we drop worker-quarter observations where a worker has
two or more listed jobs. We then follow the method developed by Sorkin (2018) of constructing an
employee-employer matched panel to study worker movements. Specifically, we subset on continuous
spells of employment that last for at least five consecutive quarters to eliminate short-term and
seasonal employees. For each employment spell with a distinct employer, we drop the first and
last quarter of the spell so to avoid making inferences about earnings based on partial quarters of
employment.
      Because the AKM model is traditionally estimated on yearly panels rather than quarterly, we
annualize the remaining data within each calendar year and multiply the mean quarterly earnings by
four to reflect annual earnings (conditional on a worker having two consecutive quarters of earnings
from the same primary employer). If this condition is not met, the year for that individual worker
is omitted. We also drop worker-year observations when average yearly earnings fell short of $3,500.
      Lastly, we drop worker-year observations for displaced workers for the years of and after layoff.
We do not want to estimate firm-specific pay premiums which are a function of the very earnings
changes we seek to partially attribute to lost firm premiums. Including such observations would
violate AKM's additive separability assumption, because if the scarring effect of displacement is
caused even partially by factors unrelated to firm premiums, expected post-layoff earnings are not
the simple sum of individual and firm fixed effects. See Appendix A.1 for further discussion.
      Despite this restriction, we keep pre-displacement worker-year observations in the AKM sample
because they are negatively-selected on ability2 , so their omission from the sample could bias the
estimation of the firm premiums of employers that lay off workers. In section 4, we show this
ultimately affects the estimation of our quantity of interest ­ the share of total earnings losses can
be explained by firm premiums. These restrictions yield the preferred "full sample" from column
  2
      We document this fact in Appendix A.3.


                                                    8
1 of Table A.1. On this sample, we estimate firm fixed effects using the largest connected set, i.e.
the greatest collection of workers and firms linked by worker movements over time.


2.2       Displaced Worker and Comparison Samples

2.2.1      Construction of Samples

Displaced workers are distinct from routine job changers or other unemployed individuals. Per
the BLS, they have a structural cause for displacement, limited ability to return to a comparable
job within a reasonable span of time, and are strongly attached to the sector in which they were
employed. Because we use administrative data, we cannot explicitly identify the reason for a worker's
separation (quit, discharge for cause, etc.). Consistent with the displaced worker literature, we use
separations during a mass layoff to identify workers who separate because of economic distress at
the firm.3 Mass layoffs, which have been exploited by many since JLS, have served as a reliable
proxy for causes of displacement because most of those who leave a firm during such a period do
so involuntarily.
       Following Davis and Von Wachter (2011), we define a mass layoff as a 30% or more quarter-to-
quarter reduction in a firm's employment level. A firm shutdown is counted as a mass layoff. Because
some firms exhibit many mass layoffs, we rank a firm's four largest mass layoffs by percentage change
during the observed period (2002-2008) and assess only these four events to avoid over-counting.
Further, as smaller firms are mathematically more likely to meet this 30% benchmark without a
substantial change in absolute employment, we adhere to JLS's practice of excluding firms with
fewer than 50 employees from the sample of mass layoff firms.
       Upon identifying the various dates of a firm's mass layoffs, we define a displaced worker as
someone satisfying the following conditions: the individual (1) is employed at the firm within a year
of a given mass layoff, (2) is not employed at the firm the quarter after the mass layoff, (3) exhibits
   3
    Flaaen et al. (2019) examines the implications of assuming mass layoffs are a sound proxy for economic distress
at the firms by matching administrative datasets with the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)
and Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD), both of which contain worker-provided reasons for
separations. The authors find that earning loss estimates using only survey responses are very close to those using
only administrative data.


                                                        9
at least three years tenure at that firm, (4) holds only one job at the time of job separation, and
(5) earns at least minimum wage corresponding to 30 hours per week.4 While this definition closely
aligns with JLS, we impose a tenure requirement of three years rather than six. This less stringent
requirement, also followed by Davis and Von Wachter (2011), allows us to study a greater number
of displaced cohorts. After presenting our main results, we test the sensitivity of our estimates to
a more common tenure requirement of six years at the layoff employer.
   Further, because our research question ­ understanding the share of earnings losses attributable
to loss of a firm pay premium ­ necessitates that a displaced worker will seek future employment, it
does not make sense to study those who may drop out of the labor force altogether. As a baseline,
we follow much of the displaced worker literature and require that all displaced workers in our
sample stay somewhat attached to the labor force in the follow up period, defined as exhibiting
positive earnings in at least 25% of one's post-displacement quarters.5 In Appendix B, we explore
sensitivity of our results to this requirement by conditioning on higher attachment (more post-
displacement quarters of positive earnings). This sample restriction renders the conclusions about
displaced workers in this paper conditional on labor force attachment.
   Consistent with JLS and similar papers, we compare the outcomes of our displaced sample to
those of a control group to workers who remain continuously employed. Traditionally, the literature
has predominantly used a "never displaced" control group in order to isolate the portion of earnings
potential that is destroyed when an individual involuntarily loses a specific job (Krolikowski, 2018).


2.2.2    Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 summarizes key variables for the sample of workers displaced in Ohio between 2002Q1
and 2008Q4 and the stably employed comparison sample used our difference-in-difference model.
The comparison group, who are highly tenured at the same firm throughout the panel, outnumber
the displaced workers by a ratio of 10:1. Such a large sample size for the comparison group is
   4
     Quarterly earnings corresponding to the minimum wage (in 2014 inflation adjusted dollars) is $2,163 in the
quarter before displacement. This corresponds to earning $5.15/hour, Ohio's minimum wage from 2002-2006, for 30
hours per week for one quarter.
   5
     This baseline sample restriction shrinks our displaced worker sample size by only 8%.


                                                      10
instrumental in producing the precise regression-adjusted estimates that will be presented in section
4. Half of all comparison workers are employed in either manufacturing or education and health
services, a combined share similar to the comparison group used by Lachowska et al. (2018).
   A similar share of displaced and comparison workers come from the top quartile of firm-specific
pay premiums, although a slightly larger share of displaced workers come from lower-quartile firms.
The comparison group has significantly higher pre-layoff earnings (defined as 2004-2005 earnings,
which is the median layoff time period) than the displaced sample, but we argue this will not
threaten identification using the difference-in-difference strategy.
   Table 1 also shows that 30 percent of the displaced worker sample were laid off from manufacturing
firms, unsurprising given Ohio's industrial base. The composition of displaced workers in the Ohio
sample is similar to the primary displaced sample in Washington state from Lachowska et al. (2018)
(28 percent). However, the manufacturing share of our sample differs from two other of the most
prominent displaced worker studies which use UI data. The displaced sample JLS analyzed from
1980s Pennsylvania included many more from manufacturing (75 percent) while those analyzed
by Couch and Placzek (2010) (2000s Connecticut) were less concentrated in manufacturing (16
percent).
   The bottom two panels of Table 1 (firm premium quartile and pre-displacement yearly earnings)
show that the average displaced worker earned roughly $50,000 in the year before separation, and
half of them separated from a firm in the top-quartile of employer pay premiums. These statistics
are similar to those generated by Lachowska et al. (2018). The earnings of workers two years before
displacement are only slightly lower than earnings the year before, indiciating a relatively minimal
"Ashenfelter dip" compared to the early displaced worker literature. Figure 1 likewise indicates no
dip before displacement. These findings, however, look similar to displaced worker earnings profiles
of more recent work using administrative data by Braxton et al. (2018) and Hyman (2018).




                                                  11
3       Empirical Approach

This section begins with a description of the model used to identify firm-specific pay premiums
for Ohio employers. Then, we describe the standard multi-period difference-in-difference model
employed to infer the causal effect of displacement on earnings. Lastly, we discuss our approach
of leveraging estimated firm fixed effects to understand the role the firm plays in displaced worker
earnings losses.


3.1     AKM Model

The increased prevalence of matched employee-employer administrative datasets has enhanced the
quality and quantity of research on both displaced workers and firm-specific pay premiums. In their
seminal research on the French labor market, AKM document that workers who move between
establishments experience wage gains or losses in a highly predictable manner, providing credibility
to the claim that "where you work" matters for "what you earn." Using matched employer-employee
data, AKM developed the following model for log earnings of person i working at firm j in year t:


                                    log (earn)ijt = i + t + j (i,t) + ijt                                    (1)


i are worker fixed effects, which captures the component of earnings that moves with a worker
regardless of her employer. j (i,t) are firm fixed effects6 , reflecting the earnings premium or penalty
(relative to some omitted firm) associated with working at firm j . t are year fixed effects, and
ijt is an unobserved time-varying error which may capture shocks to human capital, individual-job
match effects, or other transitory shocks. We estimate equation (1) on the universe of 1999-2012
Ohio workers from the UI data (subject to certain sample restrictions described in subsection
2.1). We then use the ^j estimates which correspond to each firm in subsequent analysis regarding

displaced worker earnings losses.
    6
    An estimated ^j resulting from equation 1 is constant for a given firm, thus  could be applied a subscript of
j alone. However, because equation 1 describes worker i's earnings in time t as a function of her employer's pay
premium, and recognizing workers change employers, we subscript  with j as a function of i and t.


                                                       12
       In order to separately identify i and j (i,t) in equation (1), there must be sufficient movement of
workers between firms to form a "connected set." Specifically, firms whose workers have not moved
to or from other establishments during the length of the panel are not linked to others employers
by worker transitions and are thus not part of the connected set. Such firms without any movers
are inevitable in such a large dataset, but in practice do not substantially reduce the size of the
connected set, meaning the AKM estimates should be trustworthy for the population. As illustrated
in Table A.1, 89% of all workers and 88% of all firms are included in the largest connected set from
the Ohio sample.7
       The variance of log earnings for equation (1) can be decomposed into five main components:
variance deriving from worker fixed effects, firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, the covariance of
worker and firm fixed effects, and a residual.8 Because a goal of this paper is to show how the
sources of estimated displaced worker earnings losses are sensitive to sample selections, we report
variance decompositions for candidate samples on which AKM can be run in Appendix Table A.2.
In all samples, worker fixed effects explain the largest share of variation in log earnings (49-51%),
although it is clear the firm effects still assume an important role (24-25% of the variation). This
compares to 22% estimated by Sorkin (2018), 21% in Card et al. (2013) and 20% in Lachowska
et al. (2018). Table A.2 also suggests sorting between workers and firms, as the covariance between
worker and firm fixed effects is positive.


3.2       JLS Model

Before investigating the role of firm-specific wage premiums in explaining displaced worker earnings
losses, we must first estimate the simple effects of displacement on worker earnings. We do so by
   7
     In the extreme case of no worker movement between firms during the panel, the connected set would have zero
works or firms. A connected set including roughly 90% of workers and firms is typical of other papers using AKM
such as Card et al. (2013), Card et al. (2018), and Lachowska et al. (2018).
   8
     The remaining covariances, between worker and year fixed effects and firm and year fixed effects, amount to a
negligible amount of the overall variance of log earnings.




                                                       13
estimating the following multi-period difference-in-difference specification:

                                                                    16
                           yijt = i + t + Wit 1 + Xijt 2 +               k · Ditk + ijt                         (2)
                                                                  k=-8


In equation (2), yijt are the log of quarterly earnings for worker i in quarter t at firm j ; i and t are
worker and year-quarter fixed effects, respectively; Xijt includes a vector of one-digit NAICS code
dummies for worker i's layoff employer j (or the comparison worker's primary employer) interacted
with a vector of yearly indicators; and Wit is a vector of yearly indicators interacted with pre-
displacement earnings (average of the 5-8 quarters before separation for treatment group, average
of 2003 earnings for comparison group). Ditk is an indicator that equals one if worker i is observed
in quarter k relative to displacement in calendar-quarter t, and equals zero otherwise. In the final
quarter of a displaced worker's observed tenure with the layoff employer, k assumes the value zero.
k is the baseline displacement effect on earnings in quarter k relative to separation. Because the
within-worker residuals cannot be assumed to be independent across time, we cluster at the worker
level. Lastly, because "Ashenfelter dips" ­ drops in earnings that precede displacement ­ can affect
earnings despite displacement not having yet occurred, we allow the index k to assume negative
values as low as -8. Since each displaced worker has at least 3 years of tenure, the "omitted category"
for the treated sample includes earnings in quarters -12  k  -9.
       In order to interpret k as the causal effect of displacement on earnings, the parallel trends
assumption ­ that displaced and non-displaced worker earnings follow the same trend in the pre-
treatment period ­ must be met. According to equation (2), the specified treatment begins eight
quarters prior to displacement, so earnings between the two groups must be parallel in the third
year prior to separation. Displaced workers, by definition, are highly-tenured at the time of their
layoff, so we require the comparison group of stably employed workers be similarly high-tenured.9
Even if the high-tenured workers in the comparison group are not comparable to the displaced
sample along certain unobservables (such as ability or productivity), so long as the gap between the
   9
     Specifically, a worker must be employed at the same firm for at least 56 of the observed 57 quarters to qualify
for the comparison group.



                                                        14
treatment and stably employed workers is constant prior to treatment and would have remained
constant absent displacement, the k coefficients can be interpreted as causal.
       To illustrate the validity of the parallel trends assumption in this context, we plot the earnings
of displaced workers and the comparison group before and after their separation date (Figure 1).10
From three years prior to displacement up to the date of separation, the mean quarterly earnings
of the displaced and non-displaced cohorts follow the same common trend. Moreover, although the
lines plotted are not regression-adjusted, the persistent earnings losses are apparent up to four years
after displacement. This figure provides supporting evidence that if no such displacement occurred
to the treated sample, the earnings of the two groups would have continued growing at the same
pace, suggesting equation (2) is well-identified.


3.3       JLS-AKM Model

To assess the role firm-specific pay premiums assume in the earnings losses of displaced workers,
we follow Lachowska et al. (2018) and treat the previously estimated employer fixed effects ^j as

an additional outcome in the displacement process. We match the ^'s obtained from estimating

equation (1) to the worker-quarter observations that correspond to the proper firm identifier in the
displaced and comparison groups summarized in Table 1. Specifically, displaced worker i at firm j
in year-quarter t is assigned a corresponding value for ^j (i,t) ­ her firm-specific pay premium that

partially determines earnings ­ which only varies when she switches employers. All individuals ­
including displaced workers ­ have a ^j (i,t) for the entire panel while employed.11

       We use these estimated firm effects as a left-hand side variable in the following regression,
modeled after equation (2):

                                                                     16
                         ^j (i,t) = i + t + Wit 1 + Xijt 2 +
                                                                          (k · Ditk ) + ijt                       (3)
                                                                   k=-8

  10
     In Figure 1, because the comparison group necessarily lack a separation date, we set the median quarter of
displacement for the treated group as their date of separation. For the treated group, the date of separation varies
for each displaced worker.
  11
     There is a very small share of displaced workers who are unmatched to a ^j because one of their employers (either
layoff or destination firm) was not in the connected set used to estimate equation (1).

                                                         15
Note that the right-hand sides of equations (2) and (3) are identical, meaning the same difference-
in-difference reasoning applies. The parallel trends assumption for equation (3) is particularly
straightforward: because the displaced sample is required to be employed at the same firm during
the pre-treatment period (quarters 9 through 12 before layoff), then ^j (i,t) ­ which only changes for

worker i when she moves firms ­ remains constant in the pre-period. Workers in the comparison
group ­ who never change employers ­ possess a constant firm-specific pay premium throughout
the panel.
       The estimated k 's are thus the effect of displacement on the firm-specific component of earnings
for worker i in quarter k relative to displacement. In effect, each k estimates


                                  E[j |i , t , Ditk = 1] - E[j |i , t , Ditk = 0]


where Ditk equals one if a displaced worker is observed in a post-separation quarter, and zero if a
displaced worker pre-separation or a stably-employed worker is observed. A negative k for positive
values of k would provide evidence of lost employer-specific premiums. The quotient of the k
coefficient and k from equation (2) approximates the share of earnings losses attributable to lost
firm fixed effects k quarters after displacement.12



4        Results

4.1       Estimates of Lost Earnings

The first row of panel A in Table 2 summarizes the estimates of short and long-term earnings losses
for the full sample of 40,419 Ohio workers displaced between 2002q1 and 2008q4. In the first full
quarter after displacement, workers' earnings decrease by 34 log points. Observations where workers
experience zero earnings for a quarter are dropped from the regression. This is because we seek
  12
    As will be discussed in the results section, we prefer to translate the coefficients (in log points) to percentages
and take their ratio. Although the difference is slight, it can be more meaningful for large magnitudes and more
accurately reflects the desired quantity of interest ­ what share of earnings losses are due to forfeited firm premiums.



                                                          16
to understand how forfeited firm premiums explain earnings losses, so we do not want to consider
losses that result from working for no firm at all. Thus, the presented coefficients provide estimates
of the effect of displacement conditional on employment.13 Because many who find re-employment
in the quarter after displacement may only work a partial quarter, it is likely that this drastic drop
is driven substantially by reduced work hours over the quarter. Of greater interest are long-run
earnings effects, which we spend the remainder of the paper examining.
       Four years after displacement, workers earn approximately 25.2 log points less on average than
they would have if they were not displaced.14 Converting log points to percentage terms, we estimate
long-term earnings for displaced workers are about 22 percent less than their pre-displacement
earnings [exp(-0.252) - 1]. Such estimates fall well within the bounds of the recent displaced worker
literature. Lachowska et al. (2018) estimate long-run earnings losses of 15 log points (14%) while
Couch and Placzek (2010) estimate 32 log points (27%).15 Figure 2 plots the baseline displaced
worker earnings losses profile for up to four years after job loss.16 The short and long-term effects
of displacement are negative and highly significant. Noticeably, the causal effects of displacement
on earnings relative to quarter of separation follow the familiar "dip, drop, and partial recovery"
pattern. For robustness, we run equation (2) without controlling for the level of a displaced worker's
pre-layoff earnings (see Table B.2). We find a nearly identical earnings profile and estimate earnings
losses of 21 percent.
       The long-run earnings losses for workers in the Ohio sample ­ who all separated between 2002q1
and 2008q4 ­ are quite substantial given their time of displacement in the business cycle. Ohio's
unemployment rate17 only eclipsed 7 percent once between 2002 and 2008, and stayed below 6
  13
      While we considered using the inverse hyperbolic sign or changing zero earnings to ones to avoid an undefined
log(0) value, we opted against doing so because it would prevent constructing a "share attributable to firm fixed
effects" comparisons like that in Table 2, which only make sense when the mapping of quarterly earnings to quarterly
firm-specific fixed effects is defined for all earnings.
   14
      Throughout the paper, we refer to figures four years post-displacement to mean the average of the coefficients
for quarters 13-16 relative to separation
   15
      Both papers define the long-run as five years rather than four.
   16
      A table of point estimates and standard errors for Figure 2 is found in Appendix Table B.2, Column 3. Column
1 of this Table shows point estimates of the same regression without controlling for pre-earnings interacted with year
dummies.
   17
      Aggregating monthly rates at a quarterly frequency



                                                         17
percent for 16 of the 28 total quarters. However, the 2000's expansion may be an exception to
Davis and Von Wachter (2011)'s finding that long-run earnings losses of displaced workers are
mitigated when the labor market is strong. They also note that the 2003-2005 period ­ when
U.S. unemployment was below 6 percent ­ was an anomaly, as high-tenured men displaced during
these years exhibited long-run earnings losses greater than those displaced at any other time in the
previous quarter-century (including losses sustained by those displaced in the 1982 recession, when
unemployment eclipsed 9 percent).
      We conduct the same analysis on two subsets of displaced workers that may experience different
earnings patterns: those displaced from any industry besides finance, insurance and real estate
(FIRE), and those displaced specifically from manufacturing. We examine these groups because
they may have a harder time adjusting in the labor market and may also have less savings to smooth
consumption during unemployment (Gruber, 1997). We study manufacturing in particular because
of our particularly attractive setting to study the industry. During our layoff window from 2002 to
2008, the number of workers in manufacturing decreased by 22 percent in Ohio but just 11 percent
nationally. Our time frame also coincides with the brunt of the post-WTO accession "China shock."
Rubber and glass manufacturing ­ among the most exposed industries to Chinese imports in the
early 2000s, as detailed by Autor et al. (2013) ­ were heavily concentrated in Ohio.
      Panel B of Table 2 presents the regression-adjusted estimates of short and long-run earnings
losses for those displaced from non-FIRE industries, who represent 93% of all displaced workers in
our sample (Table 1). In applying equation (2), we likewise drop workers from finance, real estate,
or insurance firms in the comparison group sample. The non-FIRE displaced workers exhibit short
and long-run earnings losses that are greater in magnitude than those of the overall sample. Such
workers experienced a 40 log point drop in earnings in the quarter after displacement, and losses
persist on the order of 22 percent (25.3 log points) in the long-run.18 These slightly-larger earnings
deficits after four years suggest that those displaced from FIRE industries have a relatively easier
time transitioning after losing a high-tenure job. If they are more likely to find reemployment in
 18
      Point estimates for all quarters after displacement are presented in Table B.5, Columns 1 and 3.



                                                          18
the same sector, this could speak to the enhanced role of industry-specific human capital.19
       Table 2, Panel C summarizes earnings losses associated with displacement from manufacturing
firms. These deficits are markedly larger than those of the rest of the sample. They exhibit 55
log point earnings losses in the first quarter after separation. Strikingly, even four years after
displacement, they earn 29 percent (34.6 log points) less than they would have if they were
not displaced, conditional on employment.20 These long-run estimates hover around the largest
estimates in the literature for all displaced workers, which consistently measures losses between
15-30% in a diverse set of labor market contexts.


4.2       Estimated Losses due to Firm Fixed Effects

According to Table 1, roughly half of displaced workers separate from firms in the top-quartile of pay
premiums and very few separate from the bottom-quartile. If displaced workers are systematically
re-employed by firms that offer a lower pay premium to all employees, then a portion of the earnings
losses described in section 4.1 can be explained by this downward transition to lower j firms. We
approach this question using model (3).
       Figure 3 plots the estimated k and k from regression equations (2) and (3) for quarter k
relative to displacement, -8  k  16. These represent the estimated displacement effects on log
earnings and employer-specific pay premiums, respectively. 16 quarters after displacement, average
worker earnings are roughly five log points lower than they would be absent a layoff because of
re-employment at a firm with a lower pay premium. The second row of panel A in Table 2 provides
the average point estimates for the short and long-term effects of displacement on the firm-specific
component on earnings.
       We can calculate the share of losses explained by dividing the percentage earnings losses attributable
to firm pay premiums by overall earnings deficits.21 These statistics are presented in the third rows
  19
     See Neal (1995) and Sullivan (2010)
  20
     Point estimates for the effect of displacement on earnings for all quarters are presented in Table B.6.
  21
     Although this share is approximated by   ^ k /^k for positive values of k , we choose instead to convert all log changes
to percentage changes and use the percentages to calculate share attributable to forgone firm premiums. This is
because  ^k is sometimes estimated at upwards of 30 log points, which does not well approximate a 30% change.



                                                             19
of each panel of Table 2. For the overall sample, roughly 24 percent of a worker's earnings deficits
four years after displacement are attributable to employment at firms with lower pay premiums.
Laid off manufacturing employees can attribute over half of their sizable long-run earnings losses to
forfeited firm-specific pay premiums. Strikingly, the earnings deficits for displaced manufacturing
employees deriving from loss of a favorable firm premium nearly match the magnitude for the overall
earnings losses for the general sample. Charts similar to Figure 3 for these two subsets of displaced
workers ­ as well as tables of point estimates and standard errors ­ can be found in the appendix.22
      Our main results follow a practice of nearly all displaced worker papers using administrative
data by conditioning that workers have positive earnings in 25% of post-displacement quarters (and
positive earnings in at least one quarter of every post-layoff calendar year). As a robustness check
on our finding that firm premiums explain one-quarter of overall earnings losses, we subject our
sample to more stringent requirements of post-layoff attachment. While both the overall earnings
losses and losses due to firm premiums shrink with more stringent requirements of 50% and 75%
attachment, the share of losses attributable to firm effects remains remarkably stable around 25
percent.23 Further, while our lack of information on hours prevents us from directly estimating the
share of long-run wage scarring explained by firm fixed effects, in Appendix B.3 we provide estimates
for this quantity guided by Lachowska et al.'s (2018) results for the hour-wage decomposition of
long-run earnings scarring.


4.2.1      Workers Displaced from Top AKM Quartile Firms

Given a large share of our sample is displaced from firms offering a top-quartile pay premium ^j ,

we estimate equations (2) and (3) on a restricted sample of displaced workers who lost a job from
a top quartile firm and a comparison group stably employed at such a firm. Earnings losses for
this group are shown in Figure B.6a and summarized in panel D of Table 2. Like other displaced
workers, they experience a sharp initial earnings drop (40 log points) one quarter after separation.
After four years, they earn 29 percent (34 log points) less than they would have absent a layoff.
 22
      Appendix B, Figure B.5 and Tables B.5 and B.6.
 23
      Point estimates provided in Appendix B, Table B.3 and Figures B.3 and B.4.


                                                        20
Not only does this subset of workers suffer larger long-run earnings losses compared to the overall
sample, but they also earn nearly $10,000 more per year. Thus, the pre-displacement income gap
and higher percentage loss yield much larger deficits in absolute terms.
       Panel D of Table 2 also suggests such workers have "more to lose" by separating from their
employer, as we attribute half of their total earnings deficits to loss of a favorable firm-specific
pay premium. For this group, earnings are depressed by 15 to 16 percent by firm pay premiums
alone. The overall earnings deficits, losses due to firm premiums, and the share of losses premiums
explain are all comparable to figures for the manufacturing subsample, even though two-thirds of
this group separated from an industry besides manufacturing. This suggests the importance of firm
pay premiums is not limited to manufacturing layoffs.
       Roughly 25 percent of our displaced sample separates from high-^j firms but finds re-employment

at another top-quartile pay premium firm.24 Panel E of Table 2 confirms that even the "luckiest"
laid off workers are still systematically displaced in lower-paying firms on average. These workers
suffer 16 percentage point long-run earnings deficits, only 2 percentage points of which are due to
receiving a lower pay premium.25


4.3        Sensitivity of Estimates to Sample Construction

The JLS-AKM framework necessarily involves many precise decisions about sample restrictions for
both stages of estimation. Past displaced worker studies which use UI administrative records from
U.S. states vary in how they construct their preferred displaced sample (Jacobson et al., 1993;
Couch and Placzek, 2010; Lachowska et al., 2018; Ost et al., 2018). Further, researchers using the
JLS-AKM framework can reasonably exclude workers designated as displaced from the sample to
which AKM is applied. Thus, the resulting ^j estimates from equation (1) ­ and in turn, the share

of firm premiums on earnings losses ­ may vary substantially with small adjustments in the sample
restrictions.
  24
       See Figure B.2 in Appendix B.
  25
       Graphs of the total and firm effect losses for both of the "top-quartile" displaced groups are presented in Figure
B.6.



                                                            21
   In this section, we explore how our estimates change with constructions of different samples
and if it could account for disagreement between past work on the role of firm rents. Fackler et al.
(2017) and Schmieder et al. (2018) conclude that firm premiums are either the sole or overwhelming
source of displaced worker earnings losses in Germany. On the other hand, Lachowska et al. (2018)
find that for workers in Washington state during the Great Recession, firm effects depress long-run
earnings by 1.5 percent accounting for just 9 percent of overall losses.


4.3.1   Tenure Requirements

Job displacement studies which use administrative data always condition on some degree of worker
tenure. We require workers only have three years of tenure at the same firm prior to displacement,
following Jacobson et al. (2005) and Davis and Von Wachter (2011). However, many studies
(Jacobson et al., 1993; Couch and Placzek, 2010; Lachowska et al., 2018) require six years for
their sample. We opt for shorter tenure requirements due to a limited panel length, as we sought a
displaced sample with more displaced cohorts while still allowing for a sufficient follow-up period.
   We test the sensitivity of our results to tenure requirements by running modified versions of
equations (2) and (3) on the comparison group and a group of displaced workers which all have
at least six years tenure at their layoff firm. We follow Lachowska et al. (2018) by estimating
displacement effects (k and k ) for five years before and four year after separation (-20  k 
16), assigning the omitted category to the sixth pre-displacement year. Workers in this sample are
laid off between 2005q1 and 2008q4. The results of these specifications are summarized in Table 2,
Panel F and the estimated displacement effects are plotted in Figure 4.
   Displaced workers with higher tenure suffer larger long-run earnings losses (32 percent) than
those in our overall sample (22 percent), consistent with past empirical findings (Couch and Placzek,
2010; Lachowska et al., 2018) and theoretical explanations summarized by Carrington and Fallick
(2017). However, losses due to forfeited firm effects are also substantially larger. Ultimately, the
share of overall losses explained by firm effects remains at 24 percent for the high tenure group,
(Table 2, Panel F), identical to our baseline estimates for the share explained.


                                                 22
4.3.2      AKM construction

Given that our estimates are not sensitive to tenure requirements, we next adjust the construction
of the economy-wide AKM sample to which equation (1) is applied. Typically, AKM is estimated
on the entire sample of workers and firms to maximize the size of the largest connected set.
However, displaced worker's post-layoff earnings exhibit a residual scarring effect which violates
the AKM identifying assumption that earnings are additive in firm and worker fixed effects.26
One solution to this issue (as followed by Lachowska et al. (2018)) is to go further and omit all
displaced and comparison group worker-year observations from the sample which they estimate
AKM. Our approach drops only the post-displacement observations, under the argument that
dropping displaced workers entirely could lead to skewed estimates of firm premiums ^j . Either

approach could plausibly satisfy the AKM identifying assumptions. To assess how much this choice
matters, we test the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative AKM sample construction.27
       We find that estimated losses due to firm premiums ­ and thus the share of overall deficits
they explain ­ are moderately sensitive to AKM sample selection. Figure 5 plots results from Ohio
for firm premium losses using two different AKM sample constructions. Omitting comparison and
displaced workers altogether reduces our estimated earnings losses due to firm premiums by as much
as one-third. Because overall estimated earnings losses do not depend on firm fixed effects resulting
from the AKM sample, the corresponding share explained by pay premiums likewise declines with
the use of the alternative AKM sample, from 24 percent to 16 percent.
       The sensitivity shown in Figure 5 suggests that when displaced and comparison workers are
omitted from the AKM sample, either the estimated ^j for layoff firms are lower or estimated ^j for

firms that hire newly-displaced workers are higher (or both). We find evidence for the former case.
Estimated fixed effects for mass layoff employers are larger for our preferred AKM sample than for
  26
      In other words, a worker's post-displacement earnings is not the sum of her individual fixed effect and the fixed
effect of her firm. The error term in equation (1) is not conditional mean zero due to negative scarring effects of
displacement (loss of seniority, loss of a good match, etc.). See Appendix section A.1 for further explanation and
discussion.
   27
      The variance decomposition of log earnings is very similar across various AKM samples, as shown in Appendix
Table A.2.




                                                          23
the alternative sample (see Appendix A). The same relationship holds for the difference between
the estimated firm fixed effects of layoff firms and non-layoff firms. The result is robust to various
definitions of "layoff firm."28
       The reason for this sensitivity in estimated firm premiums to the AKM sample construction
reflects the well-documented fact that displaced workers are negatively selected on the part of
their earnings that is portable (in our case, the estimated worker fixed effect ^ i ) (Gibbons and
Katz, 1991). Following Gulyas (2016), in Appendix Figure A.2 we present a binscatter of average
change in a firm's employment against the firm's average worker quality. We find that firms which
contract by 30% or more (layoff firms) experience an increase in their average worker quality,
suggesting the workers they shed were negatively selected on ^ i . Such negative selection has
implications for estimation of ^j for layoff firms in particular: when the AKM sample omits displaced

workers altogether (rather than including their pre-layoff observations), estimated ^ i 's of incumbent
workers are biased upwards, thereby depressing the estimated firm premiums. While both sample
constructions are valid for the JLS-AKM framework, we prefer our sample because it accounts for
the fact displaced workers are negatively selected. In any case, while this choice has non-trivial
consequences for assessing the role of firm fixed effects in explaining earnings losses for displaced
workers, it does not radically change the estimate.


4.3.3       Comparison to Previous Estimates

Our finding that firm rents explain only 24 percent of long-run earnings losses bolsters Lachowska
et al.'s (2018) conclusion that such premiums are not the primary cause of earnings scarring for
workers in the United States (just 9 percent). However, our estimates are more than twice as large
as their results and suggest a more pronounced role for firm rents. Two key differences in our
empirical approaches involve tenure requirements and AKM construction: Lachowska et al. (2018)
impose longer tenure for displaced workers and construct the alternative AKM sample described in
subsection 4.3.2. We have shown the former discrepancy is inconsequential for the share explained
  28
       Appendix Table A.5 compares estimated firm premiums by layoff status.



                                                        24
estimates. The latter adjustment, however, attenuates our estimate in Lachowska et al.'s (2018)
direction, as illustrated by Figure 5. The difference in AKM sample selection appears to account for
roughly half of the difference between our estimates and Lachowska et al.'s (2018). The difference
in the other direction between our Ohio estimates and Schmieder et al.'s (2018) from Germany are
not explained by tenure requirements or AKM sample, however, because both papers follow the
same sample construction.
       Beyond the difference in AKM construction, important institutional factors likely explain the
remaining difference in our estimates. For example, while all of the workers in Lachowska et al.
(2018) are displaced during the Great Recession, the bulk of workers in our paper separate during
a tight labor market. If losses resulting from forgone firm premiums are acyclical, such premiums
may explain a relatively smaller share of overall losses during an economic downturn compared to
an expansion because total earnings deficits are larger during a recession (Davis and Von Wachter,
2011). However, there are various reasons to believe displaced workers forfeit a different kind of firm
premium over the business cycle. For example, large employers ­ which offer well-documented wage
premiums (Brown and Medoff, 1989; Bloom et al., 2018) and are less sensitive during economic
downturns than their smaller counterparts (Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994; Fort et al., 2013) ­ displace
a greater share of all laid off workers in business cycle peaks than troughs.29 Indeed, Schmieder
et al. (2018) provide evidence that the magnitude of earnings losses deriving from firm premiums
in Germany are countercyclical.
       To investigate whether the business cycle may account for our estimates being moderately larger
than those of Lachowska et al. (2018), we plot the average pay premium of layoff firms in Ohio against
the state's unemployment rate in Figure 6. Although most workers we analyze are displaced in a
tight labor market, our layoff window extends to the eve of the Great Recession in 2008.30 Both the
unweighted and employment-weighted average pay premium of layoff firms in Ohio appear to drop
  29
      According to the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) Experimental Firm Size Class Statistics
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2018b), firms with more than 500 employees accounted for 46% of all employee
layoffs in 2017 as opposed to 36% in 2010.
   30
      We are unable to analyze multiple year-cohorts of workers displaced in the Great Recession (2008-2010) using
JLS-AKM because our follow-up period would be cut short of four years.



                                                       25
as the labor market improves. However, as the unemployment rate spikes in 2008, the employment-
weighted mean ^j of layoff firms likewise rises markedly. If this series moves with the unemployment

rate throughout the business cycle, it could suggest firm premiums would explain even more than
one quarter of long-run earnings losses, rather than less. In other words, the difference in time
periods between our analysis and Lachowska et al. (2018) does not appear to explain the larger
estimates we find.
    Another possible explanation is the difference in industry mix between Ohio and Washington.
While the share of workers who are displaced from manufacturing does not vary between the Ohio
and Washington samples (27 percent), it may be that rubber, steel, or glass manufacturing plants of
Ohio confer a more generous pay premium than airplane manufacturers concentrated in Washington
state. If manufacturing employees in Ohio forfeit a larger firm-specific wage premium than those in
Washington, on average, this could explain at least part of the remaining gap between our papers'
estimates. Unfortunately, there is no way to test this empirically with only the Ohio data.



5     Conclusion

Highly-tenured displaced workers suffer large and persistent earnings losses many years after their
initial separations, the sources of which have long been a puzzle for labor economists. We first
verify that workers in Ohio displaced in the mid-2000s have similar experiences, earning 22 percent
less than they otherwise would have four years after displacement. Losses are substantially larger
for those shed from manufacturing firms. We then seek to address one potential driver of earnings
scarring by showing that firm-specific pay premiums explain a meaningful share of overall displaced
worker earnings losses in Ohio, although they are not the primary source. Specifically, we show long-
run earnings of workers who lose their job in a mass layoff are lower by 5.3 percent due exclusively
to the loss of a favorable firm pay premium. This accounts for 24 percent of long-run earnings
losses. For those separating from manufacturing firms, premium-forfeiture leads to earning losses
of 17 percent, explaining over half of long-run deficits.



                                                  26
   Because the JLS-AKM framework necessarily involves many precise decisions about sample
restrictions for both stages of estimation, we subject our findings to a battery of sensitivity checks.
We find that our 24 percent "share explained" estimate is invariant to applying higher tenure
conditions to the displaced worker sample. Subjecting the displaced sample to more stringent post-
displacement labor force attachment conditions, such as requiring workers have positive earnings in
at least half of all post-layoff quarters, does not change our result that one-quarter of the displaced
worker earnings scar is attributable to forgone firm rents.
   Our preferred AKM sample accounts for negative selection of displaced workers on ability.
However, applying an alternative AKM sample modestly attenuates our estimate from 24 to 16
percent. We discuss the theoretical reasons why modifying the AKM sample to exclude displaced
workers altogether would lead to a smaller estimate for the role of forgone firm-specific rents.
Whether employer pay premiums explain one-sixth or one-quarter of long-run earnings losses,
it implies other factors--among them, skill depreciation while unemployed, loss of seniority, and
forfeiture of positive "match effects"--are all potential sources of the remaining 75 percent of the
earnings scar.
   While our estimates for losses due to firm premiums and the share of overall deficits they
explain are still more than twice as large as evidence from Washington state, they are still broadly
consistent with Lachowska et al.'s (2018) findings that firm premiums play a much smaller role in
the U.S. than in Germany. While greater tenure requirements imposed by Lachowska et al. (2018)
for displaced workers do not account for a difference in the "share explained" estimates between
Ohio and Washington, AKM sample construction accounts for roughly half of the differences. We
then discuss the implications of differences in settings, comparing mid-2000s Ohio to Washington
during the Great Recession. While both states displace a similar proportion of workers from the
manufacturing sector, we speculate that Ohio firms offer a more generous premium to workers who
will be laid off in the future than their counterparts in Washington. Additionally, jobs at high-
premium firms may have been more available to laid off manufacturers in Washington than in Ohio.
Regarding the business cycle, data limitations prevent us from investigating how losses due to firm


                                                  27
premiums change with fluctuations in the unemployment rate. However, our data suggest such
losses would, if anything, increase for workers laid off during a downturn, confounding differences
with Lachowska et al. (2018) but consistent with Schmieder et al.'s (2018) findings for Germany.
   Our study is constrained by the usual obstacles facing displaced worker papers which use
administrative data. We are unable to assess the outcomes of displaced workers who leave the
state, Although 10 percent of all displaced workers move as a result of their layoff (Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2018a), we are unable to assess outcomes of those who leave the state. Thus, we
consider such individuals unattached to the labor force and thus exclude them from our analysis.
If such individuals recoup more of their pre-layoff earnings or find re-employment at higher-paying
firms than fellow displaced workers who stay put, our estimates of the magnitude of losses may be
biased upwards. Our UI data's limited demographic information means we are unable to control for
key variables such as worker age. Further, while we believe the AKM model accurately describes
the wage structure across firms and workers and provides a valuable estimate of firm-premiums,
it does not perfectly describe the labor market. The static nature of AKM imposes that worker
mobility doesn't depend on prior employment history. AKM doesn't consider tenure in explaining
wages, nor does it allow for complementarities between workers and firms if it does not include an
interaction term.
   Further work is needed to study how firm premiums in the U.S. change over the business cycle
and how this could affect outcomes for workers who lose their job during an economic downturn.
Workers laid off during a recession are different on numerous dimensions from those displaced
during a recession. The same is true for firms which shed workers at different points in the cycle.
A framework like JLS-AKM which describes the cost of job loss would ultimately want to account
for such changes in worker and firm composition over the business cycle.




                                                28
References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999): "High wage workers and high wage firms,"

  Econometrica, 67, 251­333.

Auray, S., D. L. Fuller, and D. Lkhagvasuren (2019): "Unemployment insurance take-up rates in

  an equilibrium search model," European Economic Review, 112, 1­31.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): "The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of

  import competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103, 2121­68.

Bloom, N., F. Guvenen, B. S. Smith, J. Song, and T. von Wachter (2018): "The disappearing

  large-firm wage premium," in AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 108, 317­22.

Bonhomme, S., T. Lamadon, and E. Manresa (2019): "A distributional framework for matched

  employer employee data," Econometrica, 87, 699­739.

Braxton, J. C., G. Phillips, K. Herkenhoff, et al. (2018): "Can the unemployed borrow?

  implications for public insurance," in 2018 Meeting Papers, Society for Economic Dynamics, 564.

Bronars, S. G. and M. Famulari (1997): "Wage, tenure, and wage growth variation within and across

  establishments," Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 285­317.

Brown, C. and J. Medoff (1989): "The employer size-wage effect," Journal of political Economy, 97,

  1027­1059.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U. S. D. o. L. (2018a): "Current Population Survey Displaced Workers

  Supplement," https://www.bls.gov/news.release/disp.nr0.htm, accessed: 2019-08-16.

------ (2018b): "Experimental JOLTS Firm Size Class Statistics," https://www.bls.gov/jlt/jlt_

  firmsize.htm, accessed: 2019-07-14.

Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018): "Firms and labor market inequality:

  Evidence and some theory," Journal of Labor Economics, 36, S13­S70.

Card, D., J. Heining, and P. Kline (2013): "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German

  Wage Inequality," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 967­1015.

Carrington, W. J. and B. Fallick (2017): "Why do earnings fall with job displacement?" Industrial

  Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 56, 688­722.

Couch, K. A. (2001): "Earnings losses and unemployment of displaced workers in Germany," ILR Review,



                                                 29
  54, 559­572.

Couch, K. A. and D. W. Placzek (2010): "Earnings losses of displaced workers revisited," American

  Economic Review, 100, 572­89.

Davis, S. J. and T. Von Wachter (2011): "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss," Brookings Papers

  on Economic Activity, 42, 1­72.
                 ¨ ller, and J. Stegmaier (2017): "Explaining wage losses after job displacement:
Fackler, D., S. Mu

  Employer size and lost firm rents," Tech. rep., IWH Discussion Papers.

Farber, H. S., R. Hall, and J. Pencavel (1993): "The incidence and costs of job loss: 1982-91,"

  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, 1993, 73­132.

Flaaen, A. B., M. D. Shapiro, and I. Sorkin (2019): "Reconsidering the Consequences of Worker

  Displacements: Firm versus Worker Perspective," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11,

  193­­227.

Fort, T. C., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2013): "How firms respond to business

  cycles: The role of firm age and firm size," IMF Economic Review, 61, 520­559.

Gertler, M. and S. Gilchrist (1994): "Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior of small

  manufacturing firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 309­340.

Gibbons, R. and L. F. Katz (1991): "Layoffs and lemons," Journal of Labor Economics, 9, 351­380.

Graham, J. R., H. Kim, S. Li, and J. Qiu (2019): "Employee costs of corporate bankruptcy," Tech.

  rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gruber, J. (1997): "The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance," The American

  Economic Review, 87, 192­205.

Gulyas, A. (2016): "Identifying labor market sorting with firm dynamics," Manuscript, University of

  Mannheim.

Huckfeldt, C. (2016): "Understanding the scarring effect of recessions," Report, Economics Department.

Hyman, B. (2018): "Can Displaced Labor Be Retrained? Evidence from Quasi-Random Assignment to

  Trade Adjustment Assistance," .

Jacobson, L., R. J. LaLonde, and D. Sullivan (2005): "The impact of community college retraining

  on older displaced workers: Should we teach old dogs new tricks?" ILR Review, 58, 398­415.

Jacobson, L. S., R. J. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan (1993): "Earnings losses of displaced workers,"


                                                  30
  The American Economic Review, 685­709.

Jarosch, G. (2015): "Searching for job security and the consequences of job loss," manuscript, Stanford

  University.

Kletzer, L. G. (1998): "Job displacement," Journal of Economic perspectives, 12, 115­136.

Krolikowski, P. (2017): "Job ladders and earnings of displaced workers," American Economic Journal:

  Macroeconomics, 9, 1­31.

------ (2018): "Choosing a control group for displaced workers," ILR Review, 71, 1232­1254.

Krueger, A. B. and L. H. Summers (1988): "Efficiency wages and the inter-industry wage structure,"

  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 259­293.

Lachowska, M., A. Mas, and S. A. Woodbury (2018): "Sources of Displaced Workers' Long-Term

  Earnings Losses," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lentz, R., S. Piyapromdee, J.-M. Robin, et al. (2018): "On worker and firm heterogeneity in wages

  and employment mobility: Evidence from danish register data," PIER Discussion Papers, 91.

Mortensen, D. T. and C. A. Pissarides (1994): "Job creation and job destruction in the theory of

  unemployment," The Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397­415.

Neal, D. (1995): "Industry-specific human capital: Evidence from displaced workers," Journal of Labor

  Economics, 13, 653­677.

Ost, B., W. Pan, and D. Webber (2018): "The impact of mass layoffs on the educational investments

  of working college students," Labour Economics, 51, 1­12.

Podgursky, M. (1992): "The industrial structure of job displacement, 1979-89," Monthly Lab. Rev., 115,

  17.

Robinson, J. (1969): The Economics of Imperfect Competition, Springer.

Schmieder, J. F. and T. Von Wachter (2010): "Does wage persistence matter for employment

  fluctuations? Evidence from displaced workers," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,

  2, 1­21.

Schmieder, J. F., T. Von Wachter, and S. Bender (2010): "The long-term impact of job

  displacement in Germany during the 1982 recession on earnings, income, and employment," Tech. rep.,

  IAB-Discussion Paper.

Schmieder, J. F., T. Von Wachter, and J. Heining (2018): "The Costs of Job Displacement over


                                                  31
  the Business Cycle and Its Sources: Evidence from Germany," .

Song, J., D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. Von Wachter (2018): "Firming Up

  Inequality," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1­50.

Sorkin, I. (2018): "Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

  133, 1331­1393.

Sullivan, P. (2010): "Empirical evidence on occupation and industry specific human capital," Labour

  Economics, 17, 567­580.

Topel, R. (1991): "Specific capital, mobility, and wages: Wages rise with job seniority," Journal of

  Political Economy, 99, 145­176.

Van Reenen, J. (1996): "The creation and capture of rents: wages and innovation in a panel of UK

  companies," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 195­226.

Von Wachter, T., J. Song, and J. Manchester (2009): "Long-term earnings losses due to mass

  layoffs during the 1982 recession: An analysis using US administrative data from 1974 to 2004,"

  Unpublished paper, Columbia University.




                                                 32
            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Displaced Workers and Comparison Group

                                                                  Displaced     Comparison
                   Industry of Layoff Firm
                   Construction, Utilities, Mining                   0.12            0.04
                   Manufacturing                                     0.30            0.26
                   Retail Trade                                      0.12            0.06
                   Finance, Insurance, Real Estate                   0.08            0.07
                   Transportation & Warehousing                      0.03            0.05
                   Educational & Health Services                     0.08            0.24
                   Hospitality & Food Services                       0.05            0.01
                   Displaced from AKM Firm in
                   Bottom quartile of firm pay premiums              0.09            0.03
                   Second quartile                                   0.18            0.15
                   Third quartile                                    0.23            0.29
                   Top quartile                                      0.50            0.53
                   Yearly Pre-Displaced Earnings
                   1-4 Quarters Before ($)                          49,689         59,444
                                                                   (39,550)       (38,585)
                   5-8 Quarters Before ($)                          49,343         58,616
                                                                   (37,226)       (38,595)
                   N                                                40,419        521,188
Note: Standard errors for earnings are expressed in parentheses. Reported industry shares do not sum to 1 due to
a small amount of the samples in other NAICS industries. Firm pay premiums refer to the premia or penalties for
a worker's log annual earnings associated with employment at a specific firm (relative to an omitted firm) and are
estimated via the AKM method. Earnings are inflation-adjusted to USD$2012 using the CPI-U.




                                                       33
                Table 2: Summary of Estimated Earnings Losses for Displaced Workers

                                                                          Q1      Q9-Q12      Q13-16
              A. All Workers
              Full losses (logs)                                        -0.335     -0.259      -0.252
              Loss attributable to foregone  FE                         -0.057     -0.056      -0.054
              Share attributable                                        19.6%      23.9%       23.8%

              B. All Workers except NAICS 51-56
              Full losses (logs)                                        -0.395     -0.262      -0.253
              Loss attributable to foregone  FE                         -0.069     -0.060      -0.059
              Share attributable                                        20.4%      25.3%       25.6%

              C. Manufacturing
              Full losses (logs)                                        -0.546     -0.376      -0.346
              Loss attributable to foregone  FE                         -0.186     -0.179      -0.182
              Share attributable                                        40.3%      52.4%       57.0%

              D. Displ. from top-quartile firm (any)
              Full losses (logs)                                        -0.409     -0.342      -0.340
              Loss attributable to foregone  FE                         -0.151     -0.164      -0.174
              Share attributable                                        41.8%      52.3%       55.4%

              E. Displ. from & re-empl. at top-quartile
              Full losses (logs)                                        -0.214     -0.191      -0.172
              Loss attributable to foregone  FE                         -0.023     -0.024      -0.022
              Share attributable                                        11.7%      13.7%       13.6%

              F. High-Tenure (6+ years)
              Full losses (logs)                                        -0.452     -0.374      -0.392
              Loss attributable to foregone  FE                         -0.083     -0.075      -0.079
              Share attributable                                        21.8%      23.3%       23.6%
Note: Each entry provides the estimated displacement effect on earnings in the quarter or range of quarters indicated.
For ranges, the mean of the corresponding point estimates are presented. All such point estimates are significant at
the p < 0.001 level. Estimates are based on equations 2 and 3. To calculate "share attributable" we convert logs to
percentages using  y % = exp( ) - 1 where  equals the mean of the log coefficients reported in the table. We then
take the quotient of the percent earnings change due to firm premiums and overall percent change in earnings.




                                                         34
                                    Figure 1: Earnings Profile of Displaced and Non-Displaced Workers

                                    18000


                                    16000
             Earnings Per Quarter




                                    14000


                                    12000


                                    10000


                                    8000

                                            -12    -8      -4       0         4       8      12         16
                                                         Quarter Relative to Displacement

                                                             Displaced          Non-Displaced


Note : This figure shows quarterly earnings profiles (2012 constant dollars) of workers displaced in Ohio between
2002Q1­2008Q4 (blue) and workers who remained at the same firm from 1999Q1­2012Q4 with no more than one
quarter of zero earnings (red). Earnings include observations of zero. Because the comparison group did not
experience displacement, for them the vertical bar denotes the median quarter of displacement for the treated group
(2005Q4)."




                                                                   35
         Figure 2: Regression-Adjusted Estimates of Earnings Losses due to Displacement


                                                       Log earnings

                             0



                            -.1
           Point estimate




                            -.2



                            -.3



                            -.4
                                  -2     -1         0         1        2                  3           4
                                               Year Relative to Displacement

Note: Figure shows estimated k s ­ logarithm of quarterly earnings lost due to displacement ­ based on equation 2
with the log of earnings as the dependent variable. Whiskers (which are very small) denote 95-percent confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Vertical line denotes quarter of displacement. Estimates for
k s for positive values of k are listed in Column 3 of Table B.2




                                                        36
         Figure 3: Estimated Displacement Losses due to Foregone Employer Fixed Effects


                                               Log earnings and Firm FE

                             0


                            -.1
           Point estimate




                            -.2


                            -.3


                            -.4
                                  -2      -1        0          1        2                  3            4
                                                Year Relative to Displacement

                                         log earnings                 firm fixed effect

Note: Figure plots the estimated k and k coefficients from equations 2 (blue) and 3 (red). Whiskers (which are
very small) denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Vertical line denotes
quarter of displacement. These estimates for positive values of k correspond to Columns 3-4 of Table B.2.




                                                         37
Figure 4: Estimated Displacement Effects on Earnings: Overall and due to Foregone Employer FE;
Six Years Tenure


                                              Log earnings and Firm FE
                             0


                            -.1
           Point estimate




                            -.2


                            -.3


                            -.4


                            -.5
                                  -2     -1         0          1        2                 3           4
                                                Year Relative to Displacement

                                        log earnings                firm fixed effect

Note: Figure plots the estimated k and k coefficients from modified versions of equations 2 (blue) and 3 (red) (see
text). Coefficients for -20  k  -9 not shown. Whiskers (which are very small) denote 95-percent confidence intervals
based on standard errors clustered by worker. Vertical line denotes quarter of displacement. These estimates for
positive values of k correspond to Columns 1 and 2 of Table B.4.




                                                        38
Figure 5: Earnings Losses due to Foregone Firm FE based on AKM Sample Selection: Ohio and
Washington Estimates

                                                                                          (a) Firm FE ^j on Earnings

                            log earnings due to firm premium        0




                                                               -.02




                                                               -.04




                                                               -.06
                                                                                 0               4             8           12     16      20
                                                                                                     Quarter Since Displacement

                                                                        Ohio: AKM Sample includes Comparison Group & Pre-Layoff DPL Workers
                                                                        Ohio: AKM Sample omits Comparison Group & DPL Workers
                                                                        Washington: AKM Sample omits Comparison Group & DPL Workers



                                                                                     (b) Share of Earnings Losses Explained
                    Share of Losses Explained by Firm FE (%)




                                                               25


                                                               20


                                                               15


                                                               10


                                                                5


                                                                0
                                                                             0               4                 8           12     16     20
                                                                                                     Quarter Since Displacement

                                                                         Ohio: AKM Sample includes Comparison & Pre-Layoff DPL Workers
                                                                         Ohio: AKM Sample omits Comparison & DPL Workers
                                                                         Washington: AKM Sample omits Comparison & DPL Workers



Note : The top panel plots  ^ k coefficients from equation (3). Corresponding point estimates are listed in Table A.4.
The bottom panel converts   ^ k and   ^k to percentages and takes the quotient, representing the share of earnings losses
attributable to forgone firm pay premium. 95% confidence intervals are not shown, but all point estimates for k > 0
are highly significant. Orange lines represent reported figures in Lachowska et al. (2018), who use Washington state
data and follow a similar approach.                        39
                                                 Figure 6: Average Layoff Firm Premium and Ohio Unemployment Rate

                                                       .1                                                             9.0
           Employer Pay Premium of Layoff Firm




                                                        0                                                             8.0




                                                                                                                            Unemployment Rate (%)
                                                      -.1                                                             7.0


                                                      -.2                                                             6.0


                                                      -.3                                                             5.0


                                                      -.4                                                             4.0
                                                            2003     2004     2005      2006    2007     2008
                                                            Unweighted Mean Layoff Pay Premium (left axis)
                                                            Employment-Weighted Mean Layoff Pay Premium (left axis)
                                                            Ohio Unemployment Rate (right axis)

Source: Authors' calculations from Ohio administrative data and Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Note : The blue solid line plots the four-quarter moving average of the estimated    ^j for all firms which experience a
mass layoff in a particular quarter between 2002q1 and 2008q4. The dashed blue line plots the four-quarter moving
average of the estimated   ^j for all firms which experience a mass layoff weighted by the firm's employment four
quarters prior to the quarter of layoff. The red line represents Ohio's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate plotted
at a quarterly frequency by averaging the monthly unemployment rate within a quarter.




                                                                                   40
Appendix A
In Appendix A, we discuss our application of AKM with the goal of obtaining firm-specific pay
premiums that can be used to infer displaced worker earnings losses attributable to forgone firm
rents. Section A.1 provides a more in-depth discussion of AKM and identifying assumptions. Section
A.2 discusses the implications of sample selection for the groups of workers and firms on which AKM
is run. This section also provides variance decompositions and regression table output for various
AKM sample selection.


A.1     AKM Overview
AKM's methodology can be applied to employer-employee matched datasets with the intention of
provide further explanatory power in the model of worker earnings. The approach, which exploits
movement of workers between firms, is typically estimated on a seven-year panel (Bloom et al., 2018;
Song et al., 2018). In our setting, however, a lengthier (13-year) panel is appropriate. We use the
JLS-AKM framework described in section 3.3 which requires constant firm premiums throughout the
panel so to infer the earnings losses due to firm premiums that accrue to workers after displacement.
    Beyond sufficient movement of workers between firms, the of the firm fixed effects estimated
from equation (1) rely critically on sufficient movement of workers between firms. Beyond employer-
switching, one can only interpret estimated firm effects with true firm-specific differences pay policies
if underlying assumptions of additive separability and conditional random mobility are met.
    Additive separability requires that upwardly and downwardly mobile job movers have a proportional
markup or markdown. We find plausible evidence for additive separability by examining changes
in mean log earnings of upwardly and downwardly mobile workers in Figure A.1. We follow Card
et al. (2013) by categorizing firms into four quartiles based on ^j . Clearly, employer identity matters
for earnings determination of workers that change firms: the same workers who move from lower-
quartile to higher-quartile firms, despite having the same fixed skills, receive an earnings boost. The
most upwardly mobile workers experience larger earnings increases than less upwardly-mobile ones,
and likewise the most downwardly mobile workers exhibit earnings penalties of greater magnitudes
than the less-downwardly mobile.
    The second assumption of conditional random mobility (CRM), sometimes called exogenous
mobility, rules out job sorting based on individual shocks, firm shocks, and match components. For
example, if worker i moves from firm j1 to firm j2 , CRM requires i) symmetry about zero

                                E[yit |j1  j2 ] = -E[yit |j2  j1 ]

(where yit is earnings) and ii) no pre or post-trends during before or after job change

                                         E[yit |Stayer] = 0



                                                 41
Symmetry about zero is evident in Figure A.1. For example, workers who transition from the
lowest-quartile  (Q1) firms to the highest-quartile  (Q4) firms experience a 90 average log point
increase in their earnings. Conversely, workers who move from Q4 to Q1 employers exhibit a 95 log
point drop in earnings. Those who move from top or bottom firm to Q2 or Q3 firms likewise exhibit
symmetric changes that are smaller in magnitude compared the most upwardly or downwardly
mobile job changers. Further, movers in Figure A.1 exhibit a lack of pre and post-trends in mean
log earnings, with little change for workers who switch firms in the year before their transition and
between their first and second year at the destination firm. See Card et al. (2018) for an in-depth
discussion of the complications involved in satisfying CRM.
    Lastly, while the AKM approach excels in settings with two-sided unobserved heterogeneity,
we are also well-aware of the model's shortcomings. AKM is a necessarily static model, meaning
worker mobility does not depend on earnings conditional on worker or firm heterogeneity. AKM also
cannot consider worker tenure in explaining wages. Further, the degree of sorting between workers
and firms may be understated because the sampling error in the firm and worker fixed effects are
negatively correlated. Bonhomme et al. (2019) and Lentz et al. (2018) propose frameworks to
obviate these concerns while still leveraging the benefits of employer-employee matched data.


A.2     AKM Sample Selection
In the vast majority of papers which use AKM, equation (1) is estimated on the entire sample
of workers and firms in the connected set. However, the aim of this paper is to study displaced
workers who exhibit substantial wage scarring after job loss. When AKM is run on a sample that
includes displaced workers for all years they are present in the panel, the earnings of displaced
workers, unlike typical workers, are not additive in their worker and firm fixed effect after they
separate from their layoff employer. For example, a worker laid off from a bottom-quartile firm who
finds re-employment at a top-quartile firm receives an average pay increase of only 55 log points
upon movement. However, the earnings of a displaced worker moving in the opposite direction with
respect to firm pay premiums drop by 90 log points. This suggests displaced worker earnings after
displacement are characterized by equation (1) where the error term ijt is not conditional mean
zero. Thus, displaced worker earnings in post-layoff periods should be omitted from any potential
AKM sample.
    Both our paper and Lachowska et al. (2018) omit post-layoff year-worker observations for
displaced workers from the AKM sample. Thus, both approaches plausibly satisfy AKM's identifying
assumptions. However, Lachowska et al. (2018) also choose to omit both displaced workers altogether
and comparison workers (used in the difference-in-difference model) from the sample on which they
run AKM. We opt against this restriction for reasons provided in subsection 4.3.2.
    Below we provide numerous tables of variance decompositions and regression-adjusted estimates
that use alternative AKM sample selections instead of our own preferred sample. These results and
figures serve as a robustness check for our results by examining sensitivity to AKM sample selection.


                                                 42
A.3     Negative Selection of Displaced Workers shown with AKM
In this section, we illustrate that displaced workers are negatively selected and that their omission
in the AKM sample systematically changes the premium estimate        ^j for firms that lay off workers.
    First, Figure A.2 presents a binscatter of the average change in a firm's employment against
that firm's average worker quality. Firm j 's average worker quality is defined as
                                                           Njt
                                         ¯            1
                                         ^ j (i,t) =             ^ i(j,t)
                                                     Njt   i=1


where Njt is the number of employees at firm j in time t and    ^ i(j,t) is the estimated individual fixed
effect of worker i at firm j in time t. The individual fixed effects are estimated from equation (1)
on the sample described in section 2. As firms in Ohio contract by 30% or more in a year, their
average worker quality increases, meaning the workers who were shed had lower estimated fixed
effects. This implies displaced workers are negatively selected on ability.
    We believe this negative selection explains why pay premium estimates for the same firm vary
substantially depending on the AKM sample restrictions described in Appendix A.2. In Table A.5,
we compare how the estimated mean firm pay premium        ^j of "mass layoff firms" changes depending
on the AKM sample. For completeness, we provide results for four different definitions of mass
layoff firms, described in the table notes.
    Table A.5 illustrates several features about different firm premium estimates that arise from
AKM. First, regardless of AKM sample and definition of mass layoff firm, "layoff firms" have
larger estimated firm premiums than employers that do not lay off workers. Second, pay premium
estimates for layoff firms are always higher in our preferred sample (AKM I) than in a sample
which omits displaced workers but keeps comparison workers (AKM II). This suggests that by not
including negatively-selected displaced workers, AKM underestimates the value of pay premiums for
layoff firms but they are only identified by a positively-selected subsample of the firm's employees.
    Because the average estimated pay premium for non-layoff firms also changes slightly depending
on the AKM sample, the last column of the table reports the difference        ^M L - ^non-M L to underscore
                                                                               j      j
that lay off firms always have a higher estimated firm-specific pay premium under AKM sample I
compared to AKM sample II. The difference in firm premiums depending on AKM sample illustrated
in Table A.5 ultimately explains why the regression-adjusted estimates equation (3) vary by AKM
sample (see Figure 5a).
    It should be noted that while Table A.5 compares our preferred AKM sample to one that omits
displaced workers entirely but keeps comparison workers, the figures in the main body compare
results from our sample to an AKM sample that omits both displaced and comparison workers.
This is because in Table A.5, we seek to isolate the "marginal effect" of omitting displaced workers
from AKM on the resulting estimated firm premiums for employers that lay off workers. However,
when we compare our preferred sample to one that omits both displaced and comparison workers,
the same relationship holds.

                                                     43
       Table A.1: Summary Statistics for Full Panel and Largest AKM Connected Set

    Full Sample                                  Full annualized panel       Largest connected set
    Number of worker-year observations                        58,214,004                  51,139,118

    Number of workers                                           7,374,993                   6,577,019
    Number of employers                                           343,475                     301,733
    Number of movers                                            4,206,119                   3,967,005
    Log earnings (mean)                                            10.484                      10.485
    Source: Author's tabulations of Ohio administrative earnings records, 1999-2012




Table A.2: Variance Decomposition of Log Earnings AKM Model into Components By Sample

                   Includes         Total   Worker         Employer       Year
Sample           Disp Comp         Variance FE ()           FE ()        FE ( )     2cov(,)        Resid
Ohio
AKM I                                0.610       0.310        0.149       0.001       0.033        0.117
                                                 0.509        0.244       0.002       0.055        0.191
AKM II                               0.611       0.311        0.149       0.001       0.034        0.116
                                                 0.509        0.244       0.002       0.056        0.190
AKM III                              0.623       0.305        0.154       0.001       0.036        0.127
                                                 0.490        0.248       0.002       0.058        0.204
Washington
LMW (2018)                           0.596       0.309        0.123       0.004       0.101        0.064
                                                 0.519        0.207       0.006       0.169        0.107
Source: Authors' tabulations of Ohio administrative earnings records, 1999-2012, as well as reported
decomposition estimates reported in the Appendix by Lachowska et al. (2018).
Note: The variance estimates arise from the estimated coefficients obtained by estimating equation 1 on the
universe of workers in the largest AKM connected set subject to different sample restrictions. Specifically,
whether observations for the comparison group or displaced workers (before displacement) described in
section 3.2 are included when estimating AKM via equation 1. The share of the variance explained by each
component is denoted in italics below its listed variance. The decompositions also include covariances
between worker and employer fixed effects and year fixed effects. Since they explain around 1 percent of the
variation, they are omitted from the table. Lachowska et al. (2018)'s sample covers 2002-2014, while ours
cover 1999-2012.




                                                     44
Table A.3: Displacement Effects on Earnings and Firm Effects: ^j Estimated via AKM without Pre-Layoff
Displaced Workers but Including Comparison Group (Sample II)

                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
                                       Log earnings    log earnings   Log earnings    log earnings
         Quarter since displacement
         0                               -0.159        0.00133         -0.165          0.000533
                                         (0.0038)       (0.0004)       (0.0038)        (0.0004)
         1                               -0.309        -0.0392         -0.317         -0.0401
                                         (0.0054)       (0.0018)       (0.0054)        (0.0018)
         2                               -0.213        -0.0251         -0.220         -0.0260
                                         (0.0040)       (0.0014)       (0.0040)        (0.0014)
         3                               -0.301        -0.0457         -0.309         -0.0468
                                         (0.0050)       (0.0017)       (0.0050)        (0.0017)
         4                               -0.213        -0.0366         -0.221         -0.0377
                                         (0.0039)       (0.0015)       (0.0039)        (0.0015)
         5                               -0.186        -0.0343         -0.195         -0.0356
                                         (0.0038)       (0.0015)       (0.0038)        (0.0015)
         6                               -0.250        -0.0385         -0.260         -0.0398
                                         (0.0042)       (0.0017)       (0.0042)        (0.0017)
         7                               -0.200        -0.0349         -0.210         -0.0362
                                         (0.0040)       (0.0016)       (0.0040)        (0.0016)
         8                               -0.210        -0.0347         -0.221         -0.0361
                                         (0.0038)       (0.0016)       (0.0038)        (0.0016)
         9                               -0.192        -0.0343         -0.203         -0.0358
                                         (0.0039)       (0.0016)       (0.0039)        (0.0016)
         10                              -0.221        -0.0347         -0.232         -0.0362
                                         (0.0038)       (0.0016)       (0.0038)        (0.0016)
         11                              -0.198        -0.0338         -0.209         -0.0353
                                         (0.0041)       (0.0016)       (0.0041)        (0.0016)
         12                              -0.198        -0.0324         -0.210         -0.0340
                                         (0.0039)       (0.0016)       (0.0039)        (0.0016)
         13                              -0.231        -0.0368         -0.243         -0.0385
                                         (0.0043)       (0.0018)       (0.0043)        (0.0018)
         14                              -0.237        -0.0381         -0.249         -0.0399
                                         (0.0044)       (0.0019)       (0.0043)        (0.0019)
         15                              -0.219        -0.0328         -0.231         -0.0346
                                         (0.0044)       (0.0017)       (0.0044)        (0.0017)
         16                              -0.216        -0.0314         -0.228         -0.0332
                                         (0.0040)       (0.0017)       (0.0039)        (0.0017)
         Pre-Displacement Earnings          No             No             Yes             Yes
         Observations                    30855435      30807334        30855435       30807334
         Standard errors in parentheses
         
           p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001



                                                      45
Table A.4: Displacement Effects on Earnings and Firm Effects: ^j Estimated via AKM without Pre-Layoff
Displaced Workers or Comparison Group (Sample III)

                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
                                       Log earnings    log earnings   Log earnings    log earnings
         Quarter since displacement
         0                                -0.186       -0.00162         -0.192        -0.00245
                                          (0.0045)       (0.0005)       (0.0045)        (0.0005)
         1                                -0.327        -0.0400         -0.335         -0.0409
                                          (0.0055)       (0.0019)       (0.0055)        (0.0019)
         2                                -0.259        -0.0356         -0.267         -0.0366
                                          (0.0047)       (0.0018)       (0.0047)        (0.0018)
         3                                -0.293        -0.0394         -0.302         -0.0405
                                          (0.0050)       (0.0018)       (0.0050)        (0.0018)
         4                                -0.234        -0.0382         -0.244         -0.0394
                                          (0.0044)       (0.0018)       (0.0044)        (0.0018)
         5                                -0.248        -0.0370         -0.258         -0.0382
                                          (0.0043)       (0.0018)       (0.0043)        (0.0018)
         6                                -0.258        -0.0364         -0.268         -0.0377
                                          (0.0043)       (0.0018)       (0.0043)        (0.0018)
         7                                -0.245        -0.0376         -0.257         -0.0390
                                          (0.0045)       (0.0018)       (0.0045)        (0.0018)
         8                                -0.237        -0.0374         -0.249         -0.0388
                                          (0.0043)       (0.0018)       (0.0043)        (0.0018)
         9                                -0.257        -0.0369         -0.269         -0.0384
                                          (0.0044)       (0.0019)       (0.0044)        (0.0019)
         10                               -0.253        -0.0371         -0.265         -0.0387
                                          (0.0044)       (0.0019)       (0.0043)        (0.0019)
         11                               -0.243        -0.0362         -0.256         -0.0378
                                          (0.0046)       (0.0019)       (0.0046)        (0.0019)
         12                               -0.229        -0.0340         -0.242         -0.0356
                                          (0.0044)       (0.0019)       (0.0044)        (0.0019)
         13                               -0.244        -0.0340         -0.256         -0.0357
                                          (0.0046)       (0.0020)       (0.0045)        (0.0020)
         14                               -0.249        -0.0345         -0.262         -0.0363
                                          (0.0046)       (0.0020)       (0.0045)        (0.0020)
         15                               -0.245        -0.0340         -0.258         -0.0358
                                          (0.0049)       (0.0020)       (0.0048)        (0.0020)
         16                               -0.216        -0.0332         -0.229         -0.0350
                                          (0.0045)       (0.0020)       (0.0045)        (0.0020)
         Pre-Displacement Earnings           No             No             Yes             Yes
         Observations                    30,627,047    30,545,348      30,627,047     30,545,348
         Standard errors in parentheses
         
           p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001



                                                      46
          Table A.5: Firm-Specific Pay Premium Comparison by AKM Regression Sample

                                Includes           M. Layoff Firms                   Mean ^       ML - Non-ML
                                                                                                            ¯
                                                                                                            ^
                             Disp     Comp           N      Share Q4         Non-ML       ML Firm   Diff in 
 A. Ever Had Layoff
   AKM I                                           6,578        0.268         -0.2251       -0.1729          0.0522
   AKM II                                          6,328        0.253         -0.2243       -0.1960          0.0283

 B. Multiple Layoffs
   AKM I                                           6,522        0.268         -0.2251       -0.1741          0.0510
   AKM II                                          6,273        0.252         -0.2243       -0.1975          0.0268

 C. Only 2008 layoffs
   AKM I                                             75         0.307         -0.2251       -0.0863          0.1388
   AKM II                                            74         0.306         -0.2243       -0.0931          0.1312

 D. Manufacturing
   AKM I                                            644         0.407         -0.2251       0.0313           0.2564
   AKM II                                           625         0.376         -0.2243       0.0048           0.2291
Note : Results are obtained running AKM (equation 1) on two samples. AKM Sample I ­ our preferred sample ­ is the
largest connected set of all non-displaced workers and displaced workers during the years before their displacement.
AKM Sample II is the largest connected set that omits displaced workers entirely, however the sample includes
workers used in the comparison group used in equation 2 for difference-in-difference methodology. The first two
columns list the number of layoff firms and the share of these layoff firms that are top-quartile (Q4) pay premium
firms. Column 3 and 4 show the mean     ^j of non-layoff firms and layoff firms, respectively. The fifth and final column
expresses the difference between column 4 and column 3. A "layoff firm" assumes a different definition in each panel.
Panel A compares the mean value of     ^j non-layoff firms to firms that ever laid off workers between 2002 and 2008.
Panel B compares non-layoff firms to firms that had multiple layoffs during 2002-2008. Panel C compares non-layoff
firms to firms whose first layoff came in 2008. Panel D compares non-layoff firms to manufacturing firms that had
layoffs in 2002-2008.




                                                           47
Figure A.1: Mean Log Earnings of Movers Classified by Quartile of Firm Effects () for Origin and
Destination Firms


                                         11
          Mean log earnings of movers




                                        10.8

                                        10.6

                                        10.4

                                        10.2

                                         10

                                         9.8

                                         9.6

                                         9.4
                                               -2                -1                    0                     1
                                                           Years since new job (0 = first year)

                                                    Q1 to Q1      Q1 to Q2         Q1 to Q3       Q1 to Q4
                                                    Q4 to Q1      Q4 to Q2         Q4 to Q3       Q4 to Q4

Note : This figure shows mean yearly earnings of workers observed in 1999-2012 in Ohio who changed jobs in the
interval and both the preceding job and new job for two or more years. Jobs are classified into quartiles of firm fixed
effects based on the estimation of the AKM model.




                                                                       48
                              Figure A.2: Change in Average Worker Quality




Note : This figure shows the percentage change of average employee fixed effect by firm growth rates for firms in the
Ohio administrative data. Growth rate bins are five percentage points in width between -25% and 25%, and ten
otherwise. The sample consists of all firms with size > 30. Firm growth rates and percentage changes in average
worker quality are yearly.




                                                         49
Appendix B
In Appendix B, we describe our displaced sample in further detail (B.1) and subject our estimates to
a battery of sensitivity tests (B.2). Lastly, we combine our displaced worker earnings loss estimates
from Section 4 and previous research with information on hours worked to estimate the role of firm
premiums in hourly wage scarring (B.3).


B.1     Supplemental Displaced Worker Information
Table B.1 summarizes earnings and industry variables for all displaced workers by quartile of
layoff firm pay premium. 34% of all displaced workers who separate from an upper-quartile fixed
effect employer come from manufacturing. The administrative sample lacks information on firm's
unionization status. However, according to the Current Population Survey, Ohio had the nation's
fourth highest manufacturing unionization rate (23.7%) in 2002, potentially contributing to their
large representation among firms with high pay premiums. At the low end, one-third of employees
from a bottom quartile-paying firm separated from hospitality and food services and another one-
fourth in retail. However, as Table 1 in the body of the paper notes, these workers from the
lowest-paying firms comprise only a small share of the overall displaced sample.
    The second panel of Table B.1 displays the average displaced worker pre-earnings by AKM
quartile firms, demonstrating the predictable pattern that workers at higher AKM quartile firms
earn more. The numbers underscore the magnitude of the earnings differences across quartiles. One
year before displacement, the average sample individual at a top quartile firm earns $25,000 more
per year than that of someone at a second quartile firm.
    Besides unionization in manufacturing, there are other plausible explanations for the substantial
variation between mean earnings of workers displaced from different quartile firms. In a monopsonistic
wage setting model like that from Robinson (1969), different employer wage premiums arise because
more profitable firms that seek to hire more workers must pay higher wages to do so. Lastly, the
positive covariance between worker and firm fixed effects shown in Appendix Table A.2 reflects
sorting patterns between higher-paying firms and workers of higher ability, educational attainment,
or occupational skill.
    Separately, in Table B.2, we provide the point estimates and standard errors that accompany
Figure 3 for the time of displacement and sixteen quarters thereafter. Although the regression
estimates the effect of displacement on earnings for the eight quarters preceding displacement,
these coefficients are not included in the table.
    Figure B.1 displays the estimated coefficients and standard errors for the following specification:
                                                             16
                       empit = i + t + Wit 1 + Xijt 2 +            k · Ditk + it                  (4)
                                                            k=-8


The right-hand side of equation (4) is identical to that of equation (2). On the left-hand side is an

                                                 50
indicator for whether worker i is employed in time t. The resulting ^k 's are interpreted as the effect
of displacement on a worker's probability of employment k quarters relative to their separation.




        Table B.1: Descriptive Statistics: Displaced Workers by Layoff Firm Pay Premium

                                               Quartile of Layoff Firm by Pay Premium
                                                Lowest       2nd        3rd      Highest
            Industry of Layoff Firm
            Construction, Utilities, Mining       0.02      0.05       0.11        0.16
            Manufacturing                         0.02      0.04       0.35        0.42
            Retail Trade                          0.26      0.35       0.04        0.04
            Transportation & Warehousing          0.01      0.04       0.04        0.02
            Finance, Insurance, Real Estate       0.02      0.02       0.05        0.14
            Educational & Health Services         0.01      0.08       0.20        0.04
            Hospitality & Food Services           0.33      0.08       0.00        0.00
            Other Industries                      0.30      0.34       0.21        0.18
            Total                                 1.00      1.00       1.00        1.00
            Yearly Pre-Displaced Earnings
            1-4 Quarters Before ($)             25,047     33,651     44,388      62,492
                                               (22,024)   (28,733)   (32,083)    (43,528)
            5-8 Quarters Before ($)             25,386     34,240     44,712      61,366
                                               (21,875)   (29,071)   (30,748)    (40,097)
            N                                    3,606      7,455      9,323      20,104




                                                  51
      Table B.2: Effects of Displacement on Earnings and AKM Firm Fixed Effects

                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
                              Log earnings    log earnings   Log earnings    log earnings
Quarter since displacement
0                                -0.186       -0.00120         -0.193        -0.00209
                                 (0.0045)      (0.0005)        (0.0045)        (0.0005)
1                                -0.327       -0.0564          -0.335         -0.0574
                                 (0.0055)      (0.0018)        (0.0055)        (0.0018)
2                                -0.259       -0.0523          -0.268         -0.0533
                                 (0.0047)      (0.0018)        (0.0047)        (0.0018)
3                                -0.294       -0.0562          -0.303         -0.0573
                                 (0.0050)      (0.0017)        (0.0050)        (0.0017)
4                                -0.234       -0.0550          -0.244         -0.0563
                                 (0.0044)      (0.0017)        (0.0044)        (0.0017)
5                                -0.248       -0.0544          -0.258         -0.0557
                                 (0.0043)      (0.0018)        (0.0043)        (0.0018)
6                                -0.258       -0.0537          -0.269         -0.0551
                                 (0.0043)      (0.0018)        (0.0043)        (0.0018)
7                                -0.246       -0.0555          -0.257         -0.0569
                                 (0.0045)      (0.0018)        (0.0045)        (0.0018)
8                                -0.237       -0.0554          -0.249         -0.0569
                                 (0.0043)      (0.0018)        (0.0043)        (0.0018)
9                                -0.257       -0.0552          -0.269         -0.0568
                                 (0.0044)      (0.0018)        (0.0044)        (0.0018)
10                               -0.253       -0.0553          -0.265         -0.0570
                                 (0.0044)      (0.0019)        (0.0043)        (0.0018)
11                               -0.244       -0.0545          -0.257         -0.0562
                                 (0.0046)      (0.0019)        (0.0046)        (0.0019)
12                               -0.230       -0.0525          -0.243         -0.0542
                                 (0.0044)      (0.0019)        (0.0044)        (0.0019)
13                               -0.244       -0.0526          -0.257         -0.0545
                                 (0.0046)      (0.0019)        (0.0045)        (0.0019)
14                               -0.249       -0.0534          -0.262         -0.0553
                                 (0.0046)      (0.0020)        (0.0045)        (0.0020)
15                               -0.245       -0.0529          -0.258         -0.0549
                                 (0.0049)      (0.0020)        (0.0048)        (0.0019)
16                               -0.216       -0.0513          -0.230         -0.0532
                                 (0.0045)      (0.0020)        (0.0045)        (0.0020)
Pre-Displacement Earnings           No            No              Yes             Yes
Observations                    30,628,063    30,585,770      30,628,063     30,585,770
Standard errors in parentheses

  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001



                                             52
                    Figure B.1: Effects of Displacement on Probability of Employment


                                                   Pr(earnings > 0)
                   .1



                    0
  Point estimate




                   -.1



                   -.2



                   -.3
                         -2           -1          0          1        2                          3              4
                                              Year Relative to Displacement


Note : This plots the point estimates for equation 4. The results are interpreted as the causal effect of displacement
on probability of being employed in the k th quarter after separation.




                                                         53
     Figure B.2: Histogram of Displaced Workers by AKM Quartile (Origin/Destination Firm)


             .3


            .25


             .2
  Density




            .15


             .1


            .05


             0
                  10              20             30             40                                             50
                          Type of Mover (Displaced Worker) by AKM Quartile


Note : Histogram plots the share of displaced workers who belong to one of sixteen potential bins that represent their
movement between AKM quartile firms. The possible values ­ 11-14, 21-24, 31-34, 41-44 ­ refer to the firm quartile
of a worker's origin and destination firm during displacement. For example, the bar over the number 42 represents
the share of all displaced workers who separated from a Q4 firm and were next re-employed at a Q2 firm (about 9%
of the sample). Histogram only considers movement between a displaced workers layoff firm and next firm at which
she works, even if she changes employers many times.




                                                         54
B.2     Alternative Displaced Worker Sample Construction
We test the sensitivity of our long-run earnings loss estimates and whether they are explained by
lost firm-specific pay premiums to alternative constructions of the displaced sample.

B.2.1   Post-displacement attachment

Our main results follow past literature by restricting the displaced sample to workers with positive
earnings in each post-layoff calendar year. Because our administrative data report earnings at
a quarterly frequency, this approach effectively conditions on 25% or greater post-displacement
attachment. For robustness, we impose more stringent post-layoff attachment requirements on
the displaced sample and compare baselines estimates of overall earnings loss estimates (25%
attachment) from equation (2) to samples with positive earnings in 50%, 75%, and 90% of post-
displacement quarters (Figure B.3). Earnings losses become smaller with higher post-displacement
attachment requirements, consistent with the idea that more highly-attached workers are less likely
to suffer subsequent unemployment spells which may dampen earnings (Carrington and Fallick,
2017).
    We then test whether more stringent attachment requirements also decrease earnings losses
attributable to forgone firm pay premiums. Table B.3 presents the estimated coefficients on
displacement dummies for equations (2) and (3) for displaced samples with 50% and 75% post-layoff
attachment. Figure B.4 plots the coefficients for equation (3) in the top panel and the share of total
losses explained by firm premiums in the bottom panel. Despite considerably different attachment
requirements, we consistently find that forfeited firm premiums explain roughly one-quarter of total
long-run earnings losses.

B.2.2   Pre-displacement tenure

As discussed in section 4, while our main results use a displaced sample with at least three years
tenure at the layoff firm, many studies impose a tenure requirement of six years. Figure 4 in the
body of the paper shows longer tenure requirements increase the magnitude of both overall losses
and losses due to firm premiums. The share of total earnings losses explained by firm premiums,
however, is very similar to our baseline estimates (24% after four years). Point estimates and
standard errors for Figure 4 are reported in Table B.4.

B.2.3   Displacement industry

Eight percent of displaced workers in the Ohio sample separate from firms in finance, insurance, and
real estate (FIRE), industries which have a relatively high probability of displacement despite their
relatively small size (Podgursky, 1992; Farber et al., 1993). We apply the JLS-AKM framework to
the non-FIRE group of displaced and comparison workers, illustrated in Table B.5 and Figure B.5a.



                                                 55
Similarly, we isolate displaced manufacturing employees (30 percent of the displaced sample) and
estimate their earnings losses. These results are presented in Table B.6 and Figure B.5b.

B.2.4   Displacement from top AKM quartile firms

Lastly, we study displaced workers who separate from a "top-quartile firm," meaning an employer
in the top 25% of all firms according to their estimated firm pay premium          ^j . This group of
individuals, roughly half of the total displaced sample, potentially had "the most to lose" from a
layoff. Predictably, these workers exhibit large, sustained long-run losses in the long-run (34 log
points), more than half of which can be explained by forfeited firm pay premiums. Point estimates
and standard errors are provided for this group in the first two columns of Table B.7 and are graphed
in Figure B.6a.
    Roughly one-quarter of the displaced sample separates from a top-quartile firm but finds re-
employment at a separate top-quartile firm (Figure B.2). Thus, we apply the JLS-AKM framework
to this smaller subset. Results are listed in the third and fourth columns of Table B.7 and are
graphed in Figure B.6b. Unsurprisingly, this group's long-run earnings losses are smaller than the
overall sample (just 17 log points). 14% of these losses are explained by lower firm premiums at
post-layoff employers, suggesting even the luckiest displaced workers still systematically move to
lower- ^j firms.




                                                 56
Table B.3: Estimated Effects of Displacement on Earnings and AKM Fixed Effects by Post-Layoff Attachment

                                        50% post-layoff attachment    75% post-layoff attachment
                                       Log earnings  log earnings    Log earnings  log earnings
         Quarter since displacement
         0                                -0.128        -0.00108       -0.108        -0.00016
                                          (0.0047)       (0.0005)      (0.0050)      (0.0005)
         1                                -0.297       -0.0503         -0.283       -0.0489
                                          (0.0059)       (0.0020)      (0.0063)      (0.0022)
         2                                -0.224       -0.0444         -0.207       -0.0417
                                          (0.0049)       (0.0019)      (0.0052)      (0.0021)
         3                                -0.242       -0.0489         -0.218       -0.0458
                                          (0.0050)       (0.0019)      (0.0052)      (0.0020)
         4                                -0.188       -0.0466         -0.165       -0.0431
                                          (0.0046)       (0.0019)      (0.0047)      (0.0021)
         5                                -0.177       -0.0426         -0.152       -0.0389
                                          (0.0042)       (0.0019)      (0.0044)      (0.0021)
         6                                -0.185       -0.0389         -0.161       -0.0345
                                          (0.0043)       (0.0019)      (0.0045)      (0.0021)
         7                                -0.161       -0.0402         -0.135       -0.0357
                                          (0.0042)       (0.0019)      (0.0044)      (0.0021)
         8                                -0.155       -0.0391         -0.129       -0.0342
                                          (0.0042)       (0.0020)      (0.0044)      (0.0021)
         9                                -0.173       -0.0380         -0.142       -0.0324
                                          (0.0044)       (0.0020)      (0.0045)      (0.0021)
         10                               -0.172       -0.0380         -0.140       -0.0322
                                          (0.0042)       (0.0020)      (0.0044)      (0.0021)
         11                               -0.147       -0.0372         -0.113       -0.0317
                                          (0.0042)       (0.0020)      (0.0043)      (0.0021)
         12                               -0.145       -0.0355         -0.116       -0.0307
                                          (0.0042)       (0.0020)      (0.0043)      (0.0022)
         13                               -0.164       -0.0349         -0.126       -0.0297
                                          (0.0045)       (0.0020)      (0.0046)      (0.0022)
         14                               -0.169       -0.0356         -0.124       -0.0298
                                          (0.0045)       (0.0021)      (0.0044)      (0.0022)
         15                               -0.157       -0.0352         -0.107       -0.0287
                                          (0.0045)       (0.0021)      (0.0045)      (0.0022)
         16                               -0.142       -0.0330        -0.0944       -0.0267
                                          (0.0044)       (0.0021)      (0.0044)      (0.0022)
         Observations                    30,411,853    30,371,030     30,293,947    30,253,909
         Standard errors in parentheses
         
           p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001




                                                      57
Table B.4: Effects of Displacement on Earnings and AKM Firm FE: Displaced Workers with 6+ Years Tenure

                                                         (1)             (2)
                                                     Log earnings    log earnings
                       Quarter since displacement
                       0                                -0.280       0.000776
                                                        (0.0107)       (0.0002)
                       1                                -0.452        -0.0825
                                                        (0.0133)       (0.0042)
                       2                                -0.340        -0.0655
                                                        (0.0102)       (0.0037)
                       3                                -0.440        -0.0721
                                                        (0.0122)       (0.0036)
                       4                                -0.346        -0.0694
                                                        (0.0099)       (0.0037)
                       5                                -0.373        -0.0737
                                                        (0.0094)       (0.0038)
                       6                                -0.378        -0.0645
                                                        (0.0096)       (0.0039)
                       7                                -0.418        -0.0731
                                                        (0.0116)       (0.0039)
                       8                                -0.378        -0.0756
                                                        (0.0098)       (0.0040)
                       9                                -0.367        -0.0749
                                                        (0.0096)       (0.0040)
                       10                               -0.367        -0.0752
                                                        (0.0093)       (0.0039)
                       11                               -0.399        -0.0761
                                                        (0.0113)       (0.0040)
                       12                               -0.362        -0.0750
                                                        (0.0094)       (0.0041)
                       13                               -0.383        -0.0780
                                                        (0.0100)       (0.0043)
                       14                               -0.373        -0.0791
                                                        (0.0100)       (0.0043)
                       15                               -0.442        -0.0803
                                                        (0.0127)       (0.0043)
                       16                               -0.368        -0.0803
                                                        (0.0099)       (0.0042)
                       Pre-Displacement Earnings           Yes            Yes
                       Observations                    29,818,250    29,780,376
                       Standard errors in parentheses
                       
                         p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001



                                                     58
Table B.5: Estimated Displacement Effects on Earnings and AKM Fixed Effects, Excluding Workers from NAICS
51-56

                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
                                       Log earnings    log earnings   Log earnings    log earnings
         Quarter since displacement
         0                                -0.228       0.000991         -0.236        -0.0000339
                                          (0.0051)      (0.0005)        (0.0051)        (0.0005)
         1                                -0.395       -0.0689          -0.405         -0.0701
                                          (0.0066)      (0.0022)        (0.0066)        (0.0022)
         2                                -0.279       -0.0610          -0.289         -0.0623
                                          (0.0055)      (0.0021)        (0.0055)        (0.0021)
         3                                -0.319       -0.0629          -0.330         -0.0643
                                          (0.0058)      (0.0020)        (0.0058)        (0.0020)
         4                                -0.271       -0.0618          -0.283         -0.0632
                                          (0.0050)      (0.0020)        (0.0050)        (0.0020)
         5                                -0.281       -0.0612          -0.294         -0.0628
                                          (0.0050)      (0.0020)        (0.0050)        (0.0020)
         6                                -0.278       -0.0590          -0.292         -0.0607
                                          (0.0051)      (0.0021)        (0.0050)        (0.0021)
         7                                -0.265       -0.0614          -0.279         -0.0632
                                          (0.0052)      (0.0021)        (0.0052)        (0.0021)
         8                                -0.267       -0.0614          -0.281         -0.0632
                                          (0.0050)      (0.0021)        (0.0050)        (0.0021)
         9                                -0.280       -0.0603          -0.296         -0.0623
                                          (0.0051)      (0.0021)        (0.0050)        (0.0021)
         10                               -0.265       -0.0607          -0.280         -0.0627
                                          (0.0050)      (0.0021)        (0.0050)        (0.0021)
         11                               -0.255       -0.0603          -0.271         -0.0623
                                          (0.0053)      (0.0022)        (0.0053)        (0.0021)
         12                               -0.246       -0.0584          -0.262         -0.0606
                                          (0.0050)      (0.0022)        (0.0050)        (0.0022)
         13                               -0.265       -0.0597          -0.281         -0.0620
                                          (0.0052)      (0.0022)        (0.0052)        (0.0022)
         14                               -0.260       -0.0598          -0.276         -0.0621
                                          (0.0052)      (0.0023)        (0.0052)        (0.0023)
         15                               -0.256       -0.0585          -0.273         -0.0609
                                          (0.0056)      (0.0023)        (0.0056)        (0.0022)
         16                               -0.231       -0.0578          -0.248         -0.0602
                                          (0.0051)      (0.0023)        (0.0050)        (0.0023)
         Pre-Displacement Earnings           No            No              Yes             Yes
         Observations                    23,895,853    23,864,070      23,895,853     23,864,070
         Standard errors in parentheses
         
           p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001



                                                      59
Table B.6: Estimated Displacement Effects on Earnings and AKM FE, Manufacturing Only

                                                 (1)             (2)
                                             Log earnings    log earnings
               Quarter since displacement
               0                               -0.270        0.00821
                                                (0.0092)      (0.0006)
               1                               -0.546         -0.186
                                                (0.0113)      (0.0034)
               2                               -0.390         -0.178
                                                (0.0100)      (0.0032)
               3                               -0.444         -0.171
                                                (0.0107)      (0.0031)
               4                               -0.395         -0.175
                                                (0.0087)      (0.0032)
               5                               -0.387         -0.179
                                                (0.0082)      (0.0032)
               6                               -0.396         -0.167
                                                (0.0084)      (0.0034)
               7                               -0.432         -0.184
                                                (0.0097)      (0.0033)
               8                               -0.423         -0.186
                                                (0.0084)      (0.0033)
               9                               -0.393         -0.179
                                                (0.0082)      (0.0033)
               10                              -0.367         -0.179
                                                (0.0080)      (0.0034)
               11                              -0.388         -0.180
                                                (0.0093)      (0.0034)
               12                              -0.356         -0.180
                                                (0.0079)      (0.0034)
               13                              -0.347         -0.185
                                                (0.0080)      (0.0034)
               14                              -0.349         -0.184
                                                (0.0081)      (0.0034)
               15                              -0.385         -0.181
                                                (0.0097)      (0.0034)
               16                              -0.302         -0.179
                                                (0.0076)      (0.0034)
               Pre-Displacement Earnings          Yes            Yes
               Observations                    8,052,225     8,040,055
               Standard errors in parentheses
               
                 p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001



                                             60
Table B.7: Effects of Displacement on Earnings and AKM Firm FE for Workers at Top-Quartile Firms

                                                Any Q4 Displace             Q4 Displace & re-employed
                                              Log earn  ^ log earn
                                                                            Log earn      ^ log earn
                                                                                          
          Quarter since displacement
          0                                  -0.169*** 0.00758*** -0.181***                  -0.00103***
                                               (0.007)   (0.001)     (0.007)                    (0.000)
          1                                  -0.409***  -0.151***  -0.214***                  -0.0227***
                                               (0.008)   (0.002)     (0.007)                    (0.001)
          2                                  -0.342***  -0.145***  -0.210***                  -0.0240***
                                               (0.007)   (0.002)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          3                                  -0.413***  -0.153***  -0.263***                  -0.0247***
                                               (0.008)   (0.002)     (0.008)                    (0.001)
          4                                  -0.288***  -0.150***  -0.147***                  -0.0237***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          5                                  -0.307***  -0.152***  -0.171***                  -0.0238***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.005)                    (0.001)
          6                                  -0.364***  -0.160***  -0.212***                  -0.0258***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.005)                    (0.001)
          7                                  -0.341***  -0.158***  -0.207***                  -0.0261***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          8                                  -0.322***  -0.161***  -0.151***                  -0.0262***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.005)                    (0.001)
          9                                  -0.340***  -0.162***  -0.181***                  -0.0251***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          10                                 -0.350***  -0.164***  -0.202***                  -0.0249***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.005)                    (0.001)
          11                                 -0.350***  -0.165***  -0.206***                  -0.0236***
                                               (0.007)   (0.002)     (0.007)                    (0.001)
          12                                 -0.327***  -0.166***  -0.173***                  -0.0229***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          13                                 -0.338***  -0.171***  -0.185***                  -0.0218***
                                               (0.006)   (0.002)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          14                                 -0.346***  -0.176***  -0.189***                  -0.0222***
                                               (0.006)   (0.003)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          15                                 -0.366***  -0.175***  -0.166***                  -0.0218***
                                               (0.007)   (0.002)     (0.005)                    (0.001)
          16                                 -0.312***  -0.174***  -0.146***                  -0.0206***
                                               (0.006)   (0.003)     (0.006)                    (0.001)
          Observations                       15,924,435 15,921,496 15,873,865                 15,873,865

  Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; First two columns show results from equations
  2 and 3 for any displaced worker who was laid off from top-quartile j firm. The third and fourth columns use as a
  displaced sample workers laid off from a top-quartile j firm who found re-employment at a new top-quartile firm.



                                                           61
  Figure B.3: Sensitivity of Earnings Losses to Different Labor Market Attachment Restrictions


                           Log earnings by Post-Displacement Attachment
                          .1



                           0
       Point estimate




                         -.1



                         -.2



                         -.3
                               -2     -1          0          1        2                   3           4
                                              Year Relative to Displacement

                        25% Attach         50% Attach           75% Attach              90% Attach

Note : The graph plots estimated   ^k coefficients from equation 2. Whiskers (very small) represent 95% confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Vertical line denotes quarter of displacement.




                                                       62
          Figure B.4: Estimated Losses due to Foregone Firm Fixed Effect by Attachment

                                                                        (a) Change in Firm FE ^j due to Displacement

                                                                    0
                            log earnings due to firm premium




                                                               -.02




                                                               -.04




                                                               -.06
                                                                             0             4                8           12            16
                                                                                           Quarter since displacement

                                                                         25% Attachment            50% Attachment        75% Attachment


                                                                                 (b) Share of Earnings Losses Explained

                                                               30
                    Share of Losses Explained by Firm FE (%)




                                                               20




                                                               10




                                                                0
                                                                         0                4                8            12           16
                                                                                          Quarter since displacement

                                                                        25% Attachment            50% Attachment        75% Attachment


Note : The top panel plots  ^ k coefficients from equation 3. The bottom panel converts    ^ k and ^k to percentages and
takes the quotient, representing the share of earnings losses attributable to loss of a firm-specific pay premium. 95%
confidence intervals for the top panel are not included in the figures but are small. All point estimates for k > 0 are
highly significant.




                                                                                                    63
 Figure B.5: Estimated Losses due to Foregone Firm Fixed Effect; Subsets of Displaced Workers
                                      (a) All Displaced Workers Excluding NAICS 51-56

                                                       Log earnings and Firm FE
                                        0


                                      -.1
                     Point estimate




                                      -.2


                                      -.3


                                      -.4

                                            -2    -1         0          1        2           3   4
                                                         Year Relative to Displacement

                                                 log earnings            firm fixed effect



                                                       (b) Manufacturing

                                                       Log earnings and Firm FE
                                       0
                   Point estimate




                                      -.2




                                      -.4




                                      -.6
                                            -2   -1         0          1        2            3   4
                                                        Year Relative to Displacement

                                                 log earnings           firm fixed effect



Note : These figures plot the k and k coefficients from equations 2 (blue) and 3 (red) for two different displaced
subsamples. The top panel shows estimates for losses of workers displaced from industries besides NAICS 51-
56 (finance, real estate, insurance) relative to a comparison group that omits NAICS 51-56. The bottom panel
presents the same estimates for workers displaced from manufacturing relative to workers who remain employed in
manufacturing. Whiskers (very small) denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by
worker. Vertical line denotes quarter of displacement. Figures correspond to estimates in Appendix Table B.5.
                                                                64
     Figure B.6: Losses due to Foregone Employer Fixed Effects: Displaced from Top Quartile
                                                       (a) Any Displaced from Top-Quartile j

                                                                 Displaced from Top Quartile Firms


                                            0


                                          -.1
                   Point estimate




                                          -.2


                                          -.3


                                          -.4

                                                 -2        -1            0          1        2           3        4
                                                                     Year Relative to Displacement

                                                           log earnings              firm fixed effect


                                     (b) Displaced from Top-Quartile j , Re-employed in Top Quartile

                                                          Displaced from and Remain in Top Quartile Firms
                                            .1



                                            0
                    Point estimate




                                           -.1



                                           -.2



                                           -.3
                                                  -2            -1         0          1        2              3       4
                                                                       Year Relative to Displacement

                                                             log earnings                 firm fixed effect



Note : These figures plot the k and k coefficients from equations 2 (blue) and 3 (red) for workers who are displaced
from firms in the top-quartile of estimated firm fixed effects (j ). The top panel shows estimates for any displaced
worker separating from a top-quartile firm, regardless where she is re-employed. The bottom panel presents the
same estimates for workers displaced from top-quartile firms who find re-employment another top-quartile firm and
remain employed in a top firm for the remainder of the panel. Whiskers (very small) denote 95-percent confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Vertical line denotes quarter of displacement.



                                                                               65
B.3     Wage Loss Estimates
Our paper investigates the role of firm-specific wage premiums in explaining displaced worker
earnings losses. However, lack of information on hours worked in Ohio's UI data prevents us
from (i) decomposing overall earnings losses into wage and hours components and (ii) estimating
the contribution of firm pay premiums to reduced wages for displaced workers ­ both of which
are addressed by Lachowska et al. (2018) and the latter by Schmieder et al. (2018) and Fackler
et al. (2017). Instead, we use the hours-wage decomposition from Lachowska et al. (2018) ­ five
years after displacement, 70% of lost earnings for Washington workers displaced during the Great
Recession were due to lower wages (the remaining 30% due to reduced work hours) ­ as a benchmark
to estimate corresponding hourly wage results for displaced workers in Ohio.
    In Table B.8, we consider several plausible hour-wage decompositions of overall earnings losses
to inform estimates of (i) long-run total hourly wage losses for Ohio displaced workers and (ii) the
proportion attributable to firm pay premiums for plausible hour-wage decompositions of overall
earnings losses. We posit that long-run wage losses are between 13-18% for the Ohio sample,
considerably larger than the 4.9% [1.3%] long-run hourly wage losses documented by Lachowska
et al. (2018) for long [short] tenured workers.
    Lachowska et al. (2018) accurately captures this quantity by running AKM on the log of
hourly wages (rather than total earnings) and using those resulting pay premiums in the JLS-
AKM framework. Due to our data limitations, we instead assume the variance in firm fixed effects
^j reflects only employer-specific differences in hourly pay (and not hours worked). This (strong)

assumption allows us to obtain the share of long run wage losses explained by forfeited firm-specific
pay premiums from the quotient of the share of earnings losses explained by firm premiums and
the share of losses due to lower wages (last column of Table B.8). We estimate firm-pay premiums
explain between 29% and 38% of displaced workers' wage losses after four years.
    Lachowska et al. (2018) conclude firm premiums only account for 17% of long-run wage scarring
in their sample. Interestingly, the authors estimate that while displaced workers clock roughly 5%
fewer hours compared to their pre-displacement schedules, they find re-employment at firms with
policies compelling employees to work more hours relative to their layoff employer (see Table A.1
of Lachowska et al. (2018)). However, the assumption in Table B.8 is that there are no work-hour
policy differences between employers. In other words, firm fixed effects from an AKM regression
on the log of hours (which cannot be run with our limited Ohio data) would explain none of the
difference in hours worked between employees. Thus, if the results of Lachowska et al. (2018) for
hours worked holds in Ohio, the reported estimates in column 5 of Table B.8 are understated.




                                                 66
Table B.8: Estimated Wage Losses due to Forgone Pay Premiums for Ohio with Various Hours-Wage
Loss Decompositions

      Long-Run Estimates from Ohio data                 Assumed %
                                                          earnings                        Share of Total
         Overall          Earnings Losses due           loss due to       Overall         Wage Loss due
      Earnings Loss       to Firm Premium  ^j           lower wage       Wage Loss      to Firm Premiums

                                                              60%            13%                 38%
            22%                     23%                       70%            15%                 33%
                                                              80%            18%                 29%

Note : The first two columns report our main estimates of long run earnings loss and share of losses due to firm
premiums for the Ohio displaced worker sample from Table 2. We list plausible shares of long-run earnings losses
due to diminished wages (with the remainder attributable to reduced hours) in the third column. In Washington,
for example, Lachowska et al. (2018) find 70% of overall losses are due to lower hourly wages. Column 4 estimates
long-run wage losses for displaced workers in Ohio for a given hour-wage decomposition as a product of overall
earnings losses and the share of total losses due to lower wages. Column 5 lists the share of total estimated long-run
wage losses that are attributable to forfeited firm premiums.




                                                         67
