                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HEALTH INSURANCE AND MORTALITY:
              EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM TAXPAYER OUTREACH

                                          Jacob Goldin
                                          Ithai Z. Lurie
                                        Janet McCubbin

                                      Working Paper 26533
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26533


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019


Goldin: Stanford University and NBER. Lurie: Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the
Treasury. McCubbin: Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury. For helpful
comments, we are grateful to Marianne Bitler, Mark Duggan, Amy Finkelstein, Alex Gelber, Jon
Gruber, Dan Ho, Tatiana Homonoff, Jason Levitis, Adam Looney, Dan Kessler, Jonathan
Ketcham, Amanda Kowalski, Michelle Mello, Ankur Patel, Paul Reyfman, Kyle Rozema, Dan
Sacks, Deborah Schwartz, David Studdert, and seminar participants at Berkeley, George Mason,
Max Planck Institute, Stanford, Treasury, the Annual Health Economics Conference, the NTA
Annual Conference, and the WEAI Annual Conference. For implementation assistance, we thank
Debra Babcock, Jason Levitis, Pedro Mendez, Lina Rashid, Elana Safran, Carolyn Tavenner, and
Christen Linke Young. Taylor Cranor, Sarah Kotb, and Vedant Vohra provided outstanding
research assistance. The views and opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the position of the Treasury Department or any agency of the United
States. This paper was reviewed by the Treasury Department prior to release to ensure
compliance with rules governing the confidentiality of taxpayer return information. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jacob Goldin, Ithai Z. Lurie, and Janet McCubbin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health Insurance and Mortality: Experimental Evidence from Taxpayer Outreach
Jacob Goldin, Ithai Z. Lurie, and Janet McCubbin
NBER Working Paper No. 26533
December 2019
JEL No. H2,I12,I13

                                         ABSTRACT

We evaluate a randomized pilot study in which the IRS sent informational letters to 3.9 million
taxpayers who paid a tax penalty for lacking health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care
Act. Drawing on administrative data, we study the effect of the intervention on taxpayers'
subsequent health insurance enrollment and mortality. We find the intervention led to increased
coverage in the two years following treatment and that this additional coverage reduced mortality
among middle-aged adults over the same time period. Our results provide the first experimental
evidence that health insurance reduces mortality.

Jacob Goldin                                    Janet McCubbin
Stanford Law School                             U.S. Department of the Treasury
559 Nathan Abbott Way                           Janet.McCubbin@treasury.gov
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
jsgoldin@law.stanford.edu

Ithai Z. Lurie
Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20220
Ithai.Lurie@treasury.gov
1 Introduction
Near the beginning of 2017, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) sent informational letters

to taxpayers who had previously paid an income tax penalty for lacking health insurance

coverage under the so-called individual mandate provision of the Aordable Care Act
        1
(ACA).      Of the 4.5 million households who met the criteria for inclusion in this pilot

program, 3.9 million were randomly selected to receive the intervention. In this paper,

we exploit the pilot's randomized design to study the operation of tax-based incentives

for promoting health insurance take-up. Because the pilot led to increased coverage, we

also use it to explore the causal relationship between health insurance and mortality.

    Reducing the share of uninsured Americans has been an important goal of U.S. do-

mestic policy for decades, but substantial controversy still exists over which policies are

eective at achieving this objective.         For example, some have criticized the individual

mandate as being too small or too non-salient to eectively induce taxpayers to increase

their coverage (Auerbach et al., 2010). Partly in response to such concerns, the federal

government, states, and non-prots spend hundreds of millions of dollars each year on
                                                                                                     2
outreach eorts to bolster the incentive eect of policies like the individual mandate.

By linking the IRS pilot to administrative micro-data on health insurance coverage, we

can shed light on these concerns and on the potential for outreach programs to alleviate

them. Although the individual mandate is now eectively repealed at the federal level,

exploring these issues is important for assessing proposals to impose (or re-impose) an

individual mandate at the state or federal level (Levitis, 2018) and for informing outreach

eorts (Dorn, 2019).

    The second question we use the pilot to investigate is the eect of health insurance on

mortality. Although this question is among the most widely studied question in health
                                                                           3
economics, it is notoriously dicult to answer in credible ways.                Theoretically, the mag-

nitude and even existence of an eect is ambiguous  for example, uninsured individuals

with acute life-threatening conditions may still seek and obtain emergency care, which

most hospitals in the United States are legally required to provide (Newhouse et al.,

1993; Finkelstein and McKnight, 2008; Black et al., 2019). Similarly, because of adverse

selection, individuals who choose to forego coverage to which they have access may be

particularly unlikely to benet if induced to enroll.            Empirically, a growing number of

well-designed quasi-experimental studies suggest that health insurance does substantially

   1 From 2014 to 2018, federal law required most individuals to enroll in health insurance coverage
or pay a tax penalty.   As with other taxes, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) played a central role
administering this provision, including explaining its operation to taxpayers.
   2 Federal funding for ACA-related outreach has uctuated in recent years, with the budgeted amount
for ACA advertising declining from $100 million in 2017 to $10 million in 2018. However, states and
non-prots have continued to fund coverage-related outreach eorts at high levels  e.g., California's
2018 budget for Navigator programs was $111 million (Commonwealth Fund, 2017).
   3 The issue is also disputed among policymakers, some of whom have expressed skepticism about
whether health insurance reduces mortality (Phillips, 2017).



                                                    1
reduce adult mortality in certain contexts (Card, Dobkin and Maestas, 2009; Sommers,

Baicker and Epstein, 2012; Sommers, Long and Baicker, 2014; Swaminathan et al., 2018;
                                                                                     4
Khatana et al., 2019; Borgschulte and Vogler, 2019; Miller et al., 2019),                but the results

that emerge from these studies rely on unveriable and sometimes controversial assump-

tions (Levy and Meltzer, 2008; Woolhandler and Himmelstein, 2017; Black et al., 2019).

Prior randomized studies on this question are rare and inconclusive, both in the United

States (Finkelstein et al. 2012 (the Oregon study); Weathers and Stegman 2012) and
             5
worldwide.       In addition, prior research  whether observational or experimental  focuses

on the health eects from expanded access to coverage, not from changes in enrollment

behavior with respect to coverage that was already available. Understanding the eects

of the latter type of intervention  our focus here  is important for assessing the health

benets from outreach eorts of the type commonly undertaken by governments and

non-prots.

    Our results provide evidence that the intervention increased the likelihood of taxpayers

obtaining coverage, and that this additional coverage reduced middle-age mortality during

the two years following the intervention. Beginning with the eect on coverage, we nd

that among individuals who were uninsured for some portion of the prior year, those in

the treatment group were 1.3 percentage points more likely to enroll in coverage in the

year following the intervention than those in the control group, a 2.8% relative increase.

On average, each letter increased coverage among this group by 0.14 months during

2017, or one additional year of coverage per 87 letters sent. We document larger eects

among individuals who lacked any coverage during the prior year and among older non-

elderly adults. The eect appears to operate through new enrollments in the individual

marketplace as well as through Medicaid take-up. Although there is some attenuation,

coverage rates remains higher in the treatment group than in the control group in the

two years following the intervention.

    In the second part of the paper, we study whether the additional coverage induced

by the intervention reduced mortality among those who enrolled. We present evidence

that it did.     In the two years following the intervention, the rate of mortality among

previously uninsured 45-64 year-olds was lower in the treatment group than in the control

by approximately 0.06 percentage points, or one fewer death for every 1,648 individuals

in this population who were sent a letter.             We nd no evidence that the intervention

reduced mortality among children or younger adults over our sample period. Exploiting

   4 A separate body of quasi-experimental evidence nds that child health coverage yields health benets
(Currie and Gruber, 1996a,b; Meyer and Wherry, 2012; Goodman-Bacon, 2018; Brown, Kowalski and
Lurie, Forthcoming).
   5 Newhouse et al. (1993) reports experimental evidence that health insurance can reduce mortality
but the intervention they study consists of variation in cost-sharing rather than the presence or absence
of coverage itself.   Escobar, Grin and Shaw (2011) and Giedion, Alfonso and Diaz (2013) survey
international evidence on the link between health insurance and mortality and do not report the existence
of any randomized studies.




                                                   2
treatment group assignment as an instrument for coverage, we estimate that the average

per-month eect of the coverage induced by the intervention on two-year mortality was

approximately -0.17 percentage points. We caution, however, that the magnitude of the

mortality eect is imprecisely estimated; our condence interval is consistent with both

moderate and large eects of coverage on mortality.            At the same time, our estimated

condence interval is suciently precise to rule out per-month eects smaller in magnitude

than -0.03 percentage points, including the estimate from the OLS regression of mortality

on coverage across individuals. We view the eects at the lower-magnitude end of our

condence interval as most plausible, given the treatment eect magnitudes reported in

prior research (see Black et al., 2019, for a review). We also present suggestive evidence

that the steady-state eect of annual coverage on mortality is less than 12 times our

estimated per-month eect due to concavity in the relationship between coverage and

mortality. With these caveats, our results provide the rst experimental evidence that

health insurance reduces mortality.

   Our results contribute to important literatures in public nance and health economics.

First, a number of studies investigate the eect of policies like the individual mandate

that are designed to incentivize health insurance coverage (e.g.,        Buchmueller, DiNardo

and Valletta, 2011; Phillip, McKnight and Heep, 2011; Hackmann, Kolstad and Kowalski,

2015; Frean, Gruber and Sommers, 2017; Finkelstein, Hendren and Shepard, 2017; Heim,

Lurie and Sacks, 2019). Our ndings provide experimental evidence that informational

frictions like low salience or complexity can limit the eectiveness of such policies (if

not, our intervention would not have had an eect). In this sense, our results comple-

ment recent studies that document mistakes in other domains of health-related decisions

(Abaluck and Gruber, 2011; Handel, 2013; Handel and Kolstad, 2015; Handel, Kolstad

and Spinnewijn, 2018; Chandra, Handel and Schwartzstein, 2018; Loewenstein et al.,

2013). In a dierent vein, some have suggested that the dollar value of the federal man-

date penalty may have been too small to inuence behavior (Auerbach et al., 2010; Frean,

Gruber and Sommers, 2016); our coverage results provide evidence against that view, at

least with respect to the 2017 federal penalty.          By shedding light on these issues, our

results can inform states that have implemented state-level substitutes after the federal

mandate's repeal, or that are considering doing so.

   Second, our results provide new evidence on a central question in health economics:

the link between health insurance and mortality. The question is hotly debated, and prior
                                             6
studies have come to diering conclusions.            Because our design is randomized, it is not

subject to most of the identication concerns that have been leveled against observational

studies in this area. In addition, our study complements the prior experimental evidence

in important ways. Because mortality is a rare event, statistical power poses a signicant

  6 For two prominent examples, compare the ndings of the Institute of Medicine's 2002 Consensus
Report with Kronick (2009).




                                                 3
concern for both experimental and non-experimental analyses of the topic. The size of

our sample permits us to restrict our main mortality analysis to older adults, a population

for which the protective eects of coverage on mortality is more likely to be detectable.

In addition, the group for which we identify the health eect of coverage  i.e., those who

already have access to coverage but for whom misperceptions or other frictions prevent

take-up  is particularly policy relevant, since such individuals' coverage decisions can

be shaped through outreach eorts of the type commonly employed by governments and

non-prots. Indeed, our experimental sample represents the near-universe of uninsured

individuals who are the typical targets of such policy eorts.

   Methodologically, our analysis illustrates how large-scale eld experiments can provide

information not only about the intervention being studied, but also about downstream

eects of the behavior that the intervention induces.       In particular, health insurance

access is expensive to provide, but absent randomization, credible estimates of the eect

of health insurance on health are dicult to obtain.      By exploiting a pilot study that

randomly encouraged individuals to take up coverage that was already available to them,

our approach represents a cost-eective and ethical method for studying the eect of

coverage on subsequent health outcomes.

   Finally, we highlight a new resource for studying health insurance in the United States:

information returns about individual coverage reported to the IRS. Prior research on this

topic has mostly relied on self-reported survey data for a small fraction of the population

or administrative coverage data obtained from a single insurer. Our dataset oer several

important advantages. First, it covers the near-universe of individuals living in the United

States, which limits concerns about selection and endogenous sample retention. Second,

because the data contain individual-level coverage information from multiple insurers,

it allows us to observe ows between insurance providers or types of insurance. Third,

the monthly frequency of our data allows us to more precisely quantify the rst-stage

eects of interventions like the one we study and the dynamics of treatment eects over

time.   Because most prior studies have lacked such precise measures of coverage, they

have typically focused on a binary indicator for being enrolled in any coverage at a single

point in time, which can bias instrumental variable estimation when the treatment aects

coverage on other margins.

   The remainder of the article proceeds as follows.      Section 2 provides institutional

background on health insurance coverage in the United States and the federal individ-

ual mandate.   Section 3 describes our research design and provides information about

our data, the pilot study, and summary statistics. Section 4 analyzes the eect of the

intervention on coverage. Section 5 contains the mortality analysis. Section 6 concludes.




                                             4
2 Institutional Background
2.1 Health Insurance Coverage in the United States
Most people in the United States with health insurance have coverage from their employer

(employer-sponsored insurance, or ESI). The second largest source of health insurance is

through a government program such as Medicaid, Medicare, or the Veteran's Administra-

tion. Individuals who do not receive health insurance from one of these sources may enroll

in an Exchange plan, purchased through their state's health insurance marketplace, or

in an O-Exchange plan.

    To understand how the pilot aected coverage decisions, it is helpful to understand

the regulatory constraints on the timing of health insurance enrollment. Unless special
                         7
circumstances apply,         one may enroll in Exchange coverage for the year only during the

year's open enrollment period. For 2017 Exchange coverage, the open enrollment window

was from November 1, 2016 to January 31, 2017. In addition, individuals are required to

apply for Exchange coverage by the 15th day of the month prior to the month in which

coverage is to begin. Thus, to obtain coverage for January 2017, individuals must have

applied by December 15, 2016; to obtain coverage for February 2017, individuals must

have applied by January 15, 2017. Most employer-sponsored plans also have an annual

open enrollment period to enroll in coverage for the year, often ending a month or two

prior to the end of the calendar year (although the timing varies). In contrast, individuals

can obtain Medicaid coverage at any time during the year (e.g., during a hospitalization),

and Medicaid coverage can apply retroactively for up to three months prior to the month

of application.

    Most individuals apply for Exchange coverage through an online portal. States may

rely on the federal marketplace or operate their own state-based marketplace. Individuals

who visit the federal online portal, healthcare.gov, are routed to the applicable market-

place based on their location. To determine the after-subsidy cost of Exchange coverage,

individuals who visit the Exchange input information about their family size and income.

If the household qualies for Medicaid, they can enroll in that coverage through the

website as well.

    In recent years, the share of Americans under the age of 65 who lack health insurance

coverage for the entire year is approximately 9%-13%, depending on the source of the
            8
estimate.       The share of Americans who lack coverage for one month or more during the

year is much higher, approximately 21% to 26%, depending on the estimate.                        Among

those with full-year coverage in 2016, 65% received at least one month of coverage from

   7 Examples of life events that qualify an individual to enroll in coverage outside of the standard open
enrollment window include losing health coverage (e.g., by losing one's job), getting married or divorced,
or the birth of a new child.
   8 The statistics cited in this paragraph are reported in Lurie and Pearce (2019).




                                                    5
their employer. An additional 35% received at least one month of government-provided

coverage (e.g., Medicaid or coverage provided by the Veteran's Administration). Finally,

10% of those with full-year coverage were enrolled in at least one month of non-group

coverage (i.e., from an Exchange or o-Exchange plan).

   Increasing the share of Americans with health insurance coverage has been a long-

term policy goal of U.S. tax and health policy-making. A range of tax provisions support

this objective, such as the income and payroll tax exclusion for employer-provided health

insurance, the premium tax credit, the employer mandate, and the individual mandate 

the policy that is the focus of our intervention.



2.2 The Individual Mandate
The Shared Responsibility Payment provision of the Patient Protection and Aordable

Care Act (ACA), or the individual mandate, as it is commonly referred to, requires most

individuals to obtain health insurance coverage for themselves and their dependents or

pay a penalty in the form of a tax. The goal of the provision was to reduce the rate of

uninsured Americans and reduce adverse selection in the Exchanges. Preventing adverse

selection is particularly important for the viability of the Exchanges because the ACA

prohibited insurers from denying or limiting coverage based on preexisting conditions.

   Individuals who lack qualifying health insurance coverage for themselves or a depen-

dent for one or more months during the year owe an additional amount on their annual

income tax return  the so-called penalty  unless an exemption applies. Exemptions are

available under a range of circumstances; they include: unaordability of the available

coverage to the individual, income below the income tax ling threshold, general hard-

ship, individuals living abroad, gaps in coverage of three months or less, and religious
              9
objections.

   The amount of the annual penalty owed by a taxpayer depends on the taxpayer's

income, family size, and number of months without coverage. The specic parameters

vary by year, but in 2017 (our rst year of focus), the penalty for taxpayer                   i   for month

m, Pim ,   is given by:


                            1
                  Pim =       max {min {695 Ai + 347.5 Ci , 2085} , 0.025 (Ii - Fi )}
                           12

where   Ai   is the number of adults on  i's return, Ci is the number of children, Fi is the
applicable ling threshold for taxpayer i, and Ii is a measure of i's income during the tax
     10
year.   In turn, i's annual penalty, Pi , is the sum of i's monthly penalties, limited by the

yearly premium for the national average lowest cost bronze plan that would be available

  9 For additional details, refer to Lurie and McCubbin (2016).
  10 Specically,   Ii   refers to modied adjusted gross income, which for purposes of the individual mandate
is dened as adjusted gross income plus untaxed foreign income and tax-exempt interest.




                                                        6
to   i's   household   (LCBPi ):

                                   Pi = min 12
                                            m=1 Pim , LCBPi


     In December of 2017, the President signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which among

other changes to the tax code, eectively eliminated the individual mandate for 2019

and onward. In response, a number of states have enacted, or are considering enacting,

legislation at the state-level that would resemble the operation of the federal individ-

ual mandate.       To date, California, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and Washington, D.C.

have already enacted such legislation. In addition, Massachusetts adopted an individual

mandate as part of its 2006 health reform, and it remains in eect today (see Levitis,

2018).

     Even while the federal mandate was in eect, a number of elements in its design may
                                                               11
have limited its eect on individuals' coverage decisions.           First, some individuals may

have neglected to consider the penalty when deciding whether to enroll in coverage, either

because the penalty was not salient or because they lacked knowledge of its existence

(Chetty, Looney and Kroft, 2009). Because the penalty appears as a single line on one's

tax return, even those who paid it may not have learned of its existence, especially if they

used software or a third party to prepare their tax return. Second, the penalty formula

is quite complex (as described above, it is the minimum of a maximum of a minimum).

Complex incentives may yield weaker behavioral eects than when the incentive is simple

(Abeler and Jäger, 2015). Third, the timing of the mandate's penalty may render it less

eective (Gallagher and Muehlegger, 2011). Even if the penalty is salient to individuals

when they pay their taxes (typically February through April), they may forget about it

by the close of the calendar year when the next open enrollment window begins. These

elements of the mandate's design motivated the IRS pilot study.




3 Data and Research Design
This section describes our data, the experimental sample, the intervention we study, and

provides summary statistics and balance checks relating to our sample population.



3.1 Data Sources
For our analysis, we rely on administrative records from population les housed at the

Internal Revenue Service (IRS). These data include annual information on the universe

of individuals who le or are listed on individual tax returns, as well as annual and

sub-annual information on the universe of individuals listed on information returns.
  11 Separately, some have suggested that the penalty amount was too low to motivate individuals to
obtain coverage.



                                                7
    Our health insurance coverage data are derived from information returns (Form 1095

A/B/C), which provide monthly coverage information at the individual level. The forms

are provided annually to the IRS by private and public insurers, self-insured employers,

and health insurance marketplaces.          In addition to allowing us to identify whether an

individual is covered during a particular month, the data provide information about the

type of coverage in which the individual is enrolled (e.g., Medicaid, Employer-Sponsored

Insurance (ESI), or individual coverage purchased through an Exchange).

    Only certain forms of health insurance, referred to as minimum essential coverage

(MEC), satisfy the individual mandate. These are the only forms of coverage reported

on the Form 1095's.      Examples of health insurance plans that do not constitute MEC

include plans limited to vision or dental care, workers' compensation, or coverage that is

limited to a specic disease or condition. For additional details about the coverage data

on which we rely, refer to Lurie and Pearce (2019).

    Our measure of health insurance coverage is available monthly from January 2015

through December 2018. We assume that individuals for whom no Form 1095 is received

for a year are uninsured during each month of that year.

    Our data on mortality comes from the Social Security Death File, which records the

universe of U.S. deaths along with the date at which the death occurred. Our analysis

includes deaths that occurred through December 2018. Unfortunately, the data do not

contain information about the cause of death.



3.2 Sample Construction
To construct our sample, we rst identied tax returns for 2015 that reported owing

a positive penalty under the individual mandate.            Approximately 6.1 million 2015 tax
                                   12
returns fell into this category.        For context, in the same year, the total number of tax

returns led was approximately 140 million, of which 22.8 million did not indicate full-year
                                                                                               13
coverage for each household member (i.e., each individual listed on the tax return).

    We next excluded returns that satised one or more of the following conditions: the

taxpayer was claimed as a dependent; the ling address was not from one of the 50 U.S.

states or D.C.; the taxpayer led multiple (non-amended) 2015 returns; the ling address

listed a second address line (typically C/O); the return listed an Individual Taxpayer

Identication Number for a taxpayer or dependent; the taxpayer was over age 64 or under

  12 This gure refers to the 2015 tax returns that had been led and posted on the IRS system as of
October 2016, when the sample was constructed. Some additional 2015 tax returns were led after that
date, and other previously led 2015 returns were amended.
  13 Among those tax returns that did not indicate full-year coverage for each household member and
that did not report owing a penalty, approximately 11.3 million claimed an exemption for one or more
months of the year. Among the remaining approximately 5.4 million returns, some reported a penalty
but led after our sample was constructed whereas others failed to either claim an exemption or report
a penalty.




                                                  8
age 18 at the start of 2017; the taxpayer was observed to die prior to the date of sample

construction; the taxpayer's account was subject to certain audit or examination codes;

and a household member listed on the return was observed to have enrolled in Exchange

Coverage either in 2015 or in 2016 prior to our sample being nalized.                 As discussed

further below, every individual listed on a return is included in our analysis: the primary

taxpayer, the spouse if married and ling jointly, as well as up to four dependents. The

nal sample consists of 4.5 million returns, corresponding to 8.9 million individuals.



3.3 Pilot Study
The pilot intervention we study took the form of an informational letter sent to taxpayers

from the IRS. The letter informed recipients that they had paid a penalty in 2015; pro-

vided information about the penalty and plan costs for 2017; and provided instructions

for recipients to investigate the availability of Exchange and Medicaid coverage through

healthcare.gov. A sample letter is provided in Appendix Figure A.1. Individuals in the

sample were randomly assigned to receive a letter (86%) or to a control group (14%).

One letter, addressed to the taxpayer(s), was sent per return. Hence, randomization was
                                      14
conducted at the household level.

   The treatment arms varied in either the content or the timing of the intervention.

Households selected to receive a letter were randomly assigned across several treatment

arms. We explore dierences in coverage eects across treatment variants in a companion

paper, so provide only a high-level overview here. The baseline treatment contained a

personalized estimate of the taxpayer's potential 2017 penalty (based on 2015 income

and household composition) and was mailed in mid-January 2017, approximately two

weeks before the close of the open enrollment period.           A non-personalized treatment

variant was identical to the baseline treatment except that the letter provided generic

information about the 2017 penalty formula rather than a personalized estimate.                  An

exemption information treatment variant was identical to the baseline treatment, but

included additional information about penalty exemptions for which the taxpayer might

apply.   An early mailing treatment variant was identical in content to the baseline

treatment but was mailed in late November 2016, near the start of the open enrollment

period. Based on operational considerations, approximately 21 percent of the treatment

sample was assigned to the early mailing variant. The remainder of the treatment sample

was randomly divided among the baseline treatment and the other two variants in equal

proportions. Finally, the baseline treatment and each of the three variants were randomly

divided into two even-size groups, one of which had a Spanish-language translation printed

on the reverse side of the letter and one of which did not. Appendix Table A.1 summarizes

  14 Households were block-randomized based on age and gender of primary ler, marital status, number
of dependents, income, the presence of self-employment income, 2014 penalty status, and whether the
taxpayer's state expanded Medicaid and/or participated in the federal marketplace during 2017.



                                                 9
the allocation of the sample across the various treatment groups.



3.4 Summary Statistics and Balance Checks
Table 1 contains individual-level summary statistics for the experimental sample and

information about covariate balance. As benchmarks, Columns 1 and 2 provide summary

statistics for a random 1% sample of the overall population of tax returns (Column 1) as

well as for the full population of returns that did not indicate full-year coverage for 2015
              15
(Column 2).        Relative to these baseline populations, individuals in our sample (Column

3) are younger, more likely to be male, and less likely to be married. Notably, although

our sample is much lower income than the overall population, it is higher income on

average than the population without full-year coverage, many of whom qualied for an

income-based exemption from the penalty.

    Although a household being included in our sample implies that at least one individual

in the household lacked coverage for one or more months during the year, that individual

may have had coverage for other months during the year, and other individuals in the

household may have been enrolled in coverage during every month of the year. In partic-

ular, Table 1 shows that over half (58%) of the individuals in our sample had coverage

in at least one month in 2015, and a substantial minority (28%) had coverage in every

month of 2015. Along both of these measures, the fraction of our sample with coverage

rose from 2015 to 2016. Finally, note that in both 2015 and 2016, most individuals had

either full-year coverage or zero months of coverage.

    Columns 4-6 of Table 1 investigate covariate balance between the treatment and con-

trol groups. Consistent with the randomized design and large sample sizes, the treatment
                                                                16
and control groups are quite similar in most respects.




4 Coverage Eects
This section investigates the eect of the treatment on individuals' subsequent coverage

decisions.   We rst present results relating to coverage in the year following the inter-

vention. Next, we turn to longer-term coverage outcomes. Finally, we explore the total

  15 The latter category contains taxpayers who claimed an exemption and taxpayers who incorrectly
failed to report a penalty.
  16 The two characteristics in which dierences between the treatment and control groups are statisti-
cally signicant are whether the individual's household claimed a 2014 exemption (0.2 percentage point
dierence) and whether the individual was enrolled in full-year 2016 coverage (0.1 percentage point dif-
ference). In both of these cases, the magnitude of the dierence is quite small, and our results are not
sensitive to controlling for these or other observable characteristics.   For both of these variables, it is
also conceivable that the dierence reects an eect of the treatment, since receiving the letter may have
prompted individuals to le an amended 2014 return to avoid the penalty, or may have corrected an
error on the part of their insurer or employer that otherwise would have resulted in them appearing to
lack 2016 coverage.




                                                   10
additional coverage induced by the pilot among those whose coverage decisions were

aected.



4.1 First-Year Coverage Eects
We rst investigate how the treatment aected the likelihood of obtaining coverage in

2017, the rst year following the intervention. Under our randomized design, this eect

is identied by comparing the means of the coverage outcomes across the treatment and

control groups. Because individuals listed on the same tax return were assigned to the

same treatment group, we present standard errors clustered at the household-level.

    Column 1 of Table 2 presents the results of this analysis for the full experimental

sample. The treatment (i.e., receiving any letter) increased the probability of obtaining

at least one month of 2017 coverage by 0.85 percentage points, a 1.2% increase relative to

the control group mean of 69%. Put dierently, the treatment reduced the share of the

sample without any 2017 coverage by 2.7%. The treatment eect is precisely estimated;

the 95% condence interval ranges from 0.74 to 0.96 percentage points.

    As indicated by the control group mean, approximately two-thirds of the overall sam-

ple would have enrolled in at least some coverage even absent the intervention. Although

we cannot identify which individuals fall into this category, one proxy might be the num-

ber of months of 2016 coverage in which the individual enrolled. Columns 2 through 5 of

Table 2 investigate the eect of the treatment on the probability of obtaining any 2017

coverage, broken out by months of 2016 coverage.             Because the intervention may have

aected coverage decisions for December 2016, we restrict our focus to the rst 11 months

of 2016. Among individuals who lacked any 2016 coverage, only 27% of the control group

obtained any coverage in 2017. For this group, the treatment increased the probability of

2017 coverage by 1.8 percentage points, a 6.7% increase relative to the control. Columns

3-4 show that as months of 2016 coverage increase, the fraction of the sample that would

obtain 2017 coverage increases as well and the magnitude of the treatment eect declines
                17
monotonically.

    Column 5 of Table 2 investigates the treatment eect for individuals with full-year

coverage in 2016  a group constituting 42% of our sample.                 The control group mean

(97%) indicates that the vast majority of individuals in this group are likely to obtain at

least some 2017 coverage as well, even absent the intervention. Hence, there is little scope

for the intervention to increase the probability of obtaining 2017 coverage.              Consistent

with this fact pattern, the estimated treatment eect among individuals with full-year

coverage in 2016 is only slightly positive (0.08 percentage points). In Column 6, and in

subsequent specications, we exclude this group from our analysis. Among individuals

  17 Appendix Table A.2 investigates the role of 2015 coverage in predicting how the treatment aects
an individual's 2017 coverage decision. The results suggest that individuals who lacked 2015 coverage
are more likely to respond to the intervention, but that 2016 coverage plays a more important role.



                                                  11
who lacked coverage in at least one month during 2016, the treatment increased the

probability of 2017 coverage by 1.3 percentage points, a 2.8% increase relative to the

control.

    We next investigate the form of coverage induced by the intervention. As described

in Section 2, the individual penalty can be avoided by enrolling in one of various forms of

coverage. Table 3 analyzes the eect of the treatment on the likelihood of obtaining one

or more months of 2017 coverage, by type of coverage. The largest eect is on Exchange

coverage: the treatment increases the probability of having any 2017 coverage by 1.02

percentage points, a 30% increase relative to the control group mean.                 The eect on

Medicaid coverage is just under half as large in absolute terms, 0.45 percentage points,

but constitutes only a 2.4% increase relative to the control group mean. We observe a

small and statistically insignicant increase in employer-sponsored coverage, which is not

surprising given the letters were received too late to participate in most employers' open

enrollment windows. We also observe near-zero eects on o-exchange individual coverage

as well as coverage provided by the Veterans Administration. Finally, as a placebo check,

we conrm that we observe no eect on the likelihood of Medicare coverage during the
     18
year.

    We next explore treatment eect heterogeneity based on age and income.                     Table 4

estimates the treatment eect separately by age category. Recall that our sample popu-

lation over-represents younger individuals, since older adults were less likely to pay the

penalty for lacking coverage. Interestingly, up through age 64, the probability of having

2017 coverage in the control group declines monotonically with age, whereas the treat-

ment eect mostly increases. Taken together, these results suggests that although older

adults are more likely to obtain coverage, those who do not are particularly unlikely to do

so absent the treatment, but also particularly responsive to the treatment. This pattern

could emerge if some of those who lack coverage in the years prior to reaching Medicare

eligibility are intentionally deferring their consumption of health services (Card, Dobkin

and Maestas, 2008; Freed, 2017), but, absent the treatment, are also over-estimating the

net nancial cost of coverage. Column 5 of Table 4 shows that the intervention appears

to increase coverage for individuals aged 65 or older, although the smaller fraction of the

sample in this age range means that the estimates are less precise than for other age

groups.

    Table 5 considers heterogeneity in the treatment eect by household income.                    The

measure of household income we rely on is the ratio of the household's modied adjusted

gross income in 2016 relative to the applicable federal poverty line (FPL). The treatment

eect peaks among households in the 100%-138% FPL region, whose incomes are likely

  18 Note that summing the treatment eect across Columns 1-6 of Table 3 yields a larger eect (1.59
percentage points) than the total coverage eect (Column 6 of Table 2), suggesting that some individuals
were induced to enroll in multiple forms of coverage during the year.




                                                  12
to qualify them for Medicaid in the states that adopted the ACA's Medicaid eligibility
                                                                      19
expansion, and declines monotonically in both directions.                  Appendix Tables A.3 and

A.4 further investigate the eects by income on Medicaid and Exchange coverage, and

by whether the individual's state expanded Medicaid eligibility. In expansion states, the

intervention signicantly increased the likelihood of obtaining Medicaid coverage, espe-

cially for individuals in the 100-138% FPL income range. Eects on Medicaid coverage

were much smaller or non-existent in non-expansion states. In contrast, positive eects

on Exchange coverage were present in both expansion and non-expansion states, although

the eects were larger in the latter than in the former for low-income households.



4.2 Timing of Coverage Eects
In this subsection we focus on the timing and duration of the intervention's eect on

coverage. Figure 1a plots the raw coverage rates for the treatment and control groups by

month, and Figure 1b plots the monthly dierence in coverage rates. Consistent with the

randomized design, the dierence in coverage rates is approximately zero during 2016.

Both treatment and control individuals enroll in coverage at a higher rate in January 2017,

but the increase for the treatment group is larger than for the control. The dierence in

coverage rates between the treatment and control continues to grow in February 2017,

and peaks at 1.51 percentage points in March 2017. Given the timing of the letter and

the rules for beginning coverage described in Section 2, this pattern is consistent with

most individuals signing up for coverage just before the open enrollment deadline and

having March as their rst eective month of Exchange coverage. Following March, we
                                                                                             20
observe a gradual decline in the treatment eect over the course of the year.                      Even in

December 2017, however, the dierence in coverage between the treatment and control

groups is 1.06 percentage points and remains statistically signicant.

    Enrollment rates for both the treatment group and control increase between December

2017 and January 2018, but the magnitude of the increase is smaller for the treatment

than the control. This may be because there was greater scope for increased 2018 coverage

for the control group or it may be that some of those induced by the intervention to enroll

in 2017 failed to re-enroll in 2018. Nonetheless, the dierence in coverage rates between

  19 In states that expanded Medicaid, most individuals with household income below 138% of the FPL
qualify for Medicaid. In all states, individuals who qualify for Medicaid are not eligible for the premium
tax credit that subsidizes Exchange coverage.
  20 Attrition appears to be driven by individuals who enrolled in Exchange coverage; we observe a more
gradual decline over the course of 2017 in the eect of the treatment on Medicaid coverage (see Appendix
Figure A.2). Interestingly, the drop-o in Exchange coverage appears steepest in the rst few months
following enrollment, in contrast to a pattern others have identied in which individuals tend to drop
coverage at the end of the year, potentially to take advantage of the short-term gap exemption (Diamond
et al., 2018). The dierence may be due to less strategic behavior among the individuals in our sample,
as suggested by the fact that inclusion into our sample is based on having failed to avoid the penalty in
a prior year.




                                                   13
the treatment and control groups remains positive and statistically signicant throughout
                                                                         21
2018, and declines only slightly over the course of the year.                 Appendix Table A.5 shows

that the types of coverage increased by the intervention in 2018 was similar to the types

increased during the prior year. We thus conclude that much  but not all  of the eect

of the intervention on coverage persists for the two years following treatment.



4.3 Intensive Margin Coverage Eects
Thus far our focus has been on the extensive margin of coverage decisions  i.e., the

probability of obtaining positive months of coverage in the year or two years follow-

ing treatment.      In this subsection we consider how the treatment aected the number

of months of coverage in which individuals enrolled.                 We also investigate the share of

individuals who increased their months of coverage because of the treatment and the

average coverage increase among this group. We explore these questions in some depth

because answering them provides important context for interpreting the mortality eects

we estimate in Section 5.

    Let   Zi    indicate whether individual        i   is in the treatment group and let          Ci (0)   and

Ci (1)   denote the months of coverage that            i   would obtain if assigned to the control and

treatment group, respectively. Thus,         i's   observed coverage,     Ci ,   is given by   Ci = Ci (0) +
Zi (Ci (1) - Ci (0)).   Random assignment guarantees the independence of treatment and

the potential coverage outcomes,          Zi  (Ci (0), Ci (1)).        Hence, the population average

eect of the intervention on coverage is equal to the dierence in mean coverage between

treatment and control,      E [Ci (1) - Ci (0)] = E [Ci | Zi = 1] - E [Ci | Zi = 0].
    Column 1 of Table 6 reports the sample mean dierence in months of 2017 coverage

between the treatment and control. On average, the treatment increases coverage by 0.14

months in 2017. Note that this eect potentially captures changes in behavior on both

the extensive and intensive margins (i.e., any coverage and number of coverage months,

respectively). At a combined printing and postage cost of approximately $0.49 per letter,

this estimated eect implies an average outreach cost of less than $43.05 per year of new
           22
coverage.

    To shed more light on the change in coverage induced by the treatment, Figure 2 plots

  21 To the extent that the additional 2017 coverage induced by the treatment prevents 2017 mortality
(as we explore in section 5), it could mechanically increase the observed treatment eect on 2018 coverage
by increasing the share of the treatment group that is alive to purchase coverage in that year. Because
the magnitude of the mortality eect we observe is so much smaller than the coverage eect, however,
this mechanism is unlikely to play an important role in explaining the coverage results.
  22 This cost estimate overstates the number of letters sent per additional year of coverage induced
because it does not account for the fact that only one letter was sent to each married couple ling jointly.
Including individuals with full-year 2016 coverage yields a treatment eect of 0.094 months for 2017
coverage, which translates into an average cost of $62.90 per year of new coverage among the overall
pilot population. Note that these estimates do not account for the cost of IRS, Treasury, or HHS sta
time associated with the implementation or initial development of the intervention, or the budgetary
cost of premium or cost-sharing subsidies.



                                                       14
the dierence in probability mass functions of 2017 coverage months between treatment

and control. Treatment group members are less likely to have 0 months of 2017 coverage,

and more likely to have 10, 11, or 12 months of 2017 coverage. One possibility consistent

with this pattern is that the treatment primarily caused individuals who would have

enrolled in 0 months of coverage (absent the treatment) to instead enroll in 10-12 months

of coverage.        Alternatively, the Figure is also consistent with the treatment increasing

coverage (by a smaller number of months) among individuals who would have enrolled in

some non-zero amount of coverage even absent the treatment.

      Without additional assumptions, we cannot identify the share of individuals who

changed their behavior because of the treatment or the average coverage increase among

this group. To derive bounds on these parameters, we assume the eect of the treatment
                             23
is weakly monotonic,              Ci (1)  Ci (0),   which allows us to write:



               E [Ci (1) - Ci (0)] = P r (Ci (1) > Ci (0)) E [Ci (1) - Ci (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0)]      (1)



      To estimate a sharp lower bound on the share of individuals who respond to the

treatment (the responders),              P r (Ci (1) > Ci (0)), we follow Borusyak (2015) and compute
the total variation distance between the treatment and control coverage distributions for

2017:
                                                    12
                                       dT V = 1 -         min f 0 (m), f 1 (m)
                                                    m=0
           j
where f (m) denotes the probability mass function of coverage month m for the treatment
group corresponding to Z = j . Column 2 of Table 6 estimates dT V in our setting; we

nd that at least 1.4% of our sample population enrolled in additional coverage because

of the pilot. Substituting this result into (1) and using the estimated mean treatment

eect from Column 1 yields an upper bound for the coverage increase among those who
                                  24
respond of 10.0 months.

      To estimate an upper bound on the share of responders, we take advantage of the

discrete nature of the coverage decision. From (1),                P r (Ci (1) > Ci (0)) is maximized when
E [Ci (1) - Ci (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0)] is minimized.             Because the minimum increment by which

coverage can be adjusted is one month, it follows that         E [Ci (1) - Ci (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0)] 
1,   and therefore that      P r (Ci (1) > Ci (0))  E [Ci (1) - Ci (0)]. Inspection of the coverage
distribution conrms this possibility is feasible (see Appendix Table A.6) and therefore

that the bound is sharp.               The results of this exercise are summarized in Column 3 of

Table 6. Summarizing the results of this analysis, the intervention caused between 1.4%

and 14.0% of the sample to increase their coverage during 2017. Columns 4-6 repeat this

exercise for total coverage during 2017 and 2018.

     23 We discuss this assumption in greater detail in Section 5.2.
     24 Appendix Table A.6 presents the aggregated data underlying these calculations.




                                                           15
5 Mortality Eects
In this section, we exploit the exogenous variation in health insurance induced by the

pilot to estimate the eect of the newly added coverage on mortality. To increase sta-

tistical power, we restrict most of the analyses in this section to previously uninsured

individuals between the ages of 45-64  a group for whom death is less rare compared to

younger individuals and a group for whom the eect of our intervention on coverage is
                                  25
relatively large (see Table 4).        We consider the robustness of our results to other sample

populations below.



5.1 The Eect of the Outreach Intervention on Mortality
Panel A of Figure 3 presents the cumulative mortality rate over time for our sample,

broken out by treatment group assignment, and Panel B plots the dierence between

the treatment groups in cumulative mortality over time.                  The mortality rates for the

two groups appear similar during 2016 but diverge over the 2 years following the pilot

intervention. The gure thus provides preliminary evidence that the intervention reduced
                                                                    26
mortality in the treatment group relative to the control.

    Table 7 presents regression estimates for the eect of the intervention on 2-year mor-

tality (i.e., deaths that occurred in 2017 or 2018).            The overall mortality rate for the

control group during this period was approximately 1%. Given the randomized design,

the dierence in the mortality rate between the treatment and control groups (i.e., the

intent-to-treat) captures the causal eect of the intervention on mortality. We estimate

that the intervention reduced mortality by 6.3 basis points during the 2-year sample pe-

riod (Column 1). The p-value associated with this estimate is approximately                    p = 0.01;
a permutation test yields similar results (Appendix Figure A.5).                 The estimated eect

is similar, but slightly smaller in magnitude (6.1 basis points), when individual- and

household-level controls are included in the regression (Column 2).                   Focusing on this

more conservative result, we estimate that one fewer death occurred during our sample

period for every 1,648 individuals in this population that were sent a letter. Note that

  25 Studies of health insurance on mortality typically restrict the sample population to older adults, but
the specic age range varies by study (compare Baker et al., 2006; Sommers, Baicker and Epstein, 2012;
Khatana et al., 2019; Miller et al., 2019). In our setting, the age range we consider shapes the power of
our analysis by aecting the strength of the rst stage (increasing in the minimum age included), the
baseline mortality rate (increasing in the minimum age included), and the sample size (decreasing in
the minimum age included). To consider these factors together, we simulate the eect of the pilot on
mortality under a range of assumptions about the magnitude of the eect and the baseline mortality
of the compliers. For 8 of the 12 combinations of parameter values we consider, the 45-64 year-old age
range maximizes the likelihood of detecting an eect of the treatment on mortality. See Appendix Figure
A.3 for details. As in our coverage analyses, we focus on individuals who lacked coverage at some point
during the prior year because the eects of the pilot on coverage appear to be limited to this group (see
Table (2)).
  26 The same pattern is also present (but noisier) in Appendix Figure A.4, which plots new deaths
(rather than cumulative mortality) over time by treatment and control group assignment.



                                                   16
this result speaks to the average number of life-years saved during the sample period

but not to their distribution; that is, we cannot separately identify how many lives were
                                                       27
extended from the average length of extension.

    To interpret our results, we adopt the assumption that the intervention did not aect

mortality through a channel other than inducing taxpayers to enroll in additional cover-

age. This exclusion restriction might be violated, for example, if receiving a letter from

the IRS directly contributes to mortality by causing health- or nancial-related stress on

the part of recipients.      Of course, we cannot entirely rule out such possibilities, but it

is dicult to conceive of plausible mechanisms by which the assumption would be vio-
                       28
lated in our setting.       Indeed, because our intervention does not provide individuals with

newly available coverage, it avoids a potential concern that is present in lottery-based

evaluations, i.e., that the eect of coverage on health outcomes is conated with the

psychological eect of winning a lottery to obtain coverage (a possibility discussed in

Finkelstein et al., 2012). Under the exclusion restriction, our results provides evidence

that the coverage induced by the intervention reduced taxpayers' mortality.

    We conduct two placebo checks to assess the assumptions underlying our interpre-

tation of the mortality results.       First, to investigate the possibility that the observed

mortality dierence in treatment and control resulted from preexisting health dierences

or changes in reporting behavior, Column 3 of Table 7 presents the eects of the treatment

on 2016 mortality (before the intervention occurred); the estimated eect is near-zero and

not statistically signicant. The second placebo focuses on the exclusion restriction  i.e.,

the assumption that the intervention aected mortality only through the change in cov-

erage it induced.     To test this assumption, Column 4 of Table 7 presents the eect of

the treatment on mortality for a subset of the population for which the intervention was

signicantly less likely to induce new coverage: individuals who were enrolled in full-year

coverage during 2016. If the intervention aected mortality through a channel other than

inducing new coverage, we might observe its eect here as well. Instead, we estimate the

eect of the intervention on mortality for this group to be much smaller (1 basis point)

and not statistically signicant.

    We consider several other robustness checks as well. Appendix Table A.7 shows that

the presence (but not the magnitude) of the mortality eect is reasonably robust to adopt-

  27 For example, the following two cases would contribute equally to our observed eect: (1) the in-
tervention causes one person to die on 1/1/2019 instead of 1/1/2017; and, (2) the intervention causes
one person to die on 1/1/2018 instead of 1/1/2017 and a dierent person to die on 1/1/2019 instead of
1/1/2018.
  28 One possibility is that some of the individuals induced to apply for coverage are subsequently re-
cruited to participate in safety net programs like SNAP or TANF, and it is participation in these
programs, rather than health insurance, that reduces mortality. However, our nding that the mortality
eects are primarily concentrated among individuals in households above the Medicaid income threshold
(discussed below) provides evidence against this hypothesis.   Our results are consistent with the pos-
sibility that mortality is reduced via nancial rather than medical eects of coverage, but the medical
mechanism strikes us as more plausible, especially over the relatively short time period we observe.




                                                  17
ing alternative age cutos for dening the sample. Appendix Table A.8 includes in the

analysis individuals who were already fully insured in the year prior to the intervention,

and who therefore lacked a substantial rst-stage eect. As expected, the estimated eect

of the intervention is attenuated for this sample (4.5 basis points), but remains statis-

tically signicant. Finally, Appendix Table A.9 shows that the presence of a mortality

eect is not sensitive to estimating a non-linear limited dependent variable or duration

model; for example, a log-rank test rejects the null hypothesis of equality between the

treatment and control group survival curves.

   To further investigate variation in the observed mortality eect by age, Figure 4 plots

the estimated eect of the intervention by 10-year age bin. The gure provides evidence

that the coverage induced by the pilot reduced mortality even among the younger group

of middle-aged adults we consider (45-54 year-olds). The estimated mortality reduction

for 55-64 year-olds is of similar magnitude but is less precisely estimated. In contrast, we

observe no reductions in mortality among age groups younger than 45, consistent with

the prior quasi-experimental ndings reported in Sommers, Baicker and Epstein (2012)

and Miller et al. (2019).

   Appendix Table A.10 presents several additional analyses to better understand the

primary mortality results.   Columns 1 and 2 estimate the eect of the intervention on

mortality separately for men and women; the estimated eect for women is somewhat

larger in both absolute magnitude and percentage terms, but the dierence is not sta-

tistically signicant. We next investigate whether the observed mortality eect is driven

by Medicaid or Exchange enrollment.      To do so, we exploit the fact that most of the

observed increase in Medicaid enrollment comes from individuals whose 2016 household

income is below the Medicaid threshold (see Table A.3).       Columns 3 and 4 show that

the estimated mortality reduction is larger for those whose incomes exceed the Medicaid

threshold, consistent with the observed reduction in mortality being primarily driven by

enrollment in Exchange coverage.

   Turning to the mechanism by which coverage reduces mortality, a limitation of our

analysis is that we lack data on cause of death.     However, the fact that we observe a

mortality eect within the initial 1-2 years after the intervention narrows the range of

possibilities. For coverage to reduce mortality over this time horizon, it must aect con-

ditions that: (1) can cause death quickly if left untreated or unmanaged, and (2) for

which treatment or management can prevent or delay mortality. For example, individ-

uals lacking health insurance may delay seeking care when experiencing symptoms of

acute conditions (e.g., heart attack or stroke), and such delays increase the likelihood

of short-term mortality (Smolderen et al., 2010; Medford-Davis et al., 2016). Consistent

with this hypothesis, recall that our observed mortality eect is concentrated among in-

dividuals with incomes too high to qualify for Medicaid (including retroactive coverage),

and who may therefore expect a larger bill from an emergency room visit. In addition,



                                            18
prior research suggests women are more likely to delay obtaining emergency care than

men (Safdar, Lichtman and D'Onofrio, 2012), which may explain why we observe compa-

rable mortality eects for women and men despite the latter's higher baseline mortality

risk.   Separately, obtaining coverage may reduce mortality by causing the diagnosis of

certain chronic conditions for which treatment has rapid protective eects. For example,

cardiovascular drugs have been observed to reduce mortality from heart disease within

months of beginning treatment (Aronow et al., 2001; Cannon et al., 2004), and Khatana

et al. (2019) report reductions in mortality from cardiovascular disease in the initial years

following state Medicaid expansions. In contrast, coverage would not be expected to drive

such rapid mortality eects by inducing diagnosis of chronic conditions that are suscep-

tible to early- but not late-stage treatment, such as certain forms of cancer (Sommers,

Long and Baicker, 2014).



5.2 The Eect of Outreach-Induced Coverage on Mortality
The results in the prior sub-section provide evidence that the coverage induced by the

intervention reduced mortality, but do not directly speak to the magnitude of this eect.

In this sub-section, we exploit treatment group assignment as an instrument for coverage

to better understand the relationship between coverage and mortality.



5.2.1 Empirical Framework
As above, let   Zi   indicate whether individual   i   was assigned to the treatment group. Ci
denotes the months of coverage in which    i was enrolled during 2017 and 2018,     and Ci (Z )

denotes the months of coverage over the same time period in which i would have enrolled

had i been assigned to treatment group Z . Let Yi indicate whether i died in either 2017

or 2018 and Yi (C ) indicate whether i would have died during this period had i enrolled in

C months of coverage. Note that because treatment group status was randomly assigned,
the potential outcomes Yi (C ) and Ci (Z ) are jointly independent of Zi , for each value of

C and Z .
    We assume that the eect of the intervention on coverage is monotonic:             each in-

dividual obtains (weakly) more coverage when assigned to the treatment group rather

than the control,     Ci (1)  Ci (0) i.   Because we observe coverage decisions under ei-

ther the treatment or the control (but not both), monotonicity is not directly veri-

able.   However, a necessary condition for monotonicity to hold in our setting is that

the CDFs of coverage for the treatment and control groups do not cross one another,

P r (Ci (1)  m)  P r (Ci (0)  m) m  {0, 1, ..., 24}           (Angrist and Imbens, 1995). Ap-

pendix Figure A.6 establishes that this condition is satised in our data.         In addition,

because monotonicity must hold for each individual, the assumption also implies that

the cumulative distributions should not cross among any subset of the sample (at least



                                              19
in expectation). Appendix Figure A.7 presents evidence consistent with this hypothesis

from various demographic subgroups.

    When monotonicity, independence, and the exclusion restriction (described above)

are satised, the two-stage least squares estimator identies the              average causal response
(ACR) of a treatment  i.e., the treatment's per-unit eect, averaged over the additional

units of treatment that are due to the instrument (Angrist and Imbens, 1995):




                                        12
   E [Yi |Zi = 1] - E [Yi |Zi = 0]
                                   =   wm E [Yi (m) - Yi (m - 1) | Ci (1)  m > Ci (0)]                (2)
   E [Ci |Zi = 1] - E [Ci |Zi = 0] m=1

where
                                          P r (Ci (1)  m > Ci (0))
                                 wm =    24
                                               P r (Ci (1)  j > Ci (0))
                                        j =1

In our setting, the ACR corresponds to the per-month eect of coverage on mortality,

averaged over the additional months of coverage that individuals enrolled in because of

the pilot.



5.2.2 Instrumental Variable Results
Table 8 presents results for the instrumental variables analysis. As a benchmark, Column

1 presents the results from an OLS regression of mortality on coverage. Each additional

month of coverage is associated with a small (2.6 basis points) but statistically signif-

icant reduction in the probability of dying.             However, the OLS estimates may conate

dierences in mortality with dierences in the health of those who select into coverage.

    Column 2 of Table 8 presents the rst stage eect of the intervention on months of cov-
         29
erage.        Among the 45-64 year-old population used in the mortality analysis, the average

eect of the intervention on coverage is an increase of 0.36 months. Scaling the estimated

reduced form eect of the intervention (Column 1 of Table 7) by the rst stage coecient

yields our two-stage least squares estimate of -0.18 percentage points (Column 3). Un-

der the independence, monotonicity, and the exclusion restriction assumptions described

above, this coecient estimates the average causal response of coverage on mortality  i.e.,
                                                                                                       30
the average per-month eect of the extra coverage-months induced by the intervention.

The 95% condence interval extends from -0.31 to -0.04 percentage points. It is striking

  29 We focus on months of coverage enrolled in during the sample period rather than a binary indicator
for having any coverage; using the latter would violate the exclusion restriction if some individuals, who
would have enrolled in positive months of coverage even absent the intervention, enroll in more months
of coverage because of the intervention and these additional coverage-months contribute to the observed
mortality eect.
  30 Below, we present suggestive evidence that enrolling in an additional year of coverage reduces mor-
tality by less than 12 times this per-month eect.




                                                    20
to note that the OLS and 2SLS condence intervals do not overlap, consistent with the

possibility that adverse selection into coverage attenuates cross-sectional estimates of the

eect of coverage on mortality.

    To increase the precision of the IV analysis, we experimented with two additional spec-

ications. Column 4 replicates the two-stage least-squares specication but additionally

includes demographic and geographic controls. The results are similar to the specication

without controls. Column 5 expands the sample to include the full population of 45-64

year-olds, including those who were fully insured in the year prior to the intervention.

Because this group had a much smaller rst-stage than the overall population, to increase

power we include an interaction between the treatment and an indicator for having cov-

erage in each month of 2016.             The resulting point estimate is nearly identical to that

obtained from our main IV specication.

    Interpreting the average causal response (ACR) of coverage on mortality requires un-

derstanding which taxpayers enrolled in additional coverage because of the intervention,

as well as the nature of the additional coverage-months enrolled in by this group. The

remainder of this section provides suggestive evidence on these issues.

    First, to shed light on the distribution of new coverage-months induced by the treat-

ment, we estimate, for each      m:

                                              Cim =  + m Zi +                                               (3)



where     Cim   indicates whether   i    attains at least   m   months of coverage,      Ci  m.     The     m
coecients identify the weights           (wm ) from Equation (2) that aggregate the per-month ef-
                                        31
fects of coverage into the ACR.              Appendix Figure A.8 displays the results of this analysis.

The intervention added more initial coverage-months than subsequent coverage-months;

for example, 15.2 percent of the coverage-months added by the intervention constituted

the rst, second, or third month of coverage in which the individual was enrolled during

2017-18, as compared to 6.7 percent of coverage-months that constituted the 22nd, 23rd,

or 24th month of coverage for the individual during the same time period.                         This sug-

gests the ACR is disproportionately weighted towards the per-month eect of coverage

of initial coverage-months. An important implication is that if the relationship between

coverage and mortality is concave, simply multiplying the ACR by 12 would over-estimate

the eect of      annual   coverage on mortality. Such concavity might arise, for example, if

individuals can obtain many of the health benets of full-year coverage by tting their

health service consumption into the months in which they do have coverage (Diamond

et al., 2018). Similarly, for individuals who previously lacked coverage, purchasing even

a few months of coverage may be enough to induce individuals to visit a doctor, and

  31 In particular, under independence and monotonicity,        m   identies   P r(Ci (1)  m > Ci (0)),   which
                 m
implies   wm =   m m .




                                                       21
some fraction of those that do so obtain treatment for a life-threatening, but previously

undiagnosed, condition.

    A second, and related, point is that the ACR may exceed the steady-state eects of

coverage on mortality to the extent it is identied from new coverage-months enrolled in

by the recently uninsured. Without insurance, individuals may avoid or delay benecial

health services, especially when they expect to qualify for Medicare coverage in a few

years' time (Card, Dobkin and Maestas, 2008; Alpert, Lakdawalla and Sood, 2016; Freed,

2017). Because the health benets of the services consumed by the newly insured will

be higher than the long-term insured, the rst year of coverage may have a larger eect
                                                        32
on health than subsequent years of coverage.                 To shed light on this hypothesis, Table

9 describes characteristics of individuals who enroll in any 2017 coverage because of the
                                 33
treatment (the compliers).            We nd strong evidence that compliers are in fact less

likely to be insured in prior years than the others in our sample. Hence, the coverage-

months that identify the ACR disproportionately constitute coverage for the recently

uninsured.

    Third, as a benchmark for interpreting the magnitude of the estimated eect, re-

call that the average mortality rate among the control group over our two-year outcome

period is approximately 1.0%.         However, the baseline mortality rate (i.e., the mortal-

ity rate without any insurance) for those who are induced to increase coverage by the

treatment may exceed the average mortality rate among the overall control group, po-

tentially by a signicant margin (Miller et al., 2019). Identifying the baseline mortality

rate among those who increased coverage because of the intervention requires additional

structure in IV settings like ours in which the endogenous variable is non-binary. In an

Appendix, we show that a sucient condition to identify this parameter is that everyone

who responds to the intervention does so exclusively along the extensive margin  i.e.,

P r (Ci (1) > Ci (0) > 0) = 0.    This assumption strikes us as plausible when           Ci   is dened

in terms of 2017 coverage, given the timing of the intervention and the annual nature of

the enrollment window, but not for 2017-18 coverage, since the intervention likely caused

some individuals to enroll in 2017 coverage who would have enrolled in 2018 coverage

  32 Although the ACR may over-state the steady-state eect of coverage, it may simultaneously under-
state the longer-term mortality benets. For example, if obtaining 2017 coverage extends one's life from
2019 to 2020, that eect will not be reected in the ACR. With only two years of outcome data, our
analysis is not well-suited to study these longer-term eects or to disentangle the contemporaneous versus
long-term eects of coverage.
  33 In settings with a binary instrument and binary endogenous variable, it is common to report char-
acteristics of the compliers (Abadie, 2002). In our setting, because coverage is non-binary, the group we
label as the compliers corresponds to a subset of all those who respond to the instrument  specically,
those for whom the instrument aects the number of months of 2017 coverage in which they enroll.
This analysis therefore omits individuals who respond with respect to two other margins: (1) those for
whom the instrument aects their 2018  but not 2017  coverage (e.g., because they miss the 2017 open
enrollment deadline), and (2) those who increase their 2017 coverage in response to the instrument but
only on the intensive margin. The results are similar when we dene compliers in related ways, such as
those who enroll in any 2017 or 2018 coverage because of the instrument.




                                                   22
                         34
absent treatment.             Imposing this assumption that the 2017 coverage response occurred

exclusively along the extensive margin, we estimate a baseline one-year mortality rate

among the compliers of 0.7% (Table 9). Multiplying this estimated rate by two yields an

estimated baseline mortality rate among compliers of 1.4% during our two-year sample

period, approximately 40% higher than the overall control group mean. Hence, our point

estimate implies that each month of coverage induced by the intervention reduced mor-

tality by approximately 11.9% during our sample period. Note that the magnitude of this

estimate constitutes additional evidence against a linear dose-response relationship be-

tween coverage and mortality; if the relationship was linear, 12 months of coverage would

translate into an over 100% decline in mortality during the sample period, which is of

course larger than what is possible. However, as discussed above, this point estimate is

consistent with a range of eect sizes; the upper bound of our condence interval implies

that each month of coverage (on average) reduces baseline mortality among those who

enroll in coverage by approximately 2.4%, which is consistent with a linear relationship

between coverage and mortality.

    Finally, there are at least two possible reasons why our estimated ACR may be biased

upward in magnitude. The rst concerns a failure of the monotonicity assumption. If

some individuals are nudge averse, receiving the IRS letter could cause them to enroll

in less coverage than they would otherwise obtain (Gill, 2018). If the protective eect

of coverage on mortality is lower than average for this group, our rst-stage would un-

derestimate the true eect of the intervention on coverage and bias the 2SLS estimate

away from zero.          The second possibility is that the health benets of coverage are not

limited to the individuals who enroll, but also spill over to others in the same household
                    35
or community.            If so, this would also bias the 2SLS estimate upwards in magnitude.

Although we cannot rule out these possibilities, we note that neither would predict our

observing an eect of the intervention on mortality (i.e., a non-zero intent-to-treat) if

none was present.



5.3 Comparison to Findings from Other Research
With respect to our mortality analysis, the previous study closest to ours in design is

the Oregon Health Insurance Study (Finkelstein et al., 2012), which randomized access

to Medicaid among a low-income population of applicants. The Oregon study did not

nd a statistically signicant eect of coverage on mortality; however, our 95% condence

interval substantially overlaps with theirs, with both including average causal responses of

  34 Appendix Figure A.9 provides additional evidence that is consistent with the assumption holding for
2017 coverage:     P r (Ci (1) = 0) < P r (Ci (0) = 0)   and for each   m  {1, 2, ...12},   either   P r (Ci (1) = m) >
P r (Ci (0) = m)   or else the dierence is not statistically signicant.
  35 On this point, we refer readers to the discussion and literature review in Borgschulte and Vogler
(2019), who argue that such spillover eects may explain why studies in this literature tend to observe
very large eects of coverage among the treated.



                                                          23
coverage on mortality between -0.032 and -0.101 percentage points (see Appendix Table
                      36
A.11, Column 1).           In addition, the average age in the Oregon study population was

41, compared to 53 among the middle-aged adults included in our mortality analysis.

If the protective eect of coverage on mortality increases (in absolute terms) in age, as

suggested by Figure 4, it may be that dierences in the age distribution of the two study
                                                                         37
populations contributes to the dierence in point estimates.                   Indeed, re-weighting the

Oregon analysis to reect the age distribution of our middle-age sample increases the

point estimate for the eect of coverage on mortality by almost 60% and increases the

range of overlap in the estimated condence intervals (Appendix Table A.11, Column
      38
2).

      Turning to the non-experimental literature, our ability to compare our estimates to

the results from the quasi-experimental studies referenced above is limited because most

of these studies report mortality and coverage eects only over a 4- or 5-year time hori-

zon. If the relationship between coverage and mortality is concave (as discussed in the

prior subsection), the average per-month eect of coverage estimated in such studies is

not comparable to ours. Luckily, although Miller et al. (2019) primarily focus on 4-year

mortality in their study of the eect of the ACA Medicaid expansions, they also report

estimates for the mortality and coverage eects in the rst two years following the ex-
           39
pansion.        These estimates imply an ACR of coverage on 2-year mortality that is similar

to the one we estimate (Appendix Table A.11, Column 3).

      Finally, although our results are qualitatively consistent with much of the prior ev-

idence that health insurance coverage reduces adult mortality, an important dierence

from the prior literature is the type of variation in coverage that we study. Whereas most

prior literature studies expanded access to free coverage among those previously ineligi-

  36 In this section we focus on the condence interval derived from our 2SLS specication with controls
(Column 4 of Table 8).
  37 Consistent with this hypothesis, Miller et al. (2019) point out that the estimated mortality eect from
the Oregon Study for older individuals is substantially larger in magnitude than for its overall sample
population. A dierent possibility is that the discrepancy between our results and those obtained in the
Oregon Study are driven by dierences in the eectiveness of preventing mortality between Medicaid and
Exchange coverage. Whereas the entire coverage eect studied by Finkelstein et al. was due to increased
Medicaid coverage, our rst stage is due to increased enrollment in both Medicaid and Exchange coverage.
If only Exchange coverage reduces mortality, that fact might explain why we observe a mortality eect
whereas they do not. However, this hypothesis is not consistent with ndings from Sommers, Baicker
and Epstein (2012) and Miller et al. (2019) that expanded Medicaid access did reduce mortality.
  38 The SSDI Accelerated Benets demonstration project (Michalopoulos et al., 2011; Weathers and
Stegman, 2012)  the only other randomized study of health insurance access on mortality of which we
are aware  also failed to detect a benecial eect of coverage on mortality. Like the Oregon study, its
population, which was limited to 18-54 year-olds, was substantially younger than our mortality analysis
sample.    In addition, Weathers and Stegman (2012) report that the estimated eect of coverage on
mortality for the study population may have been confounded by baseline dierences in the prevalence
of early-stage cancers among treatment and control group members.
  39 Even focusing on a 2-year outcome period, the ACR derived from the Miller et al. estimates is not
directly comparable to ours because that study measures uninsurance at a single point in time each year
rather than on a monthly basis (see the discussion in Section 5.2.2, above). In addition, Miller et al.
focus exclusively on Medicaid coverage whereas we focus on having any form of insurance.



                                                   24
ble for it, our intervention did not alter the coverage our sample population could access.

Rather, it induced more individuals to enroll in coverage that was already available to

them. In a standard adverse selection model, one might expect that individuals who elect

not to enroll in available coverage are unlikely to benet from such coverage  otherwise,

they would have chosen to sign up. In contrast, our nding that the intervention reduced

mortality for this group suggests that the behavioral frictions that reduce coverage take-

up may be particularly concentrated among those individuals who would benet from

enrolling.




6 Conclusion
Drawing on a randomized pilot intervention, we examined the eect of outreach about tax

incentives to enroll in health insurance coverage among taxpayers who had previously paid

a penalty for lacking coverage. We found positive eects of the intervention on subsequent

coverage enrollment decisions, particularly for taxpayers who were uninsured in the year

prior to the intervention. We also found that the intervention reduced mortality among

middle-aged adults in the subsequent two years, which we attribute to the additional

coverage the intervention induced. Our ndings thus provide strong empirical support,

and the rst experimental evidence, for the hypothesis that health insurance coverage

reduces mortality.

   Our results also speak to important policy questions surrounding the use of outreach

strategies to increase health insurance coverage.     Ex ante, one might predict that the

individuals who choose to forego coverage (absent outreach) would be those for whom

the health benets of coverage tend to be small, especially when the outreach concerns

nancial penalties for remaining uninsured.        However, this is precisely the group that

identies our estimated eect of coverage on mortality.         Our results therefore suggest

that behavioral frictions like salience or inattention shape how tax incentives interact with

adverse selection in health insurance markets. In addition to reducing adverse selection

(their typical rationale), outreach eorts of the type we study may yield substantial health

benets.

   Although we provide evidence that the pilot intervention reduced mortality, the con-

dence interval from the two-stage least-squares estimate is consistent with both moderate

and very large eects. Combining our ndings with results from other research on this

topic through meta-analyses, as proposed by Sutton and Abrams (2001), is one path

through which future research may succeed in more precisely estimating the causal rela-

tionship between coverage and mortality.

   An important limitation of our analysis is that our sample period covers only two

years of outcome data post-intervention. As a result, our results speak only to the short-

term eects of coverage on mortality. Longer-term mortality eects may be present as



                                             25
well.   For example, coverage may induce treatment for chronic conditions that would

otherwise hasten, but not immediately cause, mortality.    Similarly, additional years of

outcome data would shed light on the longer-term survival prospects of those whose lives

were extended because of the new coverage. Depending on the persistence of the coverage

eect, additional years of data could also shed light on the steady-state eects of the new

coverage on mortality, as well as on the curvature of the relationship. Although we hope

to study these questions in future work as additional data become available, we note that

the eective repeal of the individual mandate in 2019 may limit the eect of the pilot on

coverage to 2017 and 2018.

   Finally, although mortality is an important input into welfare, we lack data on many

of the other factors that would enter a careful cost-benet of outreach, such as nancial

well-being and health outcomes other than mortality.     Along the same lines, because

we lack data on health expenditures, we are unable to investigate how the intervention

shaped adverse selection in health insurance markets. In future research, we hope to link

the pilot study to data that would permit consideration of these questions.




                                           26
References
Abadie, Alberto. 2002. Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Eects in Instru-
  mental Variable Models.   Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(457): 284
  292.


Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber.             2011.  Choice Inconsistencies among the

  Elderly:   Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D program.         American
  Economic Review, 101(4): 11801210.
Abeler, Johannes, and Simon Jäger.           2015.  Complex Tax Incentives.    American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(3): 128.
Alpert, Abby, Darius Lakdawalla, and Neeraj Sood.               2016.  Prescription Drug

  Advertising and Drug Utilization: The Role of Medicare Part D.


Angrist, Joshua, and Guido Imbens. 1995. Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of
  Average Causal Eects in Models With Variable Treatment Intensity.       Journal of the
  American Statistical Association.
Aronow, Herbert D, Eric J Topol, Matthew T Roe, Penny L Houghtaling,
 Katherine E Wolski, A Michael Linco, Robert A Harrington, Robert M
 Cali, E Magnus Ohman, Neal S Kleiman, et al. 2001. Eect of lipid-lowering
  therapy on early mortality after acute coronary syndromes: an observational study.

  The Lancet, 357(9262): 10631068.
Auerbach, David, Janet Holtzblatt, Paul Jacobs, Alexandra Minicozzi,
 Pamela Moomau, and Chapin White. 2010. Will health insurance mandates
  increase coverage?    Synthesizing perspectives from health, tax, and behavioral eco-

  nomics.    National Tax Journal, 63(4): 659.
Baker, David W, Joseph J Sudano, Ramon Durazo-Arvizu, Joseph Feinglass,
 Whitney P Witt, and Jason Thompson. 2006. Health insurance coverage and the
  risk of decline in overall health and death among the near elderly, 1992-2002.   Medical
  care, 277282.
Black, Bernard, Alex Hollingsworth, Leticia Nunes, and Kosali Simon. 2019.
   The Eect of Health Insurance on Mortality: Power Analysis and What We Can Learn

  from the Aordable Care Act Coverage Expansions. National Bureau of Economic

  Research Working Paper 25568.


Borgschulte, Mark, and Jacob Vogler.             2019. Did the ACA Medicaid Expansion

  Save Lives?




                                           27
Borusyak, Kirill.   2015.  Bounding the Population Shares Aected by Treatments.

  SSRN Working Paper 2473827.


Brown, David W, Amanda E Kowalski, and Ithai Z Lurie. Forthcoming.  Long-
  Term Impacts of Childhood Medicaid Expansions on Outcomes in Adulthood.            Review
  of Economics Studies, , (20835).
Buchmueller, Thomas C., John DiNardo, and Robert G. Valletta. 2011.  The
  Eect of an Employer Health Insurance Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage and the

  Demand for Labor: Evidence from Hawaii.        American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 3(4): 2551.
Cannon, Christopher P, Eugene Braunwald, Carolyn H McCabe, Daniel J
 Rader, Jean L Rouleau, Rene Belder, Steven V Joyal, Karen A Hill,
 Marc A Pfeer, and Allan M Skene. 2004. Intensive versus moderate lipid low-
  ering with statins after acute coronary syndromes.    New England journal of medicine,
  350(15): 14951504.


Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas.              2008.  The impact of nearly

  universal insurance coverage on health care utilization: evidence from Medicare.   Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 98(5): 22422258.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas.               2009.  Does Medicare Save

  Lives?   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2): 597636.
Chandra, Amitabh, Benjamin Handel, and Joshua Schwartzstein.                   2018.  Be-

  havioral Economics and Health-Care Markets. Working Paper.


Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009.  Salience and Taxation:            Theory

  and Evidence.   American Economic Review, 99(4): 114577.
Commonwealth Fund. 2017. Cuts to the ACA's Outreach Budget Will Make It Harder
  for People to Enroll.


Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber.                 a
                                                1996 .  Health Insurance Eligibility, Uti-

  lization of Medical Care, and Child Health*.      The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  111(2): 431466.


Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. Saving babies:           The ecacy and cost

  of recent changes in the Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women.     Journal of political
  Economy, 104(6): 12631296.
Diamond, Rebecca, Michael J Dickstein, Timothy McQuade, and Petra Pers-
 son. 2018. Take-Up, Drop-Out, and Spending in ACA Marketplaces. National Bureau
  of Economic Research Working Paper 24668.


                                           28
Dorn, Stan.    2019. Maryland's Easy Enrollment Health Insurance Program.        Health
  Aairs Blog.
Escobar, Maria-Luisa, Charles C. Grin, and R. Paul Shaw. 2011. The impact
  of health insurance in low-and middle-income countries. Brookings Institution Press.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight.           2008.  What Did Medicare Do?       The

  Initial Impact of Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending.   Journal
  of Public Economics, 92(7): 16441668.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Mark Shepard.              2017.  Subsidizing

  Health Insurance for Low-Income Adults:      Evidence from Massachusetts. Working

  Paper 23668.


Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Gruber Jonathan, Joseph P
  Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and Oregon Health Study
  Group. 2012.  The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First
  Year.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 10571106.
Frean, Molly, Jonathan Gruber, and Benjamin D. Sommers. 2016.  Disentan-
  gling the ACA's Coverage Eects: Lessons for Policymakers.    New England Journal of
  Medicine, 375: 16051608.
Frean, Molly, Jonathan Gruber, and Benjamin D. Sommers.                2017.  Premium

  Subsidies, the Mandate, and Medicaid Expansion: Coverage Eects of the Aordable

  Care Act.   Journal of Health Economics, 53: 7286.
Freed, Salama. 2017.  Insurance Take-Up Among the Near-Elderly in the Age of the
  Aordable Care Act. Working Paper.


Gallagher, Kelly Sims, and Erich Muehlegger. 2011.  Giving green to get green?
  Incentives and consumer adoption of hybrid vehicle technology.   Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management, 61(1): 115.
Giedion, Ursula, Eduardo Andres Alfonso, and Yadira Diaz. 2013. The Impact
  of Universal Coverage Schemes in the Developing World: A Review of the Existing

  Evidence. The World Bank.


Gill, Dee.   2018. Researchers nd common warning signs in persuasion projects that

  went wrong.    UCLA Anderson Review.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew.         2018. Public insurance and mortality:     evidence from

  Medicaid implementation.   Journal of Political Economy, 126(1): 216262.


                                          29
Hackmann, Martin B., Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2015.
   Adverse Selection and an Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice.         Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 105(3): 10301066.
Handel, Benjamin R. 2013.  Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Mar-
  kets: When Nudging Hurts.    American Economic Review, 103(7): 264382.
Handel, Benjamin R., and Jonathan T. Kolstad. 2015.  Health Insurance for "Hu-
  mans": Information Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare.       American Eco-
  nomic Review, 105(8): 24492500.
Handel, Benjamin R., Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Johannes Spinnewijn. 2018.
   Information Frictions and Adverse Selection: Policy Interventions in Health Insurance

  Markets.   Review of Economics and Statistics.
Heim, Brad, I. Z. Lurie, and Daniel Sacks. 2019. Does the individual mandate aect
  insurance coverage?   Regression kink evidence from the population of tax returns.

  Working Paper.
Institute of Medicine.     2002.   Care without coverage: Too little, too late.   National

  Academy Press.


Khatana, Sameed Ahmed M, Anjali Bhatla, Ashwin S Nathan, Jay Giri,
 Changyu Shen, Dhruv S Kazi, Robert W Yeh, and Peter W Groeneveld.
  2019. Association of medicaid expansion with cardiovascular mortality.   JAMA cardi-
  ology.
Kronick, Richard.     2009. Health insurance coverage and mortality revisited.      Health
  services research, 44(4): 12111231.
Levitis, Jason A. 2018.  State Individual Mandates. Center for Health Policy at Brook-
  ings Report.


Levy, Helen, and David Meltzer. 2008. The impact of health insurance on health.
  Annu. Rev. Public Health, 29: 399409.
Loewenstein, George, Joelle Y. Friedman, Barbara McGill, Sarah Ahmad,
  Suzanne Linck, Stacey Sinkula, John Beshears, James J. Choi, Jonathan
  Kolstad, and David Laibson. 2013.  Consumers' Misunderstanding of Health In-
  surance.   Journal of Health Economics, 32(5): 850862.
Lurie, Ithai, and James Pearce. 2019. Health Insurance Coverage from Administra-
  tive Tax Data.   Treasury Working Paper.


                                            30
Lurie, Ithai Z, and Janet McCubbin. 2016. What Can Tax Data Tell Us about the
  Uninsured? Evidence from 2014.     National Tax Journal, 69(4): 883.
Medford-Davis, Laura N., Gregg C. Fonarow, Deepak L. Bhatt, Deepak L.
 Xu, Eric E. Smith, Robert Suter, Eric D. Peterson, Ying Xian, Roland A.
 Matsouaka, and Lee H. Schwamm. 2016.  Impact of Insurance Status on Outcomes
  and Use of Rehabilitation Services in Acute Ischemic Stroke: Findings From Get With

  The Guidelines-Stroke.   Journal of the American Heart Association, 5(11).
Meyer, Bruce D, and Laura R Wherry. 2012.  Saving Teens:         Using a Policy Discon-

  tinuity to Estimate the Eects of Medicaid Eligibility. National Bureau of Economic

  Research Working Paper 18309.


Michalopoulos, Charles, David Wittenburg, Dina Israel, Jennifer Schore,
 Anne Warren, Aparajita Zutshi, Stephen Freedman, and Lisa Schwarts.
  2011.  The Accelerated Benets Demonstration and Evaluation Project: Impacts on

  Health and Employment at Twelve Months , Volume 1.


Miller, Sarah, Sean Altekruse, Norman Johnson, and Laura R. Wherry. 2019.
   Medicaid and Mortality:    New Evidence from Linked Survey and Administrative

  Data. Working Paper.


Newhouse, Joseph P, and the Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All?:
  Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. MAHarvard University Press.
Newhouse, Joseph P, et al. 1993. Free for all?     Harvard University Press.


Phillip, Levine;, Robin McKnight, and Samantha Heep. 2011.  How Eective are
  Public Policies to Increase Health Insurance Coverage among Young Adults?     Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1): 129156.
Phillips, Kristine. 2017.  `Nobody dies because they don't have access to health care,'
  GOP lawmaker says. He got booed.     Washington Post.
Safdar, Basmah, Judith H. Lichtman, and Gail D'Onofrio. 2012. Sex and the
  CT: An Evolving Story of the Heart.   Academic Emergency Medicine, 19(2): 197200.
Smolderen, Kim, John Spertus, Brahmajee K. Nallamothu, Harlan M.
 Krumholz, Fengming Tang, Joseph S. Ross, Henry H. Ting, Karen P.
 Alexander, Saif S. Rathore, and Paul S. Chan. 2010.  Health Care Insurance,
  Financial Concerns, and Delays to Hospital Presentation in Acute Myocardial Infarc-

  tion.   JAMA, 303(14): 13921400.



                                           31
Sommers, Benjamin D, Katherine Baicker, and Arnold M Epstein. 2012.  Mor-
  tality and Access to Care among Adults after State Medicaid Expansions.   New England
  Journal of Medicine, 367(11): 10251034.
Sommers, Benjamin D, Sharon K Long, and Katherine Baicker. 2014.  Changes
  in Mortality after Massachusetts Health Care Reform: a Quasi-Experimental Study.

  Annals of Internal Medicine, 160(9): 585593.
Sutton, Alex J, and Keith R Abrams. 2001. Bayesian methods in meta-analysis and
  evidence synthesis.   Statistical Methods in Medical Research,   10(4): 277303. PMID:

  11491414.


Swaminathan, Shailender, Benjamin D Sommers, Rebecca Thorsness, Rajnish
 Mehrotra, Yoojin Lee, and Amal N Trivedi. 2018. Association of Medicaid
  expansion with 1-year mortality among patients with end-stage renal disease.   Jama,
  320(21): 22422250.


Weathers, Robert R, II, and Michelle Stegman. 2012.  The Eect of Expanding
  Access to Health Insurance on the Health and Mortality of Social Security Disability

  Insurance Beneciaries.    Journal of Health Economics, 31(6): 863875.
Woolhandler, Stee, and David U Himmelstein. 2017.  The Relationship of Health
  Insurance and Mortality: Is Lack of Insurance Deadly?    Annals of internal medicine,
  167(6): 424431.




                                           32
                                                          Figure 1: Coverage Rates by Month



                                                                         Panel A
                                       50
                                       45
  Coverage Rate (%)
                                       40
                                       35
                                       30
                                       25
                                       20




                                                                                                    Control
                                       15




                                                                                                    Treatment
                                       10




                                              Jan   May    Sep     Jan   May    Sep    Jan    May      Sep
                                             2016                 2017                2018


                                                                         Panel B
  Difference in Coverage Rate (p.p.)
                                       1.6
                                       1.2
                                       0.8
                                       0.4




                                                                                                    Difference
                                       0.0




                                                                                                    95% CI

                                              Jan   May    Sep     Jan   May    Sep    Jan    May      Sep
                                             2016                 2017                2018

Notes: Panel A displays the shares of the treatment and control group enrolled in any coverage
in the specified month. Panel B displays the difference in the share between the treatment and
control groups enrolled in any coverage in the specified month. Units are percentage points
(0-100). Both panels exclude individuals with full coverage in January through November of
2016. Brackets denote the 95% confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered
by household.




                                                                         33
Figure 2: Eect of Intervention on Number of Covered Months in 2017




                                       2.0
  Difference in Coverage Rate (p.p.)
                                       1.5
                                       1.0
                                       0.5
                                       -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0




                                                                    0      1       2       3      4       5        6     7      8       9      10     11      12
                                                                                           Number of Months Covered in 2017
                                                                 Notes: The figure denotes the difference between the treatment and control groups in the share
                                                                 of individuals who enroll in the specified number of months of 2017 coverage. The vertical axis
                                                                 units are percentage points (0-100). Positive values indicate more individuals were enrolled in the
                                                                 specified number of months of coverage in the treatment group relative to the control group. The
                                                                 analysis excludes individuals with full coverage in January through November of 2016.
                                                                 Brackets denote the 95% confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered by.
                                                                 household.




                                                                                                              34
                                                                               Figure 3: Mortality Over Time by Treatment Group



                                                                                                               Panel A


                                            0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
  Cumulative Mortality (%)                                                                 Treatment
                                                                                           Control




                                                                               Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov
                                                                              2016                    2017                    2018


                                                                                                               Panel B
  Difference in Cumulative Mortality (pp)
                                            0.15




                                                                                           Difference
                                                                                           95% CI
                                            0.10
                                            0.05
                                            0.00
                                            -0.05




                                                                               Jan        Jul            Jan        Jul        Jan        Jul       Dec
                                                                              2016                      2017                  2018

Notes: Panel A displays the share of individuals that died during or prior to the specified date.
Panel B displays the difference in the cumulative mortality rate between the control and treatment
groups. Units are percentage points (0-100). The difference is calculated at six-month intervals
that extend through the end of the specified month. Brackets denote the 95% confidence interval
based on standard errors that are clustered by household. Both panels are limited to individuals
between the ages of 45-64 at the start of 2017 and exclude individuals with full coverage in
January through November of 2016.




                                                                                                               35
                                                                    Figure 4: Mortality Eect by Age




                                          .15
   Effect of Treatment on Mortality (p.p.)
-.15 -.1 -.05        0    .05      .1




                                                5-14              15-24              25-34              35-44               45-54              55-64
                                                                                           Age Group
                                                 Notes: The figure displays the estimated effect of the intervention on 2017-18 mortality for individuals
                                                 in the specified age ranges. Units are percentage points (0-100). Ages are calculated at the start
                                                 of 2017. Brackets denote the 95% confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered by
                                                 household. The analysis excludes individuals with full coverage in January through November of
                                                 2016.




                                                                                             36
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics and Balance Checks


                                            (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)              (6)

                                            All        No Full-                        Experimental Sample

                                         Taxpayers       Year            All       Treatment     Control         Dierence
                                                       Coverage                                                   p-value


Individual characteristics
  Female                                   0.511         0.478          0.451        0.450        0.451           0.669
  Age                                       38.6         34.5            31.1         31.1         31.1           0.395
    0 - 18                                 0.239         0.265          0.271        0.271        0.271           0.374
    19 - 26                                0.111         0.128          0.136        0.136        0.136           0.756
    27 - 45                                0.242         0.290          0.349        0.349        0.349           0.681
    45 - 64                                0.261         0.230          0.230        0.230        0.230           0.977
    65 or older                            0.147         0.087          0.015        0.015        0.014           0.510

Household characteristics
  Married                                  0.554         0.450          0.414        0.414        0.414           0.860
  Household income                         78,534       30,159          42,710       42,699       42,783          0.349
  Income/Federal Poverty Line               4.16         1.61            2.35         2.35         2.36           0.523
    <    1.38                              0.366         0.657          0.267        0.267        0.266           0.143
    1.38 - 4.00                            0.276         0.228          0.629        0.629        0.630           0.429
         4.00                              0.358         0.115          0.104        0.103        0.104           0.313
  Household size                            2.81         2.86            2.74         2.74         2.74           0.725

Local characteristics
  High school degree or higher             0.866         0.835          0.835        0.835        0.835           0.546
  BA degree or higher                      0.299         0.264          0.249        0.249        0.249           0.331
  Expansion state                          0.618         0.523          0.560        0.560        0.560           0.819
  State-based marketplace                  0.344         0.288          0.222        0.222        0.222           0.637

Penalty
  Claimed 2014 exemption                   0.088         0.307          0.175        0.176        0.174           0.010
  Paid 2014 penalty                        0.055         0.196          0.425        0.425        0.425           0.765
  2014 penalty if penalized                 247          246             257          257          258            0.182
  Claimed 2015 exemption                   0.076         0.443          0.063        0.063        0.063           0.138
  Paid 2015 penalty                        0.048         0.300          1.000        1.000        1.000               .
  2015 penalty if penalized                 545          546             528          528          529            0.268
  Projected 2017 annualized penalty        2,109         1,599          1,526        1,526        1,526           0.944

2015 coverage
  Any coverage                             0.863         0.594          0.583        0.583        0.583           0.287
  Covered months                            9.80         5.88            5.28         5.28         5.27           0.340
  Full-year coverage                       0.745         0.356          0.282        0.282        0.281           0.677

2016 coverage
  Any coverage                             0.879         0.631          0.642        0.642        0.642           0.272
  Covered months                           10.23         6.94            6.62         6.62         6.61           0.101
  Full-year coverage                       0.778         0.457          0.419        0.419        0.418           0.049

Observations
  Individuals                            2,893,655    45,472,192      8,897,821    7,651,401    1,246,420
  Households                             1,398,008    22,778,960      4,526,719    3,892,849     633,870

Notes:   The table presents summary statistics for a 1% random sample of 2015 tax returns (column 1), the set of 2015 tax
returns that did not report full-year coverage (column 2), and the experimental sample (columns 3-5). Column 6 reports the
p-value for the test of equality between the treatment and control groups, with standard errors clustered by household.
All statistics are calculated at the individual level. Local characteristics are imputed based on the zip code
corresponding to the individual's 2015 tax return. Households correspond to the individuals listed on a tax return.




                                                                 37
                       Table 2: Coverage Eect by Prior-Year Coverage


                          (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)

                          Full                     Months of 2016 coverage

                        Sample              0              1-5            6-10              11              <   11

 Treated                 0.849            1.831           0.925          0.306            0.076             1.343
                        (0.056)          (0.084)         (0.162)         (0.110)          (0.033)          (0.078)

 Control mean           68.523            27.394         76.636          86.213           96.602            47.557
 Observations          8,893,653        3,222,566        738,259       1,123,340         3,809,488        5,084,165

 Notes:   Outcome indicates any 2017 coverage. Units are percentage points (0-100). Months of

 2016 coverage refers to the rst 11 months of 2016. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are

 clustered by household.




                         Table 3: Coverage Eect by Type of Coverage


                        (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)                   (5)               (6)

                     Exchange       Medicaid              ESI          O-Exchange                  VA           Medicare

Treated                1.021             0.445           0.076              0.016                 0.021            0.011
                      (0.030)           (0.062)          (0.071)           (0.015)            (0.006)            (0.011)

Control mean           3.436            18.595           27.278             0.971                 0.184            0.694
Observations         5,084,165      5,084,165          5,084,165          5,084,165          5,084,165          5,084,165

Notes:   Outcome indicates enrollment in one month or more of the specied coverage during 2017. Units

are percentage points (0-100). ESI refers to employer-sponsored coverage. O-Exchange refers to

individual coverage not purchased through the Exchange. VA refers to coverage provided through

the Veterans Administration. All columns exclude individuals with full coverage in January through

November of 2016. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




                                   Table 4: Coverage Eect by Age


                                  (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)

                                  0-18          19-26          27-44             45-64             65+

          Treated                0.843          1.174          1.154             2.063            0.622
                                (0.207)     (0.170)            (0.106)       (0.131)              (0.640)

          Control mean           59.705         51.706         47.692        37.528               52.378
          Observations          817,915     753,088        2,094,777        1,358,983             59,365

          Notes:   Outcome indicates any 2017 coverage. Units are percentage points (0-100).

          Columns restrict to individuals with ages in the specied bins at the start of 2017.

          All columns exclude individuals with full coverage in January through November

          of 2016. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




                                                          38
                                             Table 5: Coverage Eect by Income


                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)

                                                               Income/FPL Percentage

                                                     0-100      100-138    138-400        400+

                                Treated              1.121       2.287      1.403         0.391
                                                    (0.183)     (0.219)    (0.102)       (0.225)

                                Control mean        47.847      48.510      47.782       45.382
                                Observations       879,457      638,779   2,934,527      616,667

                                Notes:   Outcome indicates any 2017 coverage. Units are percentage

                                points (0-100). Columns restrict to individuals based on 2016

                                household income as a percentage of the federal poverty line. All

                                columns exclude individuals with full coverage in January through

                                November of 2016. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are

                                clustered by household.




                      Table 6: Bounds on Responder Share and Intensive Margin Treatment Eect


                                          (1)          (2)                 (3)          (4)           (5)               (6)

                                                  Lower Bound         Upper Bound                Lower Bound     Upper Bound
                                                 for Responder        for Responder              for Responder   for Responder
                                                      Share               Share                      Share             Share

                                                      2017 Coverage                                 2017-18 Coverage

Overall Eect,
E [Ci (1) - Ci (0)]                      0.140        0.140               0.140        0.232         0.232             0.232
Share Responders,
P r[Ci (1) > Ci (0)]                                  0.014               0.140                      0.012             0.232
Eect for Responders,
E [Ci (1) - Ci (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0)]                 10.001              1.000                      19.672            1.000

Notes:   Columns 1-3 provide outcomes for coverage in 2017; Columns 4-6 provide outcomes for coverage during 2017 and 2018.

Columns 2 and 5 provide lower bounds for the share of individuals who increase coverage in response to the treatment following

Borusyak (2015), and corresponding intensive margin eects. Columns 3 and 6 provide upper bounds for the share of respondents

and corresponding intensive margin eects, assuming monotonicity and following the method described in the body of the paper.

Units for Rows 1 and 3 are months of coverage. Units for Row 2 are population shares (0-1.00). All columns exclude individuals

with full coverage in January through November of 2016.




                                                                 39
                         Table 7: Eect of Intervention on Mortality


                             (1)           (2)             (3)                    (4)

                         Mortality     Mortality        Prior-Year      Mortality Among
                                       (Controls)       Mortality      Prior-Year Insured

     Treated               -0.063        -0.061           -0.002                 -0.010
                           (0.025)       (0.025)         (0.012)              (0.037)

     Control Mean           1.007         0.993           0.238                  1.143
     Observations        1,358,983     1,309,736        1,358,983             688,795

     Notes:   Outcome indicates whether an individual died during 2017-18. Units are

     percentage points (0-100). Columns 1-3 exclude individuals with full coverage in

     January through November of 2016. Column 4 is limited to individuals with full coverage

     in January through November of 2016. The specication reported in Column 2 controls

     for age xed eects, gender, marital status, 2016 insurance coverage, 2016 household

     income relative to the federal poverty line, mean 2016 state-level mortality,

     and logged zipcode-level controls for median income, share of Spanish speakers,

     and share of college graduates. All columns are limited to individuals between

     the ages of 45-64 at the start of 2017. Standard errors, reported in parentheses,

     are clustered by household.




                           Table 8: Eect of Coverage on Mortality


                          (1)               (2)                  (3)        (4)                 (5)

                       Mortality     Covered Months        Mortality    Mortality            Mortality
                         (OLS)        (First Stage)         (2SLS)        (2SLS)          (2SLS, no prior-
                                                                                          year exclusion)

Covered Months           -0.026                              -0.178       -0.166               -0.167
                        (0.001)                             (0.070)       (0.068)             (0.068)
Treated                                    0.358
                                          (0.026)

Controls                                                                     ×                   ×
Control mean             1.007             7.795             1.007         0.993               1.040
Observations           1,358,983        1,358,983          1,358,983    1,309,736            1,983,167

Notes:   Columns 1, 3, 4, and 5: outcome indicates whether an individual died during 2017-18; units are

percentage points (0-100). Column 2: outcome is months of 2017-18 coverage. Columns 1-4 exclude

individuals with full coverage in January through November of 2016. Columns 4 and 5 control for age

xed eects, gender, marital status, no 2016 insurance coverage, 2016 household income relative to the

federal poverty line, mean 2016 state-level mortality, and logged zipcode-level controls for median

income, share of Spanish speakers, and share of college graduates. Column 5 additionally controls for

having full coverage in January through November of 2016 and includes as an instrument an interaction

of this variable with the treatment group indicator. All columns are limited to individuals between

the ages of 45-64 at the start of 2017. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




                                                   40
                          Table 9: Characteristics by Complier Status


                                           (1)           (2)             (3)                (4)

                                         Overall    Compliers     Always-Takers       Never-Takers

Share of Population                       1.000         0.021          0.375               0.604
Prior Coverage
   Any 2015 Coverage                      0.243         0.137          0.407               0.145
   Months of 2015 Coverage                1.596         1.035          2.736               0.907
   Any 2016 Coverage                      0.262         0.078          0.576               0.074
   Months of 2016 Coverage                1.597         0.264          3.620               0.385
Demographic Characteristics
   Age                                   53.223         53.753         52.906             53.401
   Male                                   0.577         0.556          0.552               0.593
   Income                                 2.650         2.181          2.693               2.640
Baseline Mortality
   Baseline Mortality in 2017                           0.007                              0.004
   Baseline Mortality in 2017-18                        0.014                              0.007

Notes :   Compliers are dened as individuals who enroll in positive months of 2017 coverage when

assigned to the treatment but not when assigned to the control. Always-takers enroll in positive

months of 2017 coverage regardless of treatment assignment. Never-takers enroll in zero months

of 2017 coverage regardless of treatment assignment. Coverage variables for 2016 refer to coverage

during the rst 11 months of 2016. Baseline mortality in 2017 refers to the mean 2017 death rate

of individuals with zero months of 2017 coverage. Baseline mortality in 2017-18 is calculated as

twice the baseline mortality in 2017. All columns are limited to individuals between the ages of 45-64

at the start of 2017 and exclude individuals with full coverage in January through November of 2016.




                                                   41
Appendix
                              Figure A.1: Letters

           (a) Baseline                             (b) Exemption Information




       (c) Non-Personalized                               (d) Spanish




                                      42
                                           Figure A.2: Coverage Rate Eect by Month by Coverage Type




                                                         Medicaid
                                     1.0
                                                         Exchange
Difference in Coverage Rate (p.p.)


                                                         95% CI
                                     0.8
                                     0.6
                                     0.4
                                     0.2
                                     0.0




                                            Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov
                                           2016                     2017                    2018
                                           Notes: The figure displays the difference in the share of the treatment and control groups enrolled
                                           in Medicaid and Exchange coverage in the specified month. Units are percentage points (0-100).
                                           The figure excludes individuals with full coverage in January through November of 2016. Brackets
                                           denote the 95% confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered by household.




                                                                                      43
                        Figure A.3: Probability of Detecting Mortality Eect by Age Range




                5.5 6.5 7.5             Percentage Effect: 1%                                                Percentage Effect: 3%




                                                                                       12 16
    Power (%)




                                                                           Power (%)

                                                                                       8
                              20   30            40             50    60                           20   30            40             50   60

                                            Minimum Age                                                          Minimum Age


                                        Percentage Effect: 5%                                                Percentage Effect: 7%
    Power (%)

                15 22.5 30




                                                                           Power (%)

                                                                                       30 40 50
                              20   30            40             50    60                           20   30            40             50   60

                                            Minimum Age                                                          Minimum Age

                                                            Uninsured Complier Scalar: 2


                                        Percentage Effect: 1%                                                Percentage Effect: 3%
    Power (%)




                                                                           Power (%)

                                                                                       15 20 25
                6 6.757.5




                              20   30            40             50    60                           20   30            40             50   60

                                            Minimum Age                                                          Minimum Age


                                        Percentage Effect: 5%                                                Percentage Effect: 7%
                                                                                       50 70 90
    Power (%)




                                                                           Power (%)
                35 45 55




                              20   30            40             50    60                           20   30            40             50   60

                                            Minimum Age                                                          Minimum Age

                                                            Uninsured Complier Scalar: 3


                                        Percentage Effect: 1%                                                Percentage Effect: 3%
                10




                                                                                       25 35 45
    Power (%)




                                                                           Power (%)
                8
                6




                              20   30            40             50    60                           20   30            40             50   60

                                            Minimum Age                                                          Minimum Age


                                        Percentage Effect: 5%                                                Percentage Effect: 7%
                                                                                       80 90 100
    Power (%)




                                                                           Power (%)
                50 65 80




                              20   30            40             50    60                           20   30            40             50   60

                                            Minimum Age                                                          Minimum Age

                                                            Uninsured Complier Scalar: 4

Notes: The figure displays the probability of detecting a difference between treatment and control group
mortality at a 5% level of significance, for varying age ranges and effect sizes. Results are based on
simulations with N=1000 random draws of treatment and control populations. Within a figure, the x-axis
reflects the minimum age included in the analysis; the maximum age is held fixed at 64. The effect of the
intervention on coverage for each age range comes from comparing average months of 2017-18
coverage in the treatment and control groups, for individuals with the specified ages that did not have
coverage in each month of 2016. The effect of coverage on mortality is alternatively assumed to be a
reduction in baseline complier mortality of 1, 3, 5, or 7%. Baseline mortality is estimated from population-
level mortality rates for 2016 from the Social Security Death Index among individuals alive at the end of
2015, aggregated into 5-year age bins. The mortality rate for uninsured compliers, absent insurance is
alternatively assumed to be 2, 3, or 4 times the average mortality rate for the general population.

                                                                           44
                                                             Figure A.4: Eect of Intervention on Rate of New Deaths




                                        0.06
Difference in Rate of New Deaths (pp)
                                        0.04
                                        0.02
                                        0.00
                                        -0.02
                                        -0.04




                                           Jan-Jun                       Jul-Dec             Jan-Jun             Jul-Dec             Jan-Jun                Jul-Dec
                                             2016                         2016                 2017               2017                 2018                  2018
                                                      Notes: The figure displays the difference in the share of new deaths between the control
                                                      and treatment groups during the six-month interval extending through the end of the specified
                                                      month. Units are percentage points (0-100). Brackets denote the 95% confidence interval based
                                                      on standard errors that are clustered by household. The analysis is limited to individuals
                                                      between the ages of 45-64 at the start of 2017 and excludes individuals with full coverage in
                                                      January through November of 2016.




                                                                                Figure A.5: Permutation Test
                                                      0.08
                                                      0.06
                                            Density
                                                      0.04




                                                                      Sample
                                                                       t-stat
                                                      0.02
                                                      0.00




                                                             -4                    -2                      0                     2                      4
                                                                                                Placebo t-statistics

                                                             Notes: The figure plots the distribution of treatment effect t-statistics generated
                                                             from 1000 random reassignments of the treatment variable across the households in the sample
                                                             population. The estimated t-statistics correspond to the specification reported in Column 1
                                                             of Table 7. The vertical line denotes the t-statistic estimated using the actual sample
                                                             population.




                                                                                                      45
             Figure A.6: Cumulative Distribution of Months of 2017-18 Coverage




             80
             70
Percentage
             60
             50




                                                                                                    Treatment
                                                                                                    Control

                  0       2        4       6       8       10      12      14       16      18      20      22
                                                        Covered Months
                  Notes: The figure displays the cumulative distribution function of the number of months
                  of coverage during 2017 and 2018. The figure excludes individuals with full coverage
                  in January through November of 2016.




                                                             46
                                    Figure A.7: Coverage CDF by Demographic Subgroup




                                                    Men                                                                       Women
               50 60 70 80 90




                                                                                            50 60 70 80 90
  Percentage




                                                                               Percentage
                                0   2   4   6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                                      0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                            Covered Months                                                               Covered Months


                                                  Married                                                                    Not Married
               50 60 70 80 90




                                                                                            50 60 70 80 90
  Percentage




                                                                               Percentage
                                0   2   4   6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                                      0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                            Covered Months                                                               Covered Months


                                                High Income                                                                  Low Income
               50 60 70 80 90




                                                                                            50 60 70 80 90
  Percentage




                                                                               Percentage




                                0   2   4   6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22                                      0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                            Covered Months                                                               Covered Months


                                                             Treatment                                                   Control


Notes: Each figure displays the cumulative distribution function of months of coverage in 2017
and 2018. High income is defined as having a ratio of household income to the federal poverty line
above the sample median. The figure is limited to individuals between the ages ages of 45-64
at the start of 2017 and excludes those with full coverage in January through November of 2016.




                                                                          47
                                       Figure A.8: Distribution of New Coverage Months Induced by the Intervention




                                                                            6
                                              Share of All New Months (%)
                                                                            4
                                                                            2
                                                                            0




                                                                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                                                                    New Month Number
                                                                                Notes: The figure displays the share of additional coverage months induced by the intervention
                                                                                that represent an individual's specified month of coverage. For example, the bar for month 3
                                                                                indicates that approximately 5% of the additional months induced by the intervention represented
                                                                                the individual's third month of coverage during 2017. The figure is limited to individuals between
                                                                                the ages of 45-64 at the start of 2017 and excludes individuals with full coverage in January
                                                                                through November of 2016.




Figure A.9: Eect of Intervention on Number of Covered Months Among 45-64 Year-Olds
                                       3.0
  Difference in Coverage Rate (p.p.)
                                       2.0
                                       1.0
                                       0.0
                                       -1.0
                                       -2.0
                                       -3.0




                                                                            0     1       2       3      4       5      6        7     8       9      10     11      12
                                                                                                  Number of Months Covered in 2017
                                              Notes: The figure denotes the difference between the treatment and control groups in the fraction
                                              of individuals who enroll in the specified number of months of 2017 coverage. The vertical axis
                                              units are percentage points (0-100). Positive values indicate more individuals were enrolled in the
                                              specified number of months of coverage in the treatment group relative to the control group. The
                                              analysis includes 45-64 year olds and excludes individuals with full coverage in January through
                                              November of 2016. Brackets denote the 95% confidence interval based on standard errors that
                                              are clustered by household.




                                                                                                                            48
   Table A.1: Sample Allocation across Treatment Groups


                                  (1)            (2)           (3)

                             Individuals    Households       Share

Overall                       8,897,821      4,526,675        1.00
Treatment                     7,651,401      3,892,807        0.86
Control                       1,246,420       633,868         0.14

Treatment arm
   Base                       2,020,465      1,027,859        0.23
   Early                      1,576,560       801,913         0.18
   Non-Personalized           2,033,077      1,034,304        0.23
   Exemption info             2,021,299      1,028,731        0.23

Language
   English only               3,819,261      1,943,194        0.43
   English + Spanish          3,832,140      1,949,613        0.43


Notes :   The table contains counts by treatment group assignment. The

base treatment was personalized, did not include information about

exemptions, and was sent during the January 2017 mailing. The shares

reported in column 3 are calculated at the household-level. Households

correspond to the individuals listed on a tax return.




                                   49
           Table A.2: Eect of Intervention by 2015 and 2016 Coverage


                                       (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)

         Full 2015 Coverage:          Yes              Yes             No               No
         Full 2016 Coverage:          Yes              No             Yes               No

         Treated                     0.063            0.951          0.096            1.375
                                    (0.038)          (0.253)         (0.054)          (0.080)

         Control mean                97.342          71.142          95.634           45.746
         Observations              2,156,674         362,371        1,652,814       4,721,794

         Notes:   Outcome indicates any 2017 coverage. Units are percentage points

         (0-100). Full 2015 coverage indicates coverage for all months of 2015. Full

         2016 coverage indicates coverage for the rst 11 months of 2016. Standard

         errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




Table A.3: Medicaid Coverage Eect by Income and Expansion State Status


                                               (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)

                                                        Income/FPL Percentage

                                              0-100      100-138         138-400               400+

Treated    ×   Expansion State                1.152          1.913           0.611             0.193
                                             (0.262)     (0.299)         (0.109)              (0.140)
Treated    ×   Non-Expansion State           -0.214          0.375           -0.049           -0.106
                                             (0.225)     (0.246)         (0.096)              (0.113)
Expansion State                              20.711      19.967              8.995             3.459
                                             (0.320)     (0.359)         (0.135)              (0.167)

Control mean                                 23.517      17.871              9.967             3.074
Observations                                 879,457     638,779        2,934,527             616,667

Notes:   Outcome indicates one or more month of Medicaid coverage during 2017. Units

are percentage points (0-100). Columns limit the sample based on 2016 household income

as a percent of the federal poverty line. All columns exclude individuals with full coverage

in January through November of 2016. Standard errors reported in parentheses, are

clustered by household.




                                               50
     Table A.4: Exchange Coverage Eect by Income and Expansion State Status


                                                 (1)         (2)             (3)              (4)

                                                          Income/FPL Percentage

                                               0-100      100-138          138-400           400+

     Treated    ×   Expansion State            0.588       1.027            1.081            0.487
                                              (0.063)      (0.098)         (0.054)       (0.109)
     Treated    ×   Non-Expansion State        0.937       1.776            1.203            0.396
                                              (0.095)      (0.140)         (0.063)       (0.117)
     Expansion State                           -1.602      -2.014           0.148            0.678
                                              (0.104)      (0.155)         (0.076)       (0.147)

     Control mean                              3.142       4.508            3.761            2.625
     Observations                             879,457     638,779       2,934,527        616,667

     Notes:   Outcome indicates one or more month of Exchange coverage during 2017. Units

     are percentage points (0-100). Columns limit the sample based on 2016 household income

     as a percent of the federal poverty line. All columns exclude individuals with full coverage

     in January through November of 2016. Standard errors reported in parentheses, are

     clustered by household.




                    Table A.5: 2018 Coverage Eect by Type of Coverage


                       (1)          (2)           (3)                (4)               (5)              (6)

                    Exchange     Medicaid         ESI       O-Exchange                VA             Medicare

Treated               0.556        0.187         0.134             0.039             0.019            0.023
                     (0.033)      (0.062)       (0.073)            (0.013)           (0.007)          (0.016)

Control mean          4.203       18.761        30.463             0.724             0.251            1.436
Observations        5,084,165    5,084,165    5,084,165        5,084,165            5,084,165        5,084,165

Notes:   Outcome indicates enrollment in one month or more of the specied coverage during 2018. Units

are percentage points (0-100). All columns exclude individuals with full coverage in January through

November of 2016. ESI refers to employer-sponsored coverage. O-Exchange refers to individual coverage

not purchased through the Exchange. VA refers to coverage provided through the Veterans Administration.

Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




                                                 51
                                   Table A.6: Distribution of Covered Months by Treatment


                  (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)      (6)        (7)     (8)          (9)     (10)    (11)         (12)     (13)

                                                            Panel A: 2017 Coverage

Months             0         1        2          3          4       5           6      7             8        9      10          11       12

Control         52.443     1.651    1.849       1.891     1.898    1.949      2.004   2.033     2.121       2.282   2.906       2.940    24.032
Treatment       51.100     1.608    1.920       1.941     1.920    1.957      2.017   2.019     2.122       2.306   3.379       3.116    24.597

                                                          Panel B: 2017-18 Coverage

Months             0         1        2          3          4       5           6      7             8        9      10          11       12

Control         41.475     1.175    1.464       1.472     1.402    1.410      1.430   1.367     1.410       1.434   1.532       1.533    5.481
Treatment       40.368     1.169    1.504       1.455     1.447    1.419      1.438   1.375     1.391       1.432   1.553       1.539    5.509

Months            13        14        15         16        17       18          19     20           21       22      23          24

Control         1.536      1.495    1.550       1.592     1.595    1.642      1.690   1.764     1.929       2.446   2.517       17.660
Treatment       1.526      1.503    1.571       1.577     1.597    1.689      1.688   1.780     1.958       2.801   2.640       18.075

Notes:   Panel A denotes the share of treatment and control groups with the specied number of months of coverage during 2017.

Panel B denotes the corresponding shares for months of coverage during 2017 and 2018. All columns exclude individuals with full

coverage in January through November of 2016.




                          Table A.7: Eect of Intervention on Mortality - Alternate Age Cutos


                                          (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)

                                      35-64             40-64                45-64           50-64         55-64     All Ages
                                                                   (Main Sample)

                Treated               -0.031            -0.039             -0.061           -0.063        -0.049      -0.012
                                      (0.016)           (0.020)           (0.025)          (0.033)        (0.048)    (0.008)
                p-value               0.055             0.050                0.015           0.057         0.307      0.146

                Control Mean          0.708             0.827                0.993           1.202         1.472      0.422
                Observations        2,242,570          1,728,577        1,309,736       902,273           530,371   4,908,521

                Notes:   Outcome indicates whether an individual died during 2017-18. Units are percentage points

                (0-100). The reported p-value corresponds to the null hypothesis that the eect of the intervention

                on mortality is zero. All columns exclude individuals with full coverage in January through November

                of 2016. All columns control for individual age xed eects, gender, marital status, 2016 insurance

                coverage, 2016 household income relative to the federal poverty line, mean 2016 state-level mortality,

                and logged zipcode-level controls for median income, share of Spanish speakers, and share of college

                graduates. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




                                                                        52
Table A.8: Eect of Intervention on Mortality: No Prior Year Exclusion


                                   (1)                 (2)

                               Mortality           Mortality
                                                  (Controls)

            Treated              -0.045              -0.044
                                 (0.021)            (0.021)

            Control Mean          1.052              1.040
            Observations        2,047,778          1,983,167

            Notes:   Outcome indicates whether an individual

            died during individual died during 2017-18. The

            analysis includes all individuals between the ages

            of 45-64, including those with full-year coverage

            during January through November of 2016. The

            specication reported in Column 2 controls for

            individual age xed eects, gender, marital status,

            2016 insurance coverage, 2016 household income

            relative to the federal poverty line, mean 2016

            state-level mortality, and logged zipcode-level

            controls for median income, share of Spanish speakers,

            and share of college graduates. Standard errors,

            reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




                                      53
   Table A.9: Eect of Intervention on 2017-18 Mortality (Non-Linear Models)


                          (1)          (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)

                         Logit        Logit            Cox               Cox           Log-Rank
                                                 Proportional-     Proportional-          Test
                                                      Hazard           Hazard

Treated                 -6.580        -6.382          -6.555            -6.355
                        (2.492)      (2.561)          (2.480)          (2.541)
Marginal Eect           -0.063        -0.049
                        (0.025)      (0.020)
p-value                  0.008        0.013           0.008             0.012             0.008

Controls                                ×                                 ×
Observations           1,358,983    1,309,736        1,355,773        1,306,719        1,355,773

Notes :   Outcome indicates whether an individual died during 2017-18. Units are percentage

points (0-100). All columns exclude individuals with full coverage in January through

November of 2016 and are limited to individuals between the ages of 45-64 at the start

of 2017. Columns 1 and 2 report the results of a logit model. The reported marginal eect

is calculated at covariate means. Columns 3 and 4 report the results of a Cox Proportional-

Hazard model at the month level. In Columns 1-4, the reported p-value corresponds to the

null hypothesis that the treatment variable does not enter into the model. Column 5 reports

a log-rank test; the p-value corresponds to the null hypothesis of equality between the

survival curves for individuals in the treatment and control groups. The specications

reported in Column 2 and 4 control for individual age xed eects, gender, marital status,

2016 insurance coverage, 2016 household income relative to the federal poverty line, mean 2016

state-level mortality, and logged zipcode-level controls for median income, share of

Spanish speakers, and share of college graduates. Standard errors, reported in parentheses,

are clustered by household.




                                                54
Table A.10: Eect of Intervention on Mortality - Additional Analyses


                             (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)

                            Men       Women        FPL          FPL
                                                      138       >     138

       Treated             -0.052      -0.080      -0.032       -0.066
                           (0.035)    (0.032)     (0.055)      (0.027)

       Control mean         1.204      0.737       1.203        0.929
       Observations       783,582     575,199     325,270     1,016,402

       Notes:   Outcome indicates whether an individual died during

       2017-18. Units are percentage points (0-100). Column 1 limits

       sample to men. Column 2 limits the sample to women.

       Column 3 limits the sample to individuals whose household

       income as a percent of the federal poverty line is less than

       138%. Column 4 limits the sample to individuals whose

       household income as a percent of the federal poverty line

       exceeds 138%. All columns are limited to individuals

       between the ages of 45-64 and exclude individuals with full

       coverage in January through November of 2016. Standard

       errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by household.




                                      55
         Table A.11: Comparison to Estimated Mortality Eects in Prior Research


                                       (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)

                                     Oregon               Oregon          Miller et al.   ACA Penalty
                                                      (Age-Weighted)         (2019)        (This Study)

Intent-to-Treat                       -0.106              -0.170             -0.208             -0.061
                                     (0.160)              (0.199)                               (0.025)
First-Stage                           2.726                2.728              1.092               0.358
                                     (0.187)              (0.194)                               (0.026)
Average Causal Response               -0.026              -0.041             -0.190             -0.166
                                     (0.039)              (0.048)                               (0.068)
Overlapping CI                   [-0.101, -0.032]     [-0.135, -0.032]

Notes:   The table presents estimates derived from the Oregon health insurance study (Columns 1 and 2),

Miller et al. (2019) (Column 3), and our study (Column 4). The Oregon results are calculated from the

public-use replication data, downloaded from https://www.nber.org/oregon/4.data.html.

We use the 20% subsample with survey data on coverage months, along with the corresponding

survey weights. Column 2 adjusts the Oregon survey weights to reect the age distribution

of our mortality analysis sample. The standard errors reported in Columns 1 and 2 are clustered

by household. The Miller et al. results are calculated from estimates reported in the draft dated

July 10, 2019. The coverage and mortality eect estimates are calculated from their Table 1

(Columns 3 and 4) and reect the event-study coecients corresponding to Year 0 and Year 1

(post-expansion). We do not calculate standard errors or condence intervals for the Miller et al.

analysis because we lack the required microdata. The results from our study are drawn

from the specications with control variables.

  The Intent-to-Treat row presents the intent-to-treat estimate of the intervention on 1.5-yr

mortality (Columns 1 and 2) and 2-yr mortality (Column 3 and 4). The units are percentage points

(0-100). The First-Stage row presents the eect of the intervention on months of coverage

enrolled in during the rst year post-intervention (Columns 1 and 2) and during the rst 2 years

post-intervention (Column 3 and 4). For Oregon, the rst stage is calculated using survey data on the

number of coverage months enrolled in by the treatment and control groups. For the Miller et al.

study, the rst stage is calculated from the change in the share of uninsured individuals, under

the assumption that each individual who obtains coverage because of the treatment does so for each

month during the year. The Average Causal Response row presents the average causal response of

coverage on mortality, and is calculated by dividing the intent-to-treat by the rst stage. Units

are percentage points (0-100). For the Oregon results, the ITT is rst scaled by 12/18 before dividing

by the rst stage so that both the ITT and rst stage reect a 12-month period. The Overlapping CI

row presents the ACR values that are included in both our estimated condence interval and the

condence interval associated with the Oregon ACR estimate.




                                                 56
Appendix: Identifying Complier Baseline Mortality
This appendix section formalizes and proves the claim made in section 5.2 that the

baseline mortality among individuals who respond to the intervention can be identied

when the rst-stage eect of the intervention on coverage is limited to the extensive

margin. The result extends a similar proposition from Abadie (2002) to the case in which

treatment is multi-valued.

    Let  Zi  {0, 1} indicate whether individual i was assigned to the treatment group.
Let Ci (Z )  {0, 12} denote the months of coverage in which i would enroll during 2017 if

assigned to treatment group Z . Let Yi (C )  {0, 1} indicate whether i would die during

2017 if i was enrolled in C months of coverage. Our goal is to estimate average mortality

during 2017 among individuals who would enroll in additional coverage because of the

intervention, in the state of the world in which they enroll in zero months of 2017 coverage,

i.e.,   E [Yi (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0)].

Claim:        Suppose    P r(Ci (1) > Ci (0) > 0) = 0.       Then, in conjunction with the standard IV

assumptions described in section 5.2 (monotonicity, exclusion restriction, independence):


                                                 Y (0, 0) 1 - C (0) - Y (0, 1) 1 - C (1)
                E [Yi (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0)] =
                                                                 C (1) - C (0)
where     Y (c, z ) = E [Yi |Ci = c, Zi = z ]    and   C (z ) = P r (Ci > 0|Zi = z ).

Proof:        First, note that,    Y (0, 0) = E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Zi = 0] = E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0],
where the rst equality follows from the exclusion restriction and the second follows from

the independence assumption.              By the law of iterated expectations, we can write this

expression as



              Y (0, 0) =     E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) = 0] P r(Ci (1) = 0 | Ci (0) = 0)
                            + E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) > 0] P r(Ci (1) > 0 | Ci (0) = 0)
or, using the denition of conditional probability,


                                                                        P r(Ci (1)=0,Ci (0)=0)
                   Y (0, 0) =      E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) = 0]      P r(Ci (0)=0)
                                                                         P r(Ci (1)>0,Ci (0)=0)     (4)
                                 + E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) >   0]      P r(Ci (0)=0)

    Next, under monotonicity,    Ci (1) = 0 = Ci (0) = 0, so P r(Ci (1) = 0, Ci (0) =
0) = P r(Ci (1) = 0) = 1 - C (1). In addition, monotonicity and the denition of C (Z )
imply C (0)  P r (Ci (0) > 0) = P r (Ci (0) > 0, Ci (1) > 0) and C (1)  P r (Ci (1) >

0) = P r(Ci (1) > 0, Ci (0) = 0) + P r(Ci (1) > 0, Ci (0) > 0). Subtracting C (0) from C (1)
therefore yields C (1) - C (0) = P r (Ci (1) > 0, Ci (0) = 0).

   Substituting these results into (4) and using the denition of C (Z ) yields




                                                        57
                                                                           1-C (1)
                     Y (0, 0) =      E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) = 0]   1-C (0)
                                                                                                   (5)
                                                                           C (1)-C (0)
                                  + E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) > 0]      1-C (0)

   Next, note that because       Ci (1) = 0 implies Ci (0) = 0 under monotonicity, it follows
that E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) = 0] = E [Yi (0)|Ci (1) = 0] = E [Yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 0] 

Y (0, 1), where the second equality follows from independence and the third equality
follows by denition. Substituting this result into (5) and rearranging yields




                                                Y (0, 0) 1 - C (0) - Y (0, 1) 1 - C (1)
        E [Yi (0) | Ci (0) = 0, Ci (1) > 0] =
                                                               C (1) - C (0)

   Finally, using the law of iterated expectations, we can write




 E [Yi (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0)]   = E [Yi (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0), Ci (0) = 0] P r (Ci (0) = 0 | Ci (1) > Ci (0))
                                 +E [Yi (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0), Ci (0) > 0] P r (Ci (0) > 0 | Ci (1) > Ci (0))
                                = E [Yi (0) | Ci (1) > Ci (0), Ci (0) = 0] P r (Ci (0) = 0 | Ci (1) > Ci (0))

where the second equality follows from the assumption that           P r (Ci (1) > Ci (0) > 0) = 0.




                                                  58
