                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CONCEPTUAL ASPECTS OF GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS

                                           Pol Antràs

                                      Working Paper 26539
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26539


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




This paper was written as a background paper for the 2020 World Development Report entitled
"Trading for Development in the Age of Global Value Chains." As co-director of the 2020 WDR,
I was a paid short-term consultant for the World Bank. I am grateful to my fellow co-directors,
Caroline Freund and Aaditya Mattoo, and to Penny Goldberg, Daria Taglioni and the rest of the
core WDR team for helpful comments. Any errors are my own. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. All the figures and data used in this paper are available at the 2020 WDR website:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2020

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Pol Antràs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Conceptual Aspects of Global Value Chains
Pol Antràs
NBER Working Paper No. 26539
December 2019
JEL No. D5,F1,F2,F4,F6

                                          ABSTRACT

I offer an overview of some key conceptual aspects associated with the rise of global value chains
(GVCs). I outline a series of alternative interpretations and definitions of what the rise of GVCs
entails, and I trace the implications of these alternative conceptualizations for the measurement of
the phenomenon, as well as for elucidating the key determinants and implications of GVC
participation, both at the country level and at the firm level. In the process, I offer some
speculative thoughts about the future of GVCs in light of the advent of an array of new
technologies.


Pol Antràs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Littauer Center 207
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
pantras@fas.harvard.edu
1        Introduction
In the last few decades, a series of technological, institutional, and political developments have
fueled a signi...cant globalization of production processes across countries.1 More and more ...rms
now organize production on a global scale and choose to o¤shore parts, components or services to
producers in foreign and often distant countries. The typical "Made in" labels in manufactured
goods have become archaic symbols of an old era. These days, most goods are "Made in the World."
        Some aspects of this new wave of globalization are not particularly novel. Signi...cant and sus-
tained increases in the trade-to-GDP ratio had been experienced in the past. The period 1870-1914,
for instance, witnessed a major increase in international trade ows, largely fueled by the invention
of the steamship, and that period is often referred to as the "First Globalization". Similarly, inter-
national trade in raw materials and intermediate inputs has been a prominent feature of world trade
ows since time immemorial. For example, Assyrian merchants who settled Kanesh (in modern-day
Turkey) in the 19th Century BCE imported luxury fabrics and tin from Assur, and they also traded
copper and wool within Anatolia (Barjamovic et al., 2019).
        Despite these precedents, there is a common-held view that the transformation of the world
economy since the 1980s has some distinctive features, and that interpreting the so-called rise of
global value chains (GVCs) as simply an intensi...cation of trade integration across countries misses
several key dimensions of this phenomenon.
        The aim of this paper is to o¤er a succinct overview of some key conceptual aspects associated
with the rise of GVCs. The paper will o¤er alternative interpretations and de...nitions of what the
rise of GVCs entails, and it will later trace the implications of these alternative conceptualizations
for the measurement of the phenomenon, as well as for elucidating the key determinants and
implications of GVC participation, both at the country level but also at the ...rm level. In the
process, this paper will also o¤er some speculative thoughts about the future of GVCs in light of
the advent of an array of new technologies.

        Outline of the Paper The paper is structured as follows. It will ...rst present a broad
conceptualization of the rise of GVCs, one that interprets this phenomenon as an increase in the
extent to which the goods and services transacted across borders are intermediate inputs rather than
...nal goods (as emphasized in traditional conceptual frameworks of international trade). According
to this broad de...nition, GVCs are tightly related to the use of foreign value added (embodied
in materials, intermediate inputs or "tasks") in production, particularly for exports. The unit of
analysis in this broad approach is typically the country-industry, thus allowing this body of work
to connect with a recent empirical literature focused on computing and documenting the observed
growth in the extent to which foreign value added is used in production in speci...c countries and
industries.
    1
    Three types of developments were particularly key: (i) the information and communication technology (ICT)
revolution, (ii) an acceleration in the rate of reduction in man-made trade barriers, and (iii) political developments
that brought about a remarkable increase in the share of world population participating in the capitalist system (see
Antràs, 2015, for more details).


                                                          1
   Despite this literature'
                          s overwhelming focus on country- and industry-level studies, it will be
argued that one can similarly apply this broad de...nition of GVCs to ...rm-level analyses of inter-
national trade. At the theoretical level, the paper will highlight that it is fruitful to conceptualize
GVC participation at the ...rm-level, particularly in environments in which ...rms have some market
power and production processes feature increasing returns to scale. In other words, GVC par-
ticipation (even when interpreted in a broad sense) is ultimately a ...rm-level phenomenon, and
hence much can be learned from conceptualizing it in this manner. The measurement of GVC
participation at the ...rm-level is at an infant stage relative to the much more mature literature
measuring GVC participation at the country-industry level, but this paper will argue that many of
the measures that have been developed in world Input-Output analyses can be fruitfully adopted
at the ...rm-level, thereby opening the door for empirical analyses of the causes and consequences
of GVC participation at the ...rm-level (the original plan was to carry these analyses in Chapters
2 and 3 of the 2020 World Development Report). This incursion into the measurement of GVC
participation will also lead to a critical reevaluation of the merits and limitations of the most widely
used measures of GVC participation.
   The broad conceptualization of the rise of GVCs might suggest that there is nothing funda-
mentally new about this latest wave of globalization. It just entails more (or deeper) integration
across countries, but it is shaped by the same factors as traditional trade ows and it carries largely
the same implications. Although it will be highlighted that even this broad view of GVCs delivers
many novel insights, this paper will also develop a narrower de...nition of GVCs that emphasizes
several distinctive characteristics of the rise of GVCs. This narrower conceptualization of GVCs
highlights that GVC participation is often (and increasingly) associated with transactions that are
very di¤erent in nature from the type of anonymous, one-shot transactions that permeate tradi-
tional trade theory. The various ...rms and plants participating in a GVC often exchange highly
customized inputs on a repeated basis, with the contracts governing these relationships being highly
incomplete and hard to enforce. Furthermore, ...rms spend signi...cant time and resources designing
the organizational structure of these production networks (e.g., whether transactions occur within
or across ...rm boundaries).
   From this alternative relational conceptualization of GVCs emerges a richer analysis of GVCs,
one that puts at the center stage the major actors (multinational ...rms, lead ...rms in GVCs, etc.)
that play a leading role in shaping GVC activity and foreign direct investment (FDI) ows, and one
that underscores the importance of institutional factors in shaping the location of global produc-
tion. By explicitly modeling the mechanisms by which the division of the gains from specialization
are divided across ...rms, this relational approach also delivers novel lessons regarding the implica-
tions of GVC participation for inequality and for development. Finally, this novel approach also
provides a rich set of predictions regarding how an increase in automation or the adoption of digital
technologies might a¤ect the landscape of the international economy and a¤ect di¤erent agents in
society.
   On the empirical front, this relational approach to GVC activity has largely focused on case


                                                   2
studies and, in a few cases, on more representative datasets that provide some information on the
ownership decisions of ...rms (see Antràs, 2015). A burgeoning literature is attempting to build more
systematic measures of relational GVC activity, and later, this paper will build on this literature
to suggest a measure of relational GVC participation based on transaction-level customs data from
the World Bank'
              s Export Dynamics Database (EDD). It will also be discussed how one can build
on transaction-level trade data to construct country- and industry-level narrow GVC participation
measures analogous to those developed in the literature embracing the broad approach to GVC
activity.
    Beyond expositing these alternative conceptualizations of GVCs, this paper will put them to
work to provide some guidance for the empirical work in various chapters of the 2020 World De-
velopment Report. First, it will delineate various key determinants of GVC participation and will
present hypothesis regarding the relative importance of these determinants depending on the type
of GVC activity (broad or relational) one focuses on. Second, it will also build on the conceptual
framework to highlight several notable implications of GVC participation for economic performance
at the ...rm level, but also for growth, poverty, inequality, and market structure at the country level.
Third, it will use the conceptual framework to speculate on the future of GVCs.
    Table 1 o¤ers a succinct summary of some of the key ideas in this paper.


2    A Broad View of Global Value Chains
In presenting the broad or traditional conceptualization of the rise of GVCs in recent decades, it is
useful to begin with a broad de...nition of a GVC and of GVC participation:

De...nition: "A global value chain or GVC consists of a series of stages involved in producing a
      product or service that is sold to consumers, with each stage adding value, and with at least
      two stages being produced in di¤erent countries. A ...rm participates in a GVC if it produces
      at least one stage in a GVC."

    As is clear from these de...nitions, a GVC is de...ned as a production process that embodies value
added (e.g., labor services) from at least two countries. As such, this notion of GVCs naturally
relates this phenomenon to the increasing use of foreign value added in production, especially
when that production is destined for exports. The de...nition above is agnostic about the speci...c
form in which foreign value added is embodied in production, though it is often associated with
either international trade in raw materials (e.g., tin or aluminum), in intermediate inputs (e.g.,
car parts), or in tasks (e.g., back-o¢ ce services). Similarly, the above de...nition is consistent with
various con...gurations of global value chains, including simple "spider-like" structures ­ in which
multiple parts and components converge to an assembly plant ­ and "snake-like" structures ­ in
which value is created sequentially in a series of stages (see Baldwin and Venables, 2013, or Antràs
and de Gortari, 2019).
    Regardless of the speci...c shape GVCs take, the possibility of fragmenting production across
borders gives rise to a ...ner international division of labor and greater gains from specialization.

                                                   3
                            Table 1. An Overview of Some Key Concepts 
                                 Broad / Traditional              Narrow / Relational 
    Definition                                                    Basic:  Increased used of foreign 
                                 Basic:  Increased used of foreign 
                                 value added in production,       value added in production, 
                                 especially in production         especially in production 
                                 destined for exports             destined for exports, but 
                                                                  focusing on interfirm and intra
                                                                  firm transactions involving 
                                                                  customized inputs and 
                                                                  relational contracting (distinct 
                                                                  from anonymous, spot trades in 
                                                                  homogeneous goods) 
                                                                   
    Conceptual framework         GVCs essentially entail a finer  GVCs entail a finer international 
                                 international division of labor  division of labor, but also 
                                 (trade in parts and components,  involve: 
                                                                   
                                 tasks) 
                                                                   nontrivial matching 
                                  
                                                                       between importers and 
                                  
                                                                       exporters 
                                                                   relationshipspecific 
                                                                       investments by all parties 
                                                                   interfirm and intrafirm 
                                                                       flows of goods, technology 
                                                                       and credit in environments 
                                                                       with limited contractual 
                                                                       security 
                                                                   governed by incomplete 
                                                                       contracts enforcement  
                                                                   
    Empirical measures            Country and industrylevel   Case studies; 
                                     measures of (i) foreign       Analyses of intrafirm trade 
                                     value added in production         flows or global ownership 
                                     and in exports (related to        patterns; 
                                     backward and forward GVC   Empirical work on 
                                     participation indices);           persistence in firmlevel 
                                  Analogous measures at the            trading relationships; 
                                     firmlevel                     Measures based on HS 
                                                                       products (anonymous vs 
                                                                       relational) 
 

 




                                                  4
GVCs allow resources to ow to their most productive use, not only across countries and sectors, but
also within sectors across stages of production. As a result, GVCs magnify the growth, employment,
and distributional impacts of standard trade. Under this "hyper-specialization" interpretation
of GVCs, traditional determinants of international trade (such as factor endowments, geography,
institutions, market size) are naturally also relevant for the extent to which countries and industries
get embedded in GVCs, though the way in which these traditional determinants a¤ect GVC ows
is sometimes distinct from how they a¤ect traditional trade ows, as will be discussed below.
    In sum, unlike in traditional conceptualizations of international trade, which focus on interna-
tional transactions that involve only two countries (an exporting country and an importing country),
GVCs entail production processes that often cross borders multiple times and that often involve
more than two countries. This leads to a rich set of determinants and consequences of GVC partic-
ipation, but it also creates important challenges for the measurement of GVC activity in the world.
Before overviewing the main determinants and consequences of GVC participation, it is useful to
explain these measurement challenges and how they have been surmounted in economic research.

Measurement
The main challenge facing the measurement of GVC arises from the fact that customs data, the
standard source for international trade ows, provides information on where the transacted good
or service was produced, but not on how it was produced, i.e., which countries contributed value to
it. Similarly, customs data record where the transacted good is owing to, but not how it will be
used, i.e., whether it will be fully consumed (absorbed) in the importing country, or whether it will
be re-exported after the importing country adds value to it. With the goal of tracing value-added
trade ows across countries, a body of work has combined information from customs o¢ ces together
with national Input-Output tables to construct global Input-Output tables. The most widely used
world Input-Output tables are: (a) the World Input-Output Database (WIOD), a collaborative
project led by researchers at the University of Groningen; (b) the OECD TiVA database, and (c)
the Eora Global Supply Chain Database, constructed by a team of researchers at the University
of Sydney. At a very broad level, this collaborative projects can be thought of as a "scaled up"
version of product-level studies (such as Dedrick, Kraemer and Linden's 2010 well-known case study
of the iPod), attempting to break out the distribution of the ...nancial value embedded in a product
across the many participants in its supply chain. Figure 1 provides a schematic version of one such
WIOT.2
    With these global Input-Output tables at hand, it is then straightforward to devise alternative
measures to document the extent to which production process have become globalized in recent
   2
     The WIOT in Figure 1 considers a world economy with J countries (indexed by i or j ) and S sectors (indexed by
r or s). In its top left J S by J S block, the WIOT contains information on intermediate purchases by industry
                                                                                                          rs
s in country j from sector r in country i. In the table, these intermediate input    ows are denoted by Zij  . To the
right of this block, the WIOT contains an additional J S by J block with information on the ...nal-use expenditure
                                                                                                                    r
in each country j on goods originating from sector r in country i. These ...nal consumption   ows are denoted by Fij
in the table. The sum of the (J S ) + J terms in each row of a WIOT represents the total use of output of sector r
from country i, and naturally coincides with gross output in that sector and country (denoted by Yir ).


                                                         5
                               Figure 1: The Structure of a World Input-Output Table

                                                               Input use & value added                                 Final use           Total use
                                                     Country 1                           Country J             Country 1       Country J
                                           Industry 1        Industry S        Industry 1         Industry S
                                                11                1S                11                 1S         1                1
                              Industry 1      Z11               Z11               Z1 J               Z1 J        F11              F1J         Y11
                                                         rs                                  rs
  Intermediate    Country 1                            Z11                                 Z1 J
                                                S1                SS                S1                 SS         S                S
                              Industry S      Z11               Z11               Z1 J               Z1 J        F11              F1J         Y1S
                                                                           rs                                              s
     inputs                                                              Zij                                              Fij                 Yjs
                                                11                1S                11                 1S         1               1             1
                              Industry 1      ZJ 1              ZJ 1              ZJJ                ZJJ         FJ 1            FJJ          YJ
                                                         rs                                  rs
    supplied      Country J                            ZJ 1                                ZJJ
                                                S1                SS                S1                 SS         S               S             S
                              Industry S      ZJ 1              ZJ 1              ZJJ                ZJJ         FJ 1            FJJ          YJ
               Value added                    V A11             V A S
                                                                    1    V A s
                                                                             j    V A 1
                                                                                      J              V A S
                                                                                                         J
               Gross output                    Y11               Y1S      Yjs      YJ1
                                                                                                      YJS




years, and the extent to which various countries and sectors participate in global value chains. At
the world level, Borin and Mancini (2019) develop a natural measure of the importance of GVC
trade in total international trade. Building on global Input-Output tables, they identify the share
of a country's exports that ow through at least two borders.3 It is important to emphasize that
these exports encompass two broad types of GVC trade. On the one hand, GVC trade includes
transactions in which a country'
                               s exports embody value added that it has previously imported from
abroad. This type of GVC participation is often referred to as backward GVC participation. On
the other hand, GVC trade also comprises transactions in which a country's exports are not fully
absorbed in the importing country, and instead are embodied in the importing country'
                                                                                    s exports to
third countries. The latter form of GVC participation is often dubbed forward GVC participation.
As Figure 2 indicates, the overall share of GVC trade in total world trade grew very signi...cantly
in the 1990s and early 2000s, but it appears to have stagnated or even declined in the last 10 years.
Still, about one-half of world trade appears to be related to global value chains.
    The two components of GVC participation, backward and forward, can also easily be computed
at the country and even country-sectoral level. When doing so, it becomes clear that the expansion
of GVC activity has occurred in an uneven way in the world. On the one hand, there are regions in
the world (such as Europe and East Asia) that are deeply involved in GVCs, while GVC participa-
tion is much smaller in other parts of the world, most notably Latin America and Africa. On the
                                                 1
other hand, even when countries actively participate in GVCs, the sectoral composition of these
GVC ows are also quite diverse. Some countries have largely specialized in agricultural GVCs
(such as Ethiopia) or in the natural resource segments of GVCs (such as Chile or Norway). Other
countries are largely involved in the manufacturing segments of GVCs, with relatively less devel-
oped economies (such as Tanzania) specializing in low-tech (or limited) manufacturing, and more
developed economies (such as Mexico, Slovakia or China) participating in high-tech (or advanced)
manufacturing processes. In addition, it is useful to distinguish a subset of countries (e.g., India)
that have largely specialized in the services embodied in GVCs, and a small set of very advanced
economies (e.g., United States, Germany or Japan) playing a signi...cant role in the provision of
innovative goods and services. Figures 3 illustrates the extent to which GVC participation has
   3
     See also Wang et al. (2013). Other important papers on the measurement of GVC participation include the
pioneering work of Hummels et al. (2001), Johnson and Noguera (2012), and Koopman et al. (2014).


                                                                           6
                             Figure O.1GVC trade grew rapidly in               lower trade barriers induced manufac
                             the 1990s but stagnated after the 2008            production processes beyond nationa
                             global financial crisis
                          Figure 2: The Importance of GVC Trade in World Trade O.1). GVC growth was concentrated
                                                                                                          electronics, and transportation, and
                                                             55
                                                                                                          specializing in those sectors: East Asia




                             GVC share of global trade (%)
                                                                                                          and Western Europe. Most countries
                                50
                                                                                                          participate in complex GVCs, produ
                                                                                                          manufactures and services, and enga
                                45
                                                                                                          activities (map O.1). By contrast, ma
                                                                                                          Africa, Latin America, and Central A
                                40
                                                                                                          commodities for further processing in
                                                                                                              In recent years, however, trade an
                                35
                                                                                                          have slowed (figure O.1). One reason
                                                                                                          overall economic growth, and especi
                                30
                                                                                                          Another reason is the slowing pace an
                                                               70

                                                               75

                                                               80

                                                               85

                                                               90

                                                               95

                                                               00

                                                               05

                                                               10

                                                               15
                                                                                                          of trade reforms. Furthermore, the fr
                                                             19

                                                             19

                                                             19

                                                             19

                                                             19

                                                             19

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20

                                                             20
                          Sources: WDR 2020 team, using data from Eora26 database; Borin and              production in the most dynamic regi
                          Mancini (2019); and Johnson and Noguera (2017). See appendix A for a
                                                                                                          has matured. China is producing mo
                          description of the databases used in this Report.
                                                                                                          the United States, a booming shale
                          Note: See figure 1.2 in chapter 1 for details. Unless otherwise specified, GVC
                          participation measures used in this and subsequent figures throughout the       oil imports by one-fourth between 20
                          Report follow the methodology from Borin and Mancini (2015, 2019).
been uneven across countries.                                                                             slightly reduced the incentives to outs
     Despite their widespread use in economic research, it is important to emphasize                      turing production.  2
                                                                                                                   two key limi-
                          The expansion
tations of global Input-Output         tables. First, because  of GVCs              could
                                                                            they rely                         Recent
                                                                                           on fairly aggregated       increases in protection cou
                                                                                                                  Input-Output
                          stall
data, the resulting sectoral         unless policy
                                  disaggregation            of GVC     predictability
                                                                                                          evolution
                                                                             ows is pretty coarse, and thus these    of GVCs.
                                                                                                                            dataProtectionism coul
                                                                                                          ing of existing  GVCs or their shifts t
                          isamount
sources miss a signi...cant    restored    of GVC activity occurring within these broadly-de...ned                       sectors.
                                                                                                          Unless policy predictability is restored
For instance, one can compute the origin of "fabricated metal products"in the production of "mo-
                          GVCs have existed for centuries. But they grew swiftly                          of GVCs is likely to remain on hol
tor vehicles"in the United States, but where tires, car engines or windshield wipers originate from
                          from 1990 to 2007 as technological advances--in trans-                          access to markets is uncertain, firms h
cannot be inferred from these datasets. A second key shortcoming of world Input-Output tables is
                          portation, information, and communications--and                                 to delay investment plans until uncert
that, in constructing them, researchers are forced to impose strong assumptions to back out certain
bilateral intermediate input trade            ows that cannot be readily read from either customs data or
                          Map
national Input-Output tables.       O.1     All    countries participate in GVCs--but not in the same way
     A di¤erent, more granular approach to measuring the degree to which production processes
are fragmented across countries was ...rst suggested by Yeats (2001) and consists of computing the
share of trade     ows accounted for by industry categories that can be safely assumed to contain
only intermediate inputs (as re         ected by the use of the words "Parts of" at the beginning of the
product description). Yeats (2001) found that intermediate input categories accounted for about
30% of OECD merchandise exports of machinery and transport equipment in 1995, and that this
share had steadily increased from its 26.1% value in 1978. Yeats classi...cation has continued to be
re...ned in recent years based on the Broad Economic Categories (BEC) product classi...cation made
available by UNCTAD.4
   4
                                 GVC linkages, 2015
       See https://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Knowledgebase/50090/Intermediate-Goods-in-Trade-Statistics.
                                                                  Low participation
                                                                  Limited commodities
                                                                  High commodities
                                                                  Limited manufacturing
                                                                  Advanced manufacturing   7
                                                                  and services
                                                                  Innovative activities
                                                                  Data gaps                                                                IBRD 4
                                             Figure 3: Uneven sectoral specialization in GVCs
                    Map 1.1All countries participate in GVCs--but not in the same way




                    GVC linkages, 2015
                               Low participation
                               Limited commodities
                               High commodities
                               Limited manufacturing
                               Advanced manufacturing
                               and services
                               Innovative activities
                               Data gaps                                                                                                                      IBRD 44640 | AUGUST 2019

                    Source: WDR 2020 team, based on the GVC taxonomy for 2015 (see box 1.3).
                    Note: The type of a country's GVC linkages is based on the country's extent of backward GVC participation, measured as the portion of imports embodied in manufacturing exports as a
                    percentage of a country's total exports, combined with the country's sector specialization of domestic value added in exports and engagement in innovation. Countries in the commodities
                    group have a small share of manufacturing exports and limited backward GVC integration. Their share of commodity exports can be low, medium, or high. Countries specialized in limited
                    manufacturing GVCs engage in some manufacturing exports, often alongside commodities exports, and exhibit medium backward GVC integration. Countries specialized in advanced
2.1       Determinants of GVC Participation
                    manufacturing and services GVCs have a high share of manufacturing and business services exports and high backward GVC integration. Countries specialized in innovative GVC activities
                    spend a large share of GDP on research and development, receive a large share of GDP from intellectual property, and exhibit high backward GVC integration.

In the workhorse conceptual frameworks developed to understand traditional trade ows, such as
                    export raw materials for further processing; others                               Figure 1.5Country transitions between different
the Heckscher-Ohlin
           import inputsmodel     ofand
                        for assembly  trade,     factor
                                        exports; and          endowments
                                                     still others types of GVC   a key determinant
                                                                            are participation,         of the structure
                                                                                               1990­2015
             produce
of international     complex
                  trade.     goods and services. In
                           Skilled-labor            addition, some
                                                  abundant       countries gain comparative advantage in producing
                    are heavily reliant on GVCs for trade, whereas others                                                                           Innovative
skilled-intensive  goods,
              export          while goods
                     largely domestic theyfor
                                            bene...t from
                                              consumption. To importing low-skill-labor intensive goods from low-                                    activities


                    capture these distinct features of participation, coun-
skill labor abundant         economies.
             tries are classified                 Similarly, countries with a large availability of arable land or
                                  into four main types--commodities,                                  Austria, Canada, Finland, Ireland,
                                                                                                      Israel, Italy, Republic of Korea,
             limited manufacturing,
of natural resources       (relative    advanced   manufacturing
                                            to their    endowment  and   Singapore, Spain
                                                                           of other factors of production)          Advanced
                                                                                                                  manufacturing        are expected to
             services, and innovative activities--based on the prod-                                               and services
                                                                                                                                             Czech Republic
specialize and  export
             ucts they exportprimary         products.
                                and their participation  in GVCs. The
             rules for classification are described in box 1.3.          China, Estonia, India, Lithuania,
    In a world  of  global value chains, factor endowments
                This taxonomy reveals clear distinctions among
                                                                                         play
                                                                         Philippines, Poland,         an analogous role in shape specializa-
                                                                                              Portugal,
                                                                         Romania, Thailand, Turkey
             regions.
tion, but they  alsoEast     Asia, the
                         a¤ect      Europe,   and North America
                                           positioning              are
                                                             of countries         in GVCs. For instance,             Limited      natural resource rich
                                                                                                                  manufacturing
             engaged in advanced manufacturing and services
countries areGVCs
               expected         to feature
                    and innovative                 high
                                      GVC activities,     levels
                                                       whereas      of forward GVC participation because their exports
                                                                Africa,
             Central Asia, and Latin America are mostly in com-
of natural resources are used in a variety of downstream production processes that typically cross
             modities and limited manufacturing GVCs.                    Argentina, Armenia,                                                 Jordan, Lesotho
                                                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina,
several borders.GVC    participationand
                    Similarly,         intensified  between
                                             although        1990 and
                                                           agricultural         products
                                                                         Cambodia,    Costa Rica,       are much closer to ...nal consumption
                                                                         Cyprus, El Salvador,
             2015, as illustrated by the many countries that tran-       Ethiopia, Indonesia,
               resources
than naturalsitioned            are,    tari¤     escalation
                       up into more sophisticated forms of GVC    practices         often
                                                                         Kenya, Nepal,   Serbia, leave less-developed countries special-
                                                                         South Africa, Tanzania                   Commodities

             participation  (figure  1.5). Transitions were  especially
izing in the most upstream stages of agricultural GVCs, that is, exporting raw products before
             common in East Asia and Europe, where countries
processing.5 were heavily engaged in the sectors most amenable
             to GVCs, such as electronics and machinery. Among
    By the same     logic, one would expect physical capital abundant countries
             advanced countries, small open economies tended to                                              1990
                                                                                                                                or skilled-labor abun-
                                                                                                                                2015

dant countries to specialize upstream or downstream depending on the relative physical capital
                                                                   The new face of trade
intensity or relative skilled-labor intensity of upstream versus downstream              | 21 According to
                                                                                    stages.
a widely used U.S.-based sectoral measure of upstreamness (see Antràs et al., 2012), upstream
sectors in U.S. manufacturing appear to be more capital intensive and more skilled-labor intensive
   5
     Tari¤ escalation is the practice of setting higher import duties on semi-processed products than on raw materials,
and higher still on ...nished products (see WTO Glossary).



                                                                                                  8
than downstream sectors. One might then expect physical capital-abundant and skilled-abundant
countries to feature relatively high levels of forward GVC participation and relatively low levels of
backward GVC participation. The evidence in Chapter 2 of the 2020 World Development Report
...nds support for the predicted link between low-skilled-labor abundance and downstream GVC
positioning, but this same chapter shows that physical-capital scarce countries tend to specialize
upstream rather than downstream. Nevertheless, the link between physical capital abundance and
GVC positioning is blurred by the fact that GVCs often come hand-in-hand with FDI capital in-
ows. To provide a speci...c example, Nigeria is a relatively physical-capital scarce country, and oil
extraction is a relatively physical-capital intensive process, but large FDI inows have conferred
Nigeria comparative advantage in that relatively upstream production stage. As a result, Nigeria
features a large level of forward GVC participation relative to its backward GVC participation level
(over the 1990-2015, the former's average was 0.26, while the latter'
                                                                    s average was 0.09).
   The international exchange of goods and services is subject to a large degree of contractual
insecurity (Antràs, 2015). Weak contract enforcement is a signi...cant deterrent of traditional trade
ows, but its incidence on GVC trade is likely to be disproportionately large. Part of the reason
for this magni...ed e¤ect will be elucidated later, when discussing our relational conceptualization
of GVCs. Yet, even when sticking to the view of GVCs as mere engines of hyper-specialization,
multi-stage production processes with signi...cant complementarities across production stages will
tend to be particularly sensitive to contractual institutions (see Acemoglu et al., 2007). In plain
words, the performance of a global value chain is often severely impacted by the strength of its
weakest link, and thus production delays or mishaps driven by weak contract enforcement might
be particularly harmful in GVCs. In sum, the quality of a country's institutions and its political
stability are expected to be important determinants of GVC participation and might a¤ect GVC
trade disproportionately more than traditional trade. Chapter 2 of the 2020 World Development
Report ...nds support for this hypothesis.
   Empirical work in international trade emphasizes that trade costs have a signi...cant negative
e¤ect on trade ows. There are various possible sources of trade costs, ranging from geographical
features (such as remoteness), ine¢ cient infrastructure, regulatory barriers (e.g., tari¤s and quotas),
or delays in clearing customs. There are at least two reasons to believe that trade costs might have a
disproportionately negative e¤ect on the GVC component of trade ows. First, the "weakest-link"
mechanism invoked in the previous paragraph applies also to production delays associated with
impediments to trade (such as customs delays). Second, and relative to traditional trade, higher
trade costs not only increase the prices at which imported goods are consumed, as in traditional
trade, but they also increase the cost of imported intermediate inputs, which get passed down the
value chain and translate into higher costs associated with a country's exports, thereby further
depressing GVC participation.
   Regional trade agreements, or trade agreements more broadly, are a particularly e¤ective mech-
anism to reduce trade barriers between the signing countries. Consequently, one would expect that
GVCs are particularly active among countries that have signed regional trade agreements. Indeed,


                                                   9
GVC activity is particularly intense among EU and ASEAN members, but it should be noted that
other regional trade agreements, such as Mercosur, appear to have been much less successful in
generating GVC participation among its members.
       Trade costs not only a¤ect the overall GVC participation of countries, but they might have a
signi...cant e¤ect in the positioning of countries in GVCs. In sequential (or snake-like) GVCs, trade
costs compound along the value chain and have a higher incidence on downstream stages than on
upstream stages. As Antràs and de Gortari (2019) demonstrate, this leads remote countries to
specialize in upstream stages, and more central countries to specialize in more downstream stages.
An implication of this fact is that we might expect the e¤ect of trade costs to be more signi...cant
for backward GVC participation indices than for forward GVC participation indices.
       Empirical work in international trade also emphasizes the role of market size in shaping bilateral
trade ows. Larger economies are expected to export more (since they produce more), and they
are also expected to import more (since their income is larger). An often-underappreciated aspect
of the gravity model of trade, the most successful empirical model of bilateral trade ows, is that
it provides a straightforward explanation for why the ratio of trade to output tends to be smaller
for larger economies.6 Whether a larger market size is associated with a higher or lower level of
GVC participation is less clear, however. On the one hand, with sequential multi-stage production
processes, larger countries naturally tend to attract a larger set of stages than small countries
do. Furthermore, to minimize cross-hauling of semi-processed goods, the set of stages countries
specialize in are often contiguous. As a result, larger countries are less likely to use imported inputs
in their exports and should, other things equal, record lower levels of backward GVC integration.
On the other hand, by their sheer size, large countries are likely to be geographically close to world
demand for ...nal goods, and thus their more "central" location should make them more prone to
specialize downstream (see Antràs and de Gortari, 2019), and thus record higher backward GVC
integration on account of their centrality.

2.2      Consequences of GVC Participation
How has the rise of GVCs a¤ected the economies in which GVC participation has grown dispro-
portionately? How might a rise in protectionism, by undoing some of the forces in recent decades,
a¤ect those same economies? Is protectionism costlier in the age of GVCs? These are the questions
that will next concern us.
       A ...rst important insight already anticipated above is that by a allowing a ...ner international
division of labor, the growth of GVCs is associated with greater income gains from trade than a
commensurate expansion of traditional trade. Intuitively, GVCs allow countries to bene...t from
the comparative advantage of other countries not only at the sectoral level, but also at the stage
level within sectors. As a result, models of trade featuring global Input-Output links (such as
Caliendo and Parro, 2013, or Antràs and de Gortari, 2019) typically deliver larger gains from trade
   6
   Note that, in a world without input trade, if exports
                                                      P between countries i and j are given by Xij = Yi Yj =k, then
k must be equal to world GDP, and the trade share is j 6=i Xij =Yi = 1 (Yi =Yworld ).



                                                        10
than models without those links.7 Furthermore, the resulting magni...ed costs of protectionism in a
world of GVCs are exacerbated by environments in which the multiple stages involve in production
feature especially high levels of complementarity (see Fally and Sayre, 2018, or Baqaee and Farhi,
2019). As we will discuss more extensively in section 3, when conceptualizing GVCs at the ...rm
level, rather than at the country-sector level, it will also be clear that part of the reason for these
magni...ed real income gains stems from the fact that, by lowering input costs and allowing an
expansion of ...rm scale, GVCs tend to increase the productivity of ...rms.
       It is well understood that the aggregate income implications of trade liberalization are also
ampli...ed in environments in which, via enhanced technology di¤usion, an economy'
                                                                                 s growth rate
might also be positively a¤ected by trade opening (see, for instance, Sampson, 2015). If increased
GVC participation enhances technology di¤usion across countries, it would thus seem plausible that
the rise of GVCs has a larger e¤ect on growth rates than traditional trade does. It is fair to say,
however, that the broad conceptualization of GVCs developed so far does not elucidate whether
GVCs are a particularly e¤ective vehicle of technology di¤usion. We will return to this point later
in the paper.
       Although GVCs are expected, on average, to generate increases in aggregate income, they also
generate nontrivial e¤ects along the income distribution. Much of the literature on the implications
of production fragmentation has in fact focused on studying how it shapes the distribution of income,
and more speci...cally, the distribution of wage income within countries. The Stolper-Samuelson
theorem, one of the key tenets of the canonical conceptualization of traditional international trade,
indicates that deeper trade integration is likely to increase wage inequality (the relative wage of
skilled versus unskilled workers) in relatively advanced, skilled-labor abundant countries, while it
is expected to decrease wage inequality in less developed, skilled-labor scarce countries.
       In a world of fragmentation, however, the validity of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem is under-
mined. More speci...cally, it is widely accepted both theoretically and empirically, that increased
production fragmentation leads to increased wage inequality in both advanced and less-developed
countries (see Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007). There are at least three reasons for this.
       First, when production is o¤shored to less developed economies, the labor force in those
economies ...nds themselves being employed in new production processes and tasks that might
have been perceived to be low-skilled labor intensive in advanced countries, but that are instead
skilled-labor intensive relative to the outside opportunities of workers in less developed countries
(see Feenstra and Hanson, 1996, 1997). Hence, o¤shoring increases the relative demand for skilled
workers in less developed economies and puts upward pressure on wage inequality.
       A second force towards increased wage inequality in less developed economies stems from the
fact that GVCs are often more skill sensitive than traditional trade ows, partly because they
often produce goods that are destined for quality-sensitive consumers in rich countries (Verhoogen,
   7
     Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2012) show that the costs of moving to autarky are shaped by the share
of imports in a country' s total spending. In their model of sequential GVCs, Antràs and de Gortari (2018) instead
obtain a formula in which the costs of moving to autarky depend on the share of spending in goods that embody any
foreign value (regardless of whether those goods themselves are imported or not).



                                                        11
2008), and partly due to high complementarities among the various stages of production carried in
di¤erent countries (Kremer and Maskin, 2003, Antràs, Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg, 2006).8
       A third force toward increase wage inequality in skilled-labor scarce countries is related to the
fact that ...rms in GVCs tend to adopt more capital-intensive techniques than comparable domestic
...rms (Bernard et al., 2018). Physical capital deepening and upgrading contributes to the increase
in the relative demand for skilled workers due to capital-skill complementarity, namely the fact
that physical capital (and capital equipment, in particular) is less substitutable with skilled labor
than it is with unskilled labor (Griliches, 1969, Krusell et al., 2000).
       Although GVCs may increase income inequality in less developed economies, their impact on
poverty is much less clear cut. On the one hand, the high-quality sensitivity of GVCs often lead
them to marginalize the least skilled agents in society, and the increased opportunities they provide
for more skilled agents might further deteriorate the livelihood of the less well o¤ (e.g., by bidding
up the price of housing or of other services). On the other hand, the positive e¤ects of GVC
participation on overall income and income growth are likely to trickle down to everyone in society.
Those directly favoring from GVC integration will use their larger incomes to demand more local
goods and services, which will generate novel opportunities for other agents in society, even those
with relatively few skills. Furthermore, higher aggregate income can support a deeper welfare state
that can ensure that the gains from integration are more evenly spread. Finally, GVC integration
in certain regions of a country, can incentivize internal migration within countries, which can be
a powerful mechanism to reduce poverty. In practice, it appears that GVCs have contributed
to lifting millions of individuals out of poverty in some countries (such as China), but they may
have failed to do so in other less developed countries. Chapter 3 of the 2020 World Development
Report presents evidence that in Vietnam, poverty reduction was greater in locations with a higher
presence of GVC activity.
       For particularly underdeveloped countries, it is also often argued that GVCs may facilitate
industrialization by reducing the range of required "capabilities" that these countries must be
endowed with to be able to produce and export industrial goods. For example, in the auto industry,
countries can participate in GVCs even when they might not have any domestic car makers or any
domestic provider of car engines. On the other hand, more sophisticated tasks in value chains require
skills and capabilities that many underdeveloped countries lack. As a result, the rise of GVCs might
lead less developed economies to specialize in relatively low-value added segments of production
with little scope for upgrading. In addition, tari¤ escalation practices by developed economies tend
to reduce the value added that can be captured by less developed producers when attempting to
remain competitive vis à vis other countries.9 In sum, it may be simpler to "industrialize"in the age
   8
     Production fragmentation also quali...es the link between trade integration and wage inequality in advanced
economies. Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) argue that o¤shoring may increase wage inequality in advanced
economies by less than traditional trade would.
   9
     Consider the following example. A car assembler in a small, less developed economy faces ...xed foreign input
costs of $7,000, while a ...xed sale price of $9,000 in rich countries. It can thus capture value added of $2,000 per car.
Nevertheless, if rich countries set a 20% import tari¤ on assembled cars, to remain competitive, the car assembler
will need to reduce its export price to $7,500, and thus local value added is reduced to $500. Thus, a 20% import



                                                           12
of GVCs, but the returns to doing so might not be as high as they were in the past. Furthermore,
these e¤ects interact with the gradual increase in automation, as will be discussed later in the
paper.
    The impact of trade liberalization on the environment also needs to be reevaluated in a world
of GVCs. The transportation of goods across long distances generates CO2 emissions that directly
harm the environment, but in GVCs, the same value added is often shipped multiple times before
reaching ...nal consumers. Thus, the volume of CO2 emissions generated in transporting goods in
GVCs appear to be associated with a larger environmental harm than traditional trade. Similarly,
the fact that GVCs foster "hyper-specialization"would appear to indicate that the pollution haven
hypothesis might apply particularly intensely to GVCs, as lead ...rms from large industrialized
nations may locate "dirty" production stages in countries where environmental norms are laxer,
thus avoiding the cost of stringent environmental regulations.
    It is important to emphasize, however, that there are at least two reasons that suggest that
environmental concerns associated with globalization might instead be alleviated in the age of
GVCs. First, as argued above, GVCs have the potential to accelerate growth in the economies
that participate in them actively, and it is well understood that the demand for environmental
regulation tends to increase when income rises (or, in economic jargon, environmental quality is
a normal good). Second, GVCs are often an e¤ective vehicle of technology transfer, so it seems
plausible that they will also constitute an e¤ective vehicle of clean technology transfer. In order
to better elucidate this mechanism, however, it will be necessary to develop richer conceptual
frameworks of GVCs, a task to which this paper will shortly turn to.
    This section concludes with a very brief overview of some other macroeconomic consequences
of GVCs (these are explained in greater detail in Chapter 4 of the 2020 World Development Re-
port). Relative to traditional trade, in which producers compete head-to-head to service foreign
markets, GVCs are associated with a higher degree of complementarity in production across coun-
tries, as productivity and demand shocks travel upstream and downstream along value chains. This
translates into a faster and more intense transmission of shocks across countries (as exempli...ed by
natural disasters such as the 2011 Tohoku earthquake), and at a more aggregate level, it also leads
to higher co-movement of output and prices across countries (i.e., larger business-cycle synchro-
nization and ination spillovers).10 GVCs also weaken the e¤ects of movements in exchange rates
on the trade balance. For instance, the positive e¤ect of depreciations on the competitiveness of
exports, is stymied by the increased cost of the foreign value added used in production.


3     A Firm-Level Approach to Global Value Chains
A common feature of both the conceptual framework and empirical measures described so far is that
they advocate an analysis at the country level or, at best, at the country-industry level. Indeed, in
tari¤ on ...nal goods can reduce value added in less developed economies by 75%.
  10
     In the presence of inventories, GVCs are also expected to generate di¤erential volatility at di¤erent stages of the
chain (see Ferrari, 2019).


                                                          13
neoclassical frameworks in which production technologies feature constant returns to scale, there
is little hope to generate predictions at a more granular level (i.e., at the ...rm or plant level).
Furthermore, Input-Output tables and publicly available international trade statistics are reported
at the industry- (or product-level) rather than at the ...rm level.
   In the real world, however, it is not countries or industries that participate in international
trade, but rather ...rms. In line with this simple observation, economic research in international
trade has undergone a dramatic transformation in the last twenty years, one that has placed ...rm-
level international strategies at the center stage. This intellectual revolution was fueled by the
increased availability of longitudinal plant and ...rm-level datasets that permitted researchers to
unveil a series of new facts that challenged the validity of existing models (see Bernard and Jensen,
1995). At the theoretical level, the seminal paper in the literature is that of Melitz (2003), which
focuses on the exporting decisions of heterogeneous ...rms within an industry. In Melitz'framework,
...rms are assumed to produce di¤erentiated products under technologies featuring increasing returns
to scale. Product di¤erentiation confers market power to ...rms, while scale economies are associated
with ...rms facing ...xed cost of production and of distribution. The decision of a ...rm on whether
to export to a given foreign market is shaped by a comparison of the potential operating pro...t
obtained in that foreign market with the ...xed costs associated with distributing products in that
market.
   Although the canonical model in this ...rm-level approach to international trade was written in
a setting in which international trade involves the exchange of only ...nal goods, as in traditional
conceptualizations of trade, an active literature has adopted similar ideas to understand the rise of
GVCs. In the presence of ...xed costs of engaging in global sourcing (i.e., of importing intermediate
inputs), one would expect that the use of imported inputs in production will demand that importers
attain a minimum e¢ cient scale of production, with smaller and less productive ...rms in an industry
being excluded from GVC participation (see Antràs and Helpman, 2004, Halpern, Koren, and
Szeidl, 2015, Gopinath and Neiman, 2014, Antràs, Fort and Tintelnot, 2017). The combination
of scale economies and ...xed costs of importing and exporting also provides a natural explanation
for the fact that ...rms that are large enough to be able to amortize the ...xed costs associated with
importing will also tend to be large enough to ...nd exporting successful. Selection into importing
thus naturally is associated with ...rms engaged in backward GVC participation according to the
de...nition developed in our broad conceptualization of GVCs (i.e., the use of foreign value added
in exporting). Similarly, ...rms exporting intermediate inputs, are likely to engage in forward GVC
participation, as the ...rms importing their products are likely to be exporters themselves.
   When adopting a ...rm-level approach one can also distinguish global value chains that are orga-
nized by a lead ...rm, which incurs the bulk of the ...xed costs associated with setting up the network
of producers in a given production process, and global value chains that are more decentralized in
nature, with individual producers incurring costs to set up links upstream and downstream from
them (see Bernard, Moxnes, and Ulltveit-Moe, 2018, Antràs and de Gortari, 2019).




                                                  14
3.1   Measurement
Firm-level datasets containing information on the import and export transactions of ...rms can be
fruitfully used to construct measures of GVC participation similar in nature to those discussed
above based on the country- industry information in global Input-Output tables. More speci...cally,
transaction-level customs datasets of the type available from the World Bank's Export Dynamics
Database can be used to identify the set of ...rms in a country that participate in trade, further
distinguishing ...rms that export, ...rms that import and ...rms that both export and import. When
a given ...rm in a given country both imports and exports, it is natural to conclude that this ...rm
participates in GVCs.
   To map this de...nition more precisely to the de...nition of backward GVC participation developed
in country-industry studies, one would ideally also resort to product-level information to verify that
the goods imported by an exporting ...rm are indeed intermediate inputs (rather than ...nal goods),
so that one can more comfortably conclude that this ...rm is indeed using foreign value-added in
their production destined for exports. Without linking customs-level data across countries, it is
much harder to come up with analogous ...rm-level measures of forward GVC participation. The
reason for this is that even when a ...rm is identi...ed as an exporter of intermediate inputs (rather
than of ...nal goods), it is virtually impossible to establish whether those inputs are fully absorbed
in the importing country, or whether they are re-exported to third markets by the importing ...rms
after having added value to them. We envision a future in which researchers will be able to conduct
more satisfactory analyses with linked customs-data datasets from a variety of countries, but this
future is not yet here.
   It should be stressed that the above ...rm-level measures only identify the extensive margin of
GVC participation, while industry-level measure based on global Input-Output tables also capture
the intensity of GVC participation. Computing intensive measures of GVC participation at the ...rm-
level data is however challenging, particularly in situations in which complementary census-level
information is not available. The reason for this is that customs-level data have no information
on ...rms' domestic purchases of inputs and on ...rms' domestic sales of goods. As a result, it is
di¢ cult to infer the ratio of foreign inputs used in production, and it is even more challenging to
disentangle the foreign-input content of exports from the foreign-content of overall production (see
Kee and Tang, 2016, for an attempt using processing trade in China).
   Firm-level information on importing and exporting can also be used to shed light on the extent to
which global Input-Output tables provide an accurate description of value-added trade ows across
countries. Even when the entries of these tables provide an accurate account of the origin of inputs
in a country'
            s industrial production, the standard methods used to compute bilateral value-added
trade ows from these tables assume that the same combination of inputs is used in production
regardless of the destination of sales of a country and industry's output. As demonstrated by de
Gortari (2018) with ...rm-level evidence from Mexico, in practice, ...rms selling output to di¤erent
markets use very di¤erent combinations of sources of inputs, and this has signi...cant implications
for the type of bilateral value-added trade ows one infers from global Input-Output tables. For


                                                 15
instance, because Mexican exports to the U.S. embody a disproportionate amount of U.S. value
added relative to Mexican exports to other countries, de Gortari estimates that the share of U.S.
value in U.S. imported Mexican manufactures is 30%, rather than the 17% one would infer from
standard techniques applied to global Input-Output tables.11
    We now turn to elucidate the determinants and consequences of GVC participation through the
lens of this ...rm-level approach to GVCs. To be clear, many of the forces outlined in the initial
traditional conceptualization of GVCs continue to hold under this novel approach, so the focus will
be on outlining distinct implications that arise in the present context.

3.2     Determinants of GVC Participation
Firm-level GVC participation is shaped by many of the same forces that shape GVC participation
at the country-industry level. Firms in countries with large endowments of factors that are used
intensively in certain segments of GVCs will be more prone to participate in GVCs, while trade
costs and institutional quality continue to play a key role in shaping the likelihood that GVCs ow
across a given country. The ...rm-level perspective, however, carries at least two important new
lessons.
    First, for some of the determinants of GVC activity, the relevant endowments might be better
measured at the ...rm level than at the country level. For instance, even in countries with relatively
low levels of educational attainment, some ...rms might be able to participate in relatively skilled-
labor intensive value chains if certain ...rms in that country manage to attract a critical mass of
skilled workers to work for them. On the other hand, it is much harder for individual ...rms to
surmount the obstacles posed by an unfavorable geography, by de...cient infrastructure, or by weak
contract enforcement (see, however, our discussion of relational GVC below). Similarly, market
size certainly matters for whether ...rms participate or not in GVCs, but often what is relevant is
that ...rm size is su¢ ciently high, both to be able to amortize the ...xed costs associated with GVC
participation, and also to be able to ful...ll large-volume orders from comparably large importers in
other countries.
    The second key lesson arising from a ...rm-level conceptualization of GVCs is that to better
understand the extensive margin of participation, it is fruitful to separate determinants that are
likely to a¤ect the ...xed cost of participation from determinants that are likely to impact GVC
pro...tability conditional on participating.12 This is because the relative magnitude of these e¤ects
is likely to shape the characteristics (size, productivity, etc.,) of ...rms participating in GVCs in a
given country.
  11
     Apart from qualifying the type of implications that one can draw from aggregated Input-Output tables, ...rm-level
data can also be fruitfully used to test more systematically the validity of the "proportionality" assumptions that go
into the construction of those data.
  12
     Antràs, Fort and Tintelnot (2017) identify a signi...cant divergence between the extent to which foreign countries
generate cost savings for U.S. ...rms o¤shoring in those countries and the ...xed costs associated with sourcing from
these countries. For instance, China is estimated to o¤er signi...cant cost savings, but the initial set up cost to be able
to source from that country appears to be especially high.




                                                            16
3.3   Consequences of GVC Participation
The consequences of GVC participation also become signi...cantly richer when adopting a ...rm-level
approach to GVCs. Such a focus makes it clear that participation in GVCs generates aggregate
income gains partly by increasing the productivity of ...rms. There are in turn two forces that
shape these productivity improvements. On the one hand, there is a direct e¤ect coming from the
fact that the use of foreign value added in production is associated with ...rms being able to secure
inputs from abroad at lower cost than they would from domestic suppliers. On the other hand, this
reduction in costs coupled with the exporting associated with GVCs tend to increase the scale of
operation of ...rms engaged in GVCs, and this tends to reduce their average costs in the presence of
scale economies. In sum, GVC participation enhances ...rm-level productivity, a fact that has been
con...rmed empirically by Amiti and Konings (2007), Goldberg et al. (2010) and De Loecker et al.
(2016), among many others.
   These productivity e¤ects imply that import competition shocks can carry signi...cantly richer
implications when they entail surges in imports of ...nal goods (as in traditional trade) and when
they partly entail an increase in imports of intermediate inputs. In the latter case, the positive
productivity e¤ects at the ...rm-level can lead to unexpected implications for scale and employment
at the ...rm level. For instance, Antràs, Fort and Tintelnot (2017) show that U.S. ...rms that started
importing from China after this country'
                                       s accession to the WTO also increased their sourcing from
domestic suppliers in the United States.
   Envisioning GVC participation as a ...rm-level phenomenon also helps conceptualize why GVCs
might be a particularly powerful vehicle of technology transfer. The reason for this is that unlike
in formulations of traditional trade, in which ...rms from di¤erent countries compete against each
other, GVCs constitute networks of ...rms with common goals, such as minimizing production costs
or maximizing pro...ts associated with the production chain. Surely, the incentives of agents in
GVCs are not always aligned, and the division of the gains generated by GVCs naturally generates
distributional conict, but downstream ...rms typically gain from productivity enhancements of
upstream producers in their chains, and vice versa. A direct implication of this simple observation
is that ...rms from advanced countries importing or exporting goods to less developed economies
might ...nd it bene...cial to share process and product innovations with their GVC co-participants
in those less advanced economies. In sum, technology transfer is particularly uid within GVCs.
   As emphasized in our broad conceptualization of GVCs, a country'
                                                                  s participation in GVCs can
also constitute a signi...cant source of increased income inequality. More speci...cally, the growth in
aggregate income stemming from countries joining GVCs is often coupled with nontrivial increases
in wage inequality. The ...rm-level approach to GVCs provides a more eshed-out version of this
mechanism, as the type of large ...rms often participating in GVCs (especially in manufacturing)
tend to be larger, more skilled intensive, and more capital intensive than other types of ...rms
(Bernard et al., 2008).
   A study of GVC activity at the ...rm level further introduces novel dimensions associated with the
distributional consequences of trade integration. For instance, in the presence of scale economies


                                                  17
and ...xed costs of participation, large ...rms will tend to bene...t disproportionately from GVC
participation due the cost-savings associated with importing and the expansion in scale a¤orded
by exporting. As a result, the size distribution of ...rms is likely to be signi...cantly more skewed in
a world of GVCs than in a world without them. This suggests the intriguing hypothesis that the
rise of "superstar" ...rms in the U.S. and other advanced economies (see Autor et al., 2017) might
be partly associated with the rise of GVCs.
    Furthermore, it is a well-established fact that large ...rms tend to face lower price elasticities of
demand than smaller ...rms, and that cost reductions are often only partially passed on to prices,
and particularly so by large companies. As a result, the growth of GVC activity appears to be a
potential contributor to the recently documented widespread rise in average markups and in the
dispersion of these markups (see De Loecker et al., 2019). In fact, De Loecker et al. (2016) provide
direct evidence from India showing that input trade liberalization was associated with an increase
in the markups charged by Indian ...rms importing inputs from abroad. Chapter 3 of the 2020
World Development Report also provides preliminary evidence that increasing GVC participation
appears to be associated with rising markups in developed countries but with falling markups in
developing countries. The latter fact suggests that the relative bargaining power of agents in GVCs
might be key for the distribution of the gains from GVC activity, an issue to which we will return
in section 4.
    A rise in markups associated with GVCs is likely to reect more than the necessary increase
in price-cost margins required to cover the increased ...xed costs associated with a more complex
sourcing or exporting strategy. As a result, GVC participation is also likely to increase the pro...t
rate of these companies, thereby generating a force towards a lower share of an economy's income
being paid to labor. Similarly, lead ...rms in GVCs often transfer their relatively capital-intensive
production techniques and automation practices to their foreign production facilities in less devel-
oped economies, which might result in further shifts in the distribution of income away from labor
and on to capital. There are of course many possible explanations for the observed global decline
in the labor share (see Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013), but the rise in GVC activity appears to
be a likely contributor to this trend.
    In terms of other macroeconomic implications of the rise of GVCs, the fact that ...rms partic-
ipating in GVCs tend to be large and tend to engage in both importing and exporting provides
a natural explanation for the fact that following large depreciations, import growth often tracks
export growth closely, thus reducing the e¤ectiveness of depreciations in reducing trade imbalances
(see Blaum, 2018).


4    A Relational View of Global Value Chains
Although research adopting the broad approach to GVCs has provided valuable novel insights,
modeling global production sharing as simply an increase in the extent to which foreign inputs
(or foreign value added) is used in production misses important distinctive characteristics of the


                                                   18
recent rise of GVCs. In other words, the de...nition of GVCs adopted so far may be too broad to do
full justice to the novel landscape that has emerged in the world economy in the last thirty years.
The rise of GVCs entails much more than the intensi...cation of the type of trade in raw materials
and homogeneous intermediate inputs that has existed since the Bronze Age. It is also much more
than importing and exporting ...rms transacting with each other in world markets. The expansion
of GVCs entails a ...ner international division of labor but it also involves a number of additional
features. Four of these distinctive features are particularly important.
   First, the process by which agents co-participating in GVCs match with each other is not
frictionless. Fixed costs of exporting and importing partly reect the costs of ...nding suitable
suppliers of parts and components or suitable buyers of one'
                                                           s products. For this reason, these ...xed
costs are better understood as sunk costs, which naturally create a "stickiness"among participants
in a GVC.
   A second source of lock-in in GVC relationships is related to the fact that GVC participants often
undertake numerous relationship-speci...c investments (such as purchasing specialized equipment or
customizing products) which would obtain a much-depressed return were GVC links to be broken.
The need to customize inputs, coupled with quality sensitivity considerations, renders the above
matching between buyers and sellers particularly important. If a ...rm suddenly faces an increase
in the demand for their goods, it cannot easily scale up by buying more foreign inputs from some
centralized market. There are typically only a handful of suppliers worldwide that can provide the
additional necessary customized inputs necessary to scale up.
   Third, ...rms participating in GVCs do not only engage in trade in tangible goods with other
members of their value chains. GVCs often involve large ows of intangibles, such as technology,
intellectual property and credit. The exchange of these intangibles is signi...cantly more complex
than that of simple goods or services.
   Fourth, the prevalence of lock-in e¤ects and ows of intangibles within GVCs is made particu-
larly relevant by the limited contractual security governing transactions within these chains. GVC
often involve transactions for which a strong legal environment is particularly important to bind
producers together and to preclude technological leakage. And yet, GVC are often conducted in
situations in which this strong legal environment is missing because cross-border exchange of goods
cannot generally be governed by the same contractual safeguards that typically accompany similar
exchanges occurring within borders. As a result, GVC participants are left to employ repeated
interactions among them to build a governance that provides implicit contract enforcement. As in
the case of matching frictions and relationship-speci...city, this force contributes to the "stickiness"
of GVC relationships.
   In sum, these considerations lead to a novel, relational conceptualization of GVCs in which
the focus is shifted away from the mere allocation of value added across countries resulting from
anonymous, spot exchanges of goods and services. Instead, a new paradigm emerges in which the
identity of the speci...c agents participating in a GVC is crucial. Within these GVCs, contracting is
often relational in nature, and thus more likely to exhibit persistence than in transactions involving


                                                  19
raw materials and homogeneous inputs.
   An extreme version of this type of relational contracting arises when parties involved in a
GVC altogether by-pass the market mechanism and decide to transact within ...rm boundaries, by
having the buyer vertically integrate the seller or vice versa. The prevalence of intra...rm trade
ows in world trade ows exempli...es the importance of relational aspects in the growth of GVCs.
For instance, U.S. customs data suggest that, in recent years, close to one-half of U.S. imports
involve related-party transactions (see Antràs, 2003). At the global level, intra...rm trade has been
estimated to account for about one-third of world trade ows.
   Nevertheless, the internalization of transactions in a GVC is just one of the many organizational
responses to the contractual vagaries associated with cross-border transactions. In an inuential
study, Gere¢ , Humphrey, and Sturgeon (2005) elaborate a much more extensive taxonomy of
potential governance forms within GVCs, and various researchers have built on their work to shed
light on the relative prevalence of these governance forms through a number of interesting case
studies.
   Although the relational approach to the study of GVCs is concerned with the same phenomena
as the more traditional approach discussed earlier in this paper, these literatures have largely
evolved in isolation. These separate paths are partly explained by the signi...cantly di¤erent sources
of data used in these di¤erent literatures, as discussed next.

4.1      Measurement
Measuring participation of ...rms in relational GVCs is notoriously di¢ cult. First of all, because
relational GVCs activity entails ...rm-to-...rm links, it presents the same di¢ culties outlined in
section 3 regarding measuring participation at the ...rm level. But more importantly, the distinctive
characteristics of relational GVCs call for a narrower empirical de...nition of this type of GVCs,
one that excludes ...rm-level GVC participation associated with the exchange of fairly homogeneous
goods in spot transaction.
   Given these di¢ culties, it is no surprise that progress on this area has been rather scant. The
most inuential work on the relational nature of GVCs tends to focus on particular case studies
of speci...c sectors and countries, which allow the researcher to paint a more colorful and realistic
picture of the web of relationship sustaining global production in that sector. The extensive and
inuential of Gary Gere¢ provides a good example of this (see for instance, Gere¢ , 1994, on the
apparel industry, Sturgeon et al., 2008, on the automobile industry or Bamber and Gere¢ , 2013,
on the medical device industry in Costa Rica). More recently, Rocco Macchiavello and Ameet
Morjaria have studied in detail the relational nature of contracting in various agricultural markets
in less developed economies, such as their work on the ower industry in Kenya (see Macchiavello
and Morjaria, 2013) or their work on the co¤ee value chain in Rwanda (Machiavello and Morjaria,
2019).
   One of the initial goals of the 2020 World Development Report was to attempt to provide
a bridge between this case-study-based literature and the broader empirical literature on GVC


                                                 20
participation. The idea was to develop ...rm-level and product-level measures of the extent to
which the GVC participation of ...rms is relational in nature, and the extent to which international
transactions associated with a given product tend to be relational in nature. More speci...cally,
the aim was to exploit the panel nature of some of the datasets available from the World Bank's
Exporter Dynamics Database (EDD) to construct measures of the observed persistence of ...rm-
to-...rm transactions, perhaps partialling out various natural determinants of persistence (such as
exchange rate volatility). This is very much in line with the measure of "relationship stickiness"
proposed by Martin et al. (2018), which they compute using detailed ...rm-to-...rm export data from
France. The hope was to "scale up"this approach and apply it to various countries, with the initial
goal of verifying whether there was a signi...cant positive rank-correlation in product-level stickiness
across countries. Such a ...nding would indicate that there is a signi...cant product-level dimension
to stickiness that is likely to render GVC participation in certain goods particularly prone to be
relational in nature. With such ...nding at hand, one could use standard industry concordances
to construct a global Input-Output table that separates trade ows associated with traditional
versus relational transactions, thereby allowing one to construct broad industry-level measures of
relational GVC participation for the comprehensive set of countries in the Eora Global Supply
Chain Database. Due to time constraints, such analysis was not conducted in time for the 2020
World Development Report, but hopefully it will be carried out in future work.

4.2   Determinants of GVC Participation
In a world of relational GVCs, the e¤ect of factor endowments on GVC participation is largely
analogous to the one developed above for the broad notion of GVCs (both at the country-industry
and at the ...rm level). A key novel aspect, however, is that as mentioned above, the relational
approach to GVCs provides a straightforward explanation for why GVC activity and FDI ows go
hand in hand. When tight control over foreign production processes is necessary (perhaps because
the legal environment does not su¢ ce to discipline the behavior of suppliers or to avoid the leakage
of intellectual property), lead ...rms might decide to rely on integrated suppliers and assemblers in
foreign countries. This results in intra...rm trade and FDI ows. For this same reason, countries
that put in place policies that are FDI friendly (such as establishing credible mechanisms to reduce
the risk of expropriation or o¤ering tax breaks for new investments by foreign companies) are more
likely to be able to participate in GVCs.
   The stickiness of relational GVCs also makes them particularly vulnerable to supply chain
disruptions. For this reason, ...rms participating in relational GVCs are likely to be particularly
sensitive to the availability of skilled labor in the economies in which they operate. Furthermore, in
relational GVCs, informational ows and communication are particularly important, which suggests
that language skills (such as a good command of English as a second language) might be particularly
relevant for GVC participation.
   The relational nature of GVCs also considerably reinforces the role of institutional quality as a
signi...cant determinant of GVC participation. Having said this, institutional quality and relational


                                                  21
GVCs interact in subtle ways. On the one hand, the emphasis this approach places on contractual
insecurity naturally implies that production processes involving high degrees of customization (i.e.,
more relationship-speci...c investments), and for which a thick "secondary" market is missing, are
likely to be located in countries with strong institutional quality (Levchenko, 2007, Nunn, 2007).
The reason for this is that in those countries, lead ...rms are in a better position to discipline the
behavior of producers and avoid costly production delays or quality debasements. Nevertheless,
and as argued above, the same forces that make relational GVC rely intensively on institutional
quality also make GVC links particularly "sticky", which fosters the emergence of reputational
mechanisms of cooperation which might partly substitute for the absence of formal contracting. In
addition, under some circumstances, vertical integration may serve as a direct (albeit imperfect)
substitute for strong contract enforcement in countries hosting GVCs. Because relational GVCs
feature signi...cant ows of credit and intellectual property, a country'
                                                                       s ...nancial institutions and
IPR protection policies also constitute important determinants of GVC participation.
   The e¤ects of trade costs on GVC participation need also be quali...ed when GVCs are rela-
tional in nature. As reiterated above, supply chain disruptions are particularly costly when ...rms
participating in these chains cannot easily resort to alternative producers when some of the links in
the chain fail to provide components or services in time or under pre-speci...ed terms. With that in
mind, trade delays associated with ine¢ cient or corrupt customs o¢ ces might act as a particularly
large deterrent for relational GVCs requiring coordination and in-time delivery. Furthermore, in the
presence of weak contract enforcement, the emergence of cooperation among producers in GVCs is
fostered by repeated interactions among the several agents participating in the chain, interactions
that may be severely curtailed by remoteness or insu¢ cient air connectivity.
   The lock-in e¤ects associated with costly search and relationship-speci...c investments also have
implications for the role of market size in attracting GVC activity. Beyond the factors identi...ed by
the above broad conceptualization of GVCs, in settings with relational GVCs, a large market might
serve the role of reducing search frictions (Grossman and Helpman, 2005), and may also facilitate
resorting to alternative suppliers in the presence of production disruptions.

4.3   Consequences of GVC Participation
How will economies be impacted by participating in relational GVCs? Many of the e¤ects discussed
under the broad conceptualization of GVCs continue to apply, but one can identify three particularly
distinctive aspects of relational GVCs that have signi...cant rami...cations for understanding the
consequences of GVCs.
   First, the relational approach clari...es the role of GVCs as vehicles of technology transfer.
GVC participation is not just about using foreign value added in production or about engaging
in importing and exporting. A GVC is made up of inter-...rm and intra-...rm relationships which
govern the transfer of tangible goods, but also the transfer of information and technology involved
in making a product or providing a service. The scope for absorbing foreign technology is thus
particularly large in relational GVCs. Furthermore, the sticky nature of relational GVCs make them


                                                 22
particularly prone to bene...ts from learning-by-importing and learning-by-exporting via repeated
interactions with highly productive ...rms in advanced economies. Similarly, the transfer of clean
environmental standards to less developed economies might be most e¢ ciently carried out via
relational GVCs.
    A second key consideration is that the combination of incomplete contract enforcement and
the lock-in e¤ects stemming from search frictions and relationship-speci...c in relational GVCs give
rise to transaction prices between buyers and sellers that tend to be bilaterally negotiated, and
that are thus not fully disciplined by market-clearing conditions. This observation has a number
of implications for the consequences of relational GVCs. Countries should concern themselves not
only with fostering the participation of their local ...rms in GVCs, but should also be mindful of the
bargaining power that their ...rms will have vis à vis large foreign ...rms. The implications of GVCs
for the emergence of superstar ...rms with huge scale, high market power and large pro...t rates are
exacerbated by the disproportionate bargaining power that these large ...rms might have vis à vis
their suppliers. More speci...cally, large lead ...rms might be able to buy parts and components at
relatively lower prices (via volume discounts, playing suppliers against each other, etc.), while also
being able to sell at higher prices (if they are themselves key suppliers to downstream producers).
This strong bargaining power enhances the pro...tability of large ...rms engaged in relational GVCs,
but might come at the cost of a lower "share of the pie"accruing to smaller and less powerful ...rms
in less developed economies. These e¤ects might be compounded in countries with unfavorable
geographical features or weak institutions, as large ...rms might react to the risk of facing production
disruptions in those countries by setting up "back-up"suppliers elsewhere, thereby further eroding
the bargaining power of suppliers in distant or weak contracting countries. Indeed, as mentioned
above, Chapter 3 of the 2020 World Development Report reports evidence suggesting that increasing
GVC participation appears to be associated with falling markups in developing countries. Beyond
distributional concerns, Antràs and Staiger (2012) also show that the fact that international prices
are often bilaterally negotiated carries important implications for the role of design of international
trade agreements.
    A third set of novel mechanisms by which relational GVCs might a¤ect inequality relates to the
disproportionate importance of the matching between buyers and sellers. Because the identity of
these producers matters, especially in situations in which sensitivity to quality is high, relational
GVCs may set o¤ "a war for talent" in which the price of particularly attractive producers, or
the wage of particularly skilled individuals might be disproportionately bid up relative to a world
without relational GVCs. This constitutes another mechanism by which GVCs might exacerbate
inequality in the distribution of income.


5    The Future of GVCs
This paper has so far focused on overviewing some key conceptual aspects related to GVCs, and
has attempted to develop a set of predictions regarding the key determinants and implications of


                                                  23
the rise of GVCs observed in the last thirty years. In this concluding section, this chapter will leave
the comfort zone of predicting the past, and will venture into the much more treacherous terrain
of attempting to predict the future.13
       Although the current political environment would be rife for a discussion of how a continuing
escalation of trade tensions between the U.S. and other countries might a¤ect the future geography
of global production, this concluding section will instead focus on speculating on the future of
GVCs in light of the advent of an array of new technologies, such as digital platforms, blockchain,
automation, and 3D printing. Some readers will be disappointed by this focus, but there are at
least two reasons for it. First, new technologies are here to stay, while the current trade "strifes"
between the U.S. and its major trading partners are very much in ux and, as of the time of writing
(December of 2019), it is not clear that they will develop into an all out "trade war". Second, if an
increase in trade barriers indeed materializes for a signi...cant amount of time, the e¤ects it would
generate would largely be the mirror image of those following the decline in trade barriers in the
last thirty years, as already hinted in section 2.2. Instead, the e¤ects of new technologies are quite
distinct in nature and deserve a separate discussion.
       How will the future of GVCs be shaped by new technologies? Will the recent (post 2008)
slowdown and retrenchment in GVC participation continue in the next few decades? Or are we
perhaps in the cusp of a new wave of globalization? And how will new technologies reshape the
role of GVCs as a possible engines of development? This ...nal section will apply the conceptual
framework developed in previous sections to o¤er some tentative answers to these questions.

5.1      Digital Technologies
Consider ...rst the case of digital technologies. It is clear that global value chains are rapidly changing
under the pressure of digital innovation. First and foremost, digital technologies encourage GVC
participation by reducing many of the barriers that ...rms face when attempting to join GVCs. For
instance, digital platforms (such as Amazon, Alibaba or Mercado Libre) facilitate the matching
of buyers and sellers, thus reducing the initial ...xed costs associated with GVC participation.14
Extending access to high-speed internet and expanding e-commerce thus has the potential to greatly
facilitate increased GVC participation by relatively small ...rms, and also for ...rms in countries with
bad infrastructure (which now gain the ability to specialize in segments of global value chains that
specialize in the provision of services via digital technologies rather than the provision of physical
goods via transport infrastructure). These same technologies also enhance the management of
inventories, and of logistics more broadly, thereby improving participation even in manufacturing
segments of GVCs (see Fort, 2017).
       Furthermore, digital platforms (via rating systems) and open distributed ledgers (such as
blockchain) enhance veri...cation and monitoring, thus reducing informational frictions and opening
  13
    As Niels Bohr famously put it,"prediction is very di¢ cult, especially if it's about the future".
  14
    Note that many digital platform companies o¤er parallel business-to-consumers and business-to-business plat-
forms.



                                                      24
the door for countries with weak institutions to bypass a key factor limiting their participation in
GVCs. Similarly, in situations in which language barriers remain signi...cant (e.g., in the provision
of certain services), the application of big data and machine learning techniques has the potential
to provide much more e¢ cient translation services (see Brynjolfsson et al., 2019). In sum, one
would expect the unstoppable advance of digital technologies to provide a new tailwind to ensure
the continuing growth in GVC activity worldwide.
   Apart from these e¤ects on the e¢ ciency of GVCs, it is also important to acknowledge some
potential distributional e¤ects originating speci...cally from these novel technologies. For instance,
the same reputation mechanisms GVCs rely on to verify seller and buyer quality may foster con-
centration, thus making it harder for entrants to compete. Within existing relational ...rm-to-...rm
GVC activity, novel technologies might also have implications for the relative bargaining power of
the di¤erent participants in GVCs. For instance, digital platforms might allow large buyers in rich
countries to gain information on a larger number of potential suppliers, thus enhancing their ability
to have these suppliers compete with each other. This in turn may lead to better terms of trade
for lead ...rms in rich countries, at the expense of a lower share of the gains from GVCs accruing to
producers in less developed economies. Furthermore, digital platforms themselves have been accu-
mulating vast amounts of information on the users of their platforms, and this certainly enhances
their ability to use this information to their advantage, either by locking in buyers with particularly
well tailored recommendations, or by price discriminating in particularly e¤ective ways. As a result,
digital platform ...rms also pose new challenges for regulators seeking to ensure fair competition and
prevent abuse of market power.
   The speci...c features of relational GVCs emphasized in section 4 suggest that the e¢ ciency and
distributional consequences following from the increasing adoption of digital technologies might
not be orthogonal to each other. More speci...cally, because veri...cation and monitoring serve
as a substitute for the need for implicit contract enforcement, they may lead to an erosion of
the "stickiness" of GVC relationships. This in turn may well generate negative e¤ects on the
productivity of ...rm-to-...rm transactions. Indeed, recent work by Machiavello and Morjaria (2019)
suggests that in co¤ee value chains in Rwanda, increased competition was associated with a lower
use of relational contracts between mills and farmers, and this breakdown in relational contracts
lowered mills'e¢ ciency and output quality.

5.2   Automation and 3D Printing
Although new technologies have the potential to raise productivity, they sometimes can prove to be
quite disruptive, especially when they lead to a reduction in the demand for workers. The example
of industrial automation and robotics is a case in point. At ...rst glance, automation constitutes
an alternative to o¤shoring for ...rms in rich countries seeking to lower their labor costs. Because
automation and o¤shoring appear to be substitutes, one would then expect improvements in au-
tomation to lead to an increasing amount of reshoring over time. This fact might be particularly
concerning to less developed economies, which might view automation as a threat to their ability


                                                  25
to leverage their cheap labor to get a foot on the door of GVCs. These fears might be compounded
by the fact that large multinational companies typically design their production processes with
their home market factor prices in mind, and might then impose these same production processes
possibly involving large amounts of automation, in their host countries (see Rodrik, 2018). In
other words, participation in GVCs might lead to the di¤usion of automation to less developed
economies, thereby aggravating the reduction in demand for labor caused by automation in less
developed economies.
   The substitutability between automation and o¤shoring is, however, much less clear-cut in
practice. Automation by ...rms in developed countries tend to decrease their costs, enhance their
productivity and thereby increase their demand for intermediate inputs, many of which continue to
be sourced from less developed economies. Whether automation increases or reduces the extent to
which ...rms in less developed economies participate in GVCs is thus an empirical matter. Building
on recent work by Artuc et al. (2018), Chapter 6 of the 2020 World Development Report presents
preliminary evidence suggesting that automation in industrial countries appears to have, in fact,
boosted imports from developing countries, although the e¤ect is heterogeneous across sectors and
countries.
   Even when automation might not have a negative impact on GVC participation, it is important
to emphasize that it is likely to aggravate the e¤ects of increased GVC participation on inequality.
The mechanism here is closely related to the capital-skill complementarity e¤ect already mentioned
in section 2.2. Similarly to physical capital investments, automation typically complements skilled
labor while substituting unskilled labor, thereby exerting upward pressure on the relative demand
for skilled workers, and thus on wage inequality. As a result, even when the e¤ects on employment
might be attenuated by productivity e¤ects, automation is likely to be associated with a decreasing
share of workers in less developed economies directly gaining from GVCs owing through their
economies.
   Automation is often associated with industrial robots, but there has recently been some debates
about the role of 3D printing on the future of GVCs. Will 3D printing lead to large volumes of
reshoring therefore depressing GVC participation and trade ows? In answering this questions,
the mechanisms at play are very much similar to those applying to automation more broadly. The
trade-reducing e¤ects of 3D printing are obvious, but one should also take into account their positive
e¤ect on productivity and input demand, and the fact that 3D printers do not print goods out of
thin air. In addition, by making consumer goods produced by 3D printers cheaper, the demand for
these same goods is increased, and as long as 3D printers are not available everywhere, they may
generate a short-run spur to trade ows. Indeed, this is consistent with the ...ndings of Freund et
al. (2018), who show that the dramatic shift of production of hearing aids via 3D printing actually
increased international trade in hearing aids by roughly 60 percent.




                                                 26
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman (2007), "Contracts and Technology Adoption,"Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 97.3: pp. 916-943.

Amiti, Mary and Jozef Konings (2007), "Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity:
    Evidence from Indonesia," American Economic Review, 97 (5), pp:1611-1638.

Antràs, Pol (2003), "Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118:4, pp.
    1375­ 1418.

Antràs, Pol (2015). Global Production: Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure. Princeton University Press.

Antràs, Pol, Luis Garicano and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2006), "O¤shoring in a Knowledge Economy,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121, No. 1, pp. 31-77.

Antràs, Pol, and Davin Chor (2013), "Organizing the Global Value Chain," Econometrica 81(6): 2127-2204.

Antràs, Pol, Davin Chor, Thibault Fally, and Russell Hillberry, (2012), "Measuring the Upstreamness of
    Production and Trade Flows," American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 102(3): 412-416.

Antràs, Pol, Teresa Fort, and Felix Tintelnot (2017), "The Margin of Global Sourcing: Theory and Evidence
    from U.S. Firms," American Economic Review, 107.9, 2514-64.

Antràs, Pol and Alonso de Gortari (2019), "On the Geography of Global Value Chains,"manuscript Harvard
    University.

Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman (2004), "Global Sourcing," Journal of Political Economy, 112, pp.552­
    580.

Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger (2012), "O¤shoring and the Role of Trade Agreements," American
    Economic Review 102.7: pp. 3140-83.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. "New trade models, same old gains?"
    American Economic Review 102.1 (2012): 94-130.

Artuc, Erhan, Paulo S. R. Bastos, and Bob Rijkers. 2018. "Robots, Tasks, and Trade," Policy Research
    Working Paper 8674, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen (2017), "The Fall
    of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Baldwin, Richard, and Anthony J. Venables (2013), "Spiders and Snakes: O¤shoring and Agglomeration
    in the Global Economy," Journal of International Economics 90.2 : 245-254.

Bamber, Penny, and Gary Gere¢ (2013), "Costa Rica in the Medical Devices Global Value Chain: Oppor-
   tunities for Upgrading,"Research Report (August 20), Global Value Chains Center, Duke University,
   Durham, NC.

Baqaee, David and Emmanuel Farhi (2019), "Networks, Barriers, and Trade" mimeo Harvard University.

Barjamovic, Gojko, Thomas Chaney, Kerem Cosar, and Ali Hortacsu (2019), "Trade, Merchants and the
     Lost Cities of the Bronze Age," Quarterly Journal of Economics 134.3: 1455-1503.

Bernard, A.B. and Jensen, J.B. (1995), "Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US Manufacturing: 1976­1987,"
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, pp. 67­ 112.


                                                  27
Bernard, A.B., Jensen, J.B., Redding, S.J. and Schott, P.K., (2018), "Global Firms," Journal of Economic
    Literature, 56(2), pp.565-619.

Bernard, Andrew B., Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe (2018), "Two-Sided Heterogeneity
    and Trade," Review of Economics and Statistics 100.3 (2018): 424-439.

Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott, (2007), "Firms in International Trade,"
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21:3, 105-130.

Blaum, Joaquin (2018), "Global Firms in Large Devaluations", mimeo Brown University.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Xiang Hui, and Meng Liu (2019), "Does Machine Translation A¤ect International
    Trade? Evidence from a Large Digital Platform," Management Science.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro (2015), "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare E¤ects of NAFTA,"
     Review of Economic Studies, 82 (1): 1-44.

Dedrick, J., Kraemer, K. L., & Linden, G. (2010). "Who Pro...ts from Innovation in Global Value Chains?
    A Study of the iPod and Notebook PCs," Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(1), 81-116.

de Gortari, Alonso (2018), `
                           Disentangling Global Value Chains," mimeo Harvard University.

De Loecker, Jan, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik (2016), "Prices, Markups,
    and Trade Reform," Econometrica, 84 (2), 445-510.

De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger (2019). "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeco-
    nomic Implications," forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Fally, Thibault, and James Sayre (2018). "Commodity Trade Matters," National Bureau of Economic
     Research Working Paper No. 24695.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, (1996), "Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative Wages,"
    in R.C. Feenstra, G.M. Grossman and D.A. Irwin, eds., The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers
    in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (1997), "Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages: Evi-
    dence from Mexico' s Maquiladoras," Journal of International Economics, vol. 42(3-4), pp. 371-393.

Ferrari, Alessandro (2019), "Global Value Chains and the Business Cycle," mimeo European University
     Institute.

Fort, Teresa C. 2017. "Technology and Production Fragmentation: Domestic versus Foreign Sourcing,"
     Review of Economic Studies 84 (2): 650­87.

Freund, Caroline L., Alen Mulabdic, and Michele Ruta. 2018. "Is 3D Printing a Threat to Global Trade?
    The Trade E¤ects You Didn'  t Hear About," Working paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Gere¢ , Gary (1999), "International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the Apparel Commodity Chain,"
    Journal of International Economics, 48:1, pp. 37-70.

Gere¢ , Gary, John Humphrey, and Timothy Sturgeon (2005), "The Governance of Global Value Chains,"
    Review of International Political Economy 12.1: 78-104.

Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Nina Pavcnik (2007), "Distributional E¤ects of Globalization in Developing
    Countries," Journal of Economic Literature, 45:1, 39-82.


                                                  28
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, Amit Kumar Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova (2010), "Im-
    ported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India," Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 125 (4), 1727-1767.

Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neiman (2014), "Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises," American
    Economic Review, 104 (3), 793-831.

Griliches, Zvi. (1969). "Capital-Skill Complementarity," Review of Economics and Statistics : 465-468.

Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (2005), "Outsourcing in a Global Economy," Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies, 72(1): 135­59.

Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of O¤shoring," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1978-97.

Halpern, Laszlo, Miklos Koren, and Adam Szeidl (2015), "Imported Inputs and Productivity," American
    Economic Review, 105 (12), 3660-3703.

Hummels, D., Ishii, J. and Yi, K.-M. (2001), "The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World
   Trade," Journal of International Economics 54, p. 75-96.

Johnson, R. C. and Noguera, G. (2012), "Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing and Trade in
    Value Added"  , Journal of International Economics, 86(2), pp. 224-236.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman (2013) "The Global Decline of the Labor Share," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 129.1: 61-103.

Kee, Hiau Looi, and Heiwai Tang. "Domestic Value Added in Exports: Theory and Firm Evidence from
     China," American Economic Review 106.6 (2016): 1402.

Koopman, R., Wang, Z. and Wei, S.-J. (2014), "Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross
    Exports," American Economic Review 104(2), pp. 459-494.

Kremer, Michael, and Eric Maskin (2006), "Globalization and Inequality," unpublished manuscript.

Krugman, P. (1980). "Scale Economies, Product Di¤erentiation, and the Pattern of Trade," American
    Economic Review, 70(5), 950-959.

Krusell, P., Ohanian, L. E., Ríos-Rull, J. V., & Violante, G. L. (2000). "Capital-Skill Complementarity
    and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis," Econometrica, 68(5), 1029-1053.

Levchenko, Andrei (2007), "Institutional Quality and International Trade," Review of Economic Studies,
    74:3, 791-819.

Macchiavello, Rocco, and Ameet Morjaria (2015), "The Value of Relationships: Evidence from a Supply
    Shock to Kenyan Rose Exports," American Economic Review, 105:9, pp. 2911-45.

Macchiavello, Rocco, and Ameet Morjaria (2017), "Competition and Relational Contracts: Evidence from
    Rwanda'  s Co¤ee Mills," Bu¤ett Institute Global Poverty Research Lab Working Pape No. 17-103.

Martin, Julien, Isabelle Méjean, and Mathieu Parenti (2018), "Relationship Stickiness: Measurement and
    Applications to International Economics," unpublished working paper.

Melitz, Marc J. (2003), "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
     Productivity," Econometrica, 71:6, pp. 1695-1725.


                                                  29
Nunn, Nathan (2007) "Relationship Speci...city, Incomplete Contracts and the Pattern of Trade," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, Vol. 122, No. 2, pp. 569-600.

Rodrik, Dani (2018), "New Technologies, Global Value Chains, and Developing Economies," National
    Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25164.

Sampson, Thomas (2015). "Dynamic Selection: An Idea Flows Theory of Entry, Trade, and Growth,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 131.1: 315-380.

Sturgeon, Timothy, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Gary Gere¢ (2008), "Value Chains, Networks and
     Clusters: Reframing the Global Automotive Industry," Journal of Economic Geography, 8:3, pp. 297-
     321.

Verhoogen, Eric A. (2008) "Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing
    Sector," Quarterly Journal of Economics 123.2: 489-530.

Yang C., Dietzenbacher E., Pei J., Chen X., Zhu K., Tang Z. (2015), "Processing Trade Biases the Mea-
    surement of Vertical Specialization in China," Economic Systems Research, 27(1):60-76.

Wang, Z., S. Wei and K. Zhu (2013), "Quantifying International Production Sharing at the Bilateral and
   Sector Levels," '
                   NBER Working Paper, No. 19677.




                                                  30
