                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           q-FACTORS AND INVESTMENT CAPM

                                            Lu Zhang

                                      Working Paper 26538
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26538


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
q-factors and Investment CAPM
Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 26538
December 2019
JEL No. E13,E22,E32,E44,G12,G14,G31,M41

                                         ABSTRACT

The q-factor model shows strong explanatory power and largely summarizes the cross section of
average stock returns. In particular, the q-factor model fully subsumes the Fama-French (2018) 6-
factor model in head-to-head factor spanning tests. The q-factor model is an empirical
implementation of the investment CAPM. The basic philosophy is to price risky assets from the
perspective of their suppliers (firms), as opposed to their buyers (investors). As a disruptive
innovation, the investment CAPM has broad-ranging implications for academic finance and asset
management practice.


Lu Zhang
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
zhanglu@fisher.osu.edu
q-factors and Investment CAPM

Lu Zhang



Summary

The q-factor model is an empirical asset pricing model proposed by Hou, Xue, and Zhang

(2015). The model says that the expected return of an asset in excess of the riskfree rate is

described by its sensitivities to the market factor, a size factor, an investment factor, and a return

on equity factor. Empirically, the q-factor model shows strong explanatory power and largely

summarizes the cross section of average stock returns. In particular, the q-factor model fully

subsumes the Fama-French (2018) 6-factor model in head-to-head factor spanning tests.

       The q-factor model is an empirical implementation of the investment CAPM (Zhang,

2017). The basic philosophy is to price risky assets from the perspective of their suppliers

(firms), as opposed to their buyers (investors). Mathematically, the investment CAPM is a

restatement of the Net Present Value rule in Corporate Finance. Intuitively, high investment

relative to low expected profitability must imply low costs of capital, and low investment relative

to high expected profitability must imply high costs of capital. In a multiperiod framework, if

investment is high next period, the present value of cash flows from next period onward must be

high. Consisting mostly of this next period present value, the benefits to investment this period

must also be high. As such, high investment next period relative to current investment (high

expected investment growth) must imply high costs of capital (to keep current investment low).

       As a disruptive innovation, the investment CAPM has broad-ranging implications for

academic finance and asset management practice. First, the consumption CAPM, in which the

classic Sharpe-Lintner CAPM (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965) is a special case, is conceptually



                                                  2
incomplete. The crux is that it blindly focuses on the demand of risky assets, while abstracting

from the supply. Alas, anomalies are primarily relations between firm characteristics and

expected returns. By focusing on the supply, the investment CAPM is the missing piece of

equilibrium asset pricing. Second, the investment CAPM retains efficient markets, with cross-

sectionally varying expected returns, depending on firms' investment, profitability, and expected

growth. As such, capital markets follow standard economic principles, in sharp contrast to the

teachings of behavioral finance. Finally, the investment CAPM validates Graham and Dodd's

(1934) Security Analysis on equilibrium grounds, within efficient markets.



Keywords: The q-factor model, anomalies, EMH, behavioral finance, the investment CAPM, the

consumption CAPM, the CAPM, equilibrium theory



Questions

       A voluminous literature in empirical asset pricing and capital markets research in

accounting documents a wide range of relations between firm characteristics and average stock

returns. These relations are often called "anomalies" because they cannot be explained by the

standard consumption-based Capital Asset Pricing Model (the consumption CAPM), in which

the classic Sharpe-Lintner CAPM (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965) is a special case. Prominent

anomalies include post-earnings-announcement drift (Ball and Brown 1968; Bernard and

Thomas 1989, 1990), long-term reversal (De Bondt and Thaler 1985), momentum (Jegadeesh

and Titman 1993), long-term underperformance following initial and seasoned equity offerings

(Ritter 1991; Loughran and Ritter 1995), the value anomaly (Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny

1994), and the accrual anomaly (Sloan 1996).



                                                 3
       Behavioral economists interpret these anomalies as predictable pricing errors, which

reject Fama's (1970) efficient markets hypothesis (EMH) as well as Muth's (1961) and Lucas's

(1972) rational expectations hypothesis. However, as emphasized by Fama (1991), anomalies do

not necessarily reject EMH because the expected-return models used to isolate "pricing errors"

in empirical tests can be incomplete (the joint-hypothesis problem). In particular, a coherent

theory of inefficient markets with predictable pricing errors has yet to appear (Fama, 1998).

       Fama and French (1993, 1996) defend EMH by adding a size factor, SMB, and a value

factor, HML, into the CAPM to form their 3-factor model. They interpret SMB and HML as

sources of risk in the intertemporal CAPM (Merton, 1973) or Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT)

(Ross, 1976). However, this interpretation has not been persuasive. Both the intertemporal

CAPM and APT are silent about the identities of state variables. As a result, SMB and HML are

motivated from their empirical performance, rather than a priori theoretical arguments.

       Within this historical context, many fundamental questions arise. What explains all the

CAPM anomalies? Why does the consumption CAPM fail so badly in explaining these

anomalies? Given its abysmal performance, what confidence should one put in equilibrium

theories that embed the consumption CAPM and permeate virtually all Ph.D. level textbooks in

finance and economics? A prominent example is New Keynesian DSGE models. Graham and

Dodd's (1934) Security Analysis has worked for 85 years in practice. Why has it so far not found

a rightful place in finance theory? Given that firm characteristics are so important in describing

returns empirically, why do characteristics barely show up in finance theory? How should we

interpret characteristics-based factors exactly? If anomalies are driven by expectation errors,

what exactly are the psychological biases at play? Why do these systematic mistakes persist for

so long, in some cases, such as post-earnings-announcement drift, for 50 years since Ball and



                                                 4
Brown (1968)? Why has there not been a coherent theory of behavioral finance for almost 35

years since De Bondt and Thaler (1985)?

       An old science joke says: "Theory is when you know everything but nothing works.

Practice is when everything works but no one knows why. In our lab, theory and practice are

combined: Nothing works and no one knows why." Finance is better. The consumption CAPM

theory is well developed, but it doesn't work. Anomaly strategies work, but no one knows why.

In the investment CAPM, theory and practice are combined: Everything works and I know why.



Mechanisms

       The basic philosophy of the investment CAPM is to price risky assets from the

perspective of their suppliers (firms), as opposed to their buyers (investors) (Zhang, 2017),

building on an early precursor of Cochrane (1991).

       Mathematically, the investment CAPM is a restatement of the Net Present Value (NPV)

rule in Corporate Finance. The NPV of a project is its present value (discounted value of its

future cash flows) minus its investment costs today. The NPV rule says that a manager should

invest in a given project if and only if its NPV is greater than or equal to zero. When initially

facing many projects with NPV  0, the manager will start with the project with the highest NPV

and work her way down the supply curve of projects. For the last project that the manager takes,

its NPV should equal zero. To keep things simple, consider first one-period projects. The last

project with NPV = 0 means that its investment costs = profitability / discount rate.

       The investment CAPM turns the NPV rule, which is a fundamental principle in Corporate

Finance, on its head and transforms it into an Asset Pricing theory. Rewriting the NPV rule

yields: Discount rate = profitability / investment costs. Intuitively, given profitability, high costs



                                                   5
of capital (discount rates) imply low NPVs of new projects and low investments, and low costs

of capital imply high NPVs of new projects and high investments. In addition, given

investments, high profitability must imply high discount rates to give rise to low NPVs of new

projects to keep investments constant. Low profitability relative to investments must imply low

discount rates to offset low profitability to keep the NPVs of new projects and investments

constant. In all, investment and profitability are two key drivers in cross section of expected

returns.

       If projects last more than one period as in a multiperiod model, the NPV rule becomes:

Investment costs = (profitability + present value of cash flows from next period onward) /

discount rate. With optimal investment, the present value of cash flows from next period onward

equals expected investment costs next period (marginal q equals marginal costs of investment).

As such, the investment CAPM says: Discount rate = (profitability + expected investment costs)

/ investment costs. Intuitively, if investment and expected investment costs are high next period,

the present value of cash flows from next period onward must be high. Consisting primarily of

this next period present value, the benefits to investment this period must also be high. As such,

if investment is high next period relative to current investment (expected investment growth is

high), the discount rate must be high. The discount rate must be high to offset the high benefits

of investment this period to keep current investment low. As such, expected growth is another

key driver in the cross section of expected stock returns.



Methods

       The investment CAPM literature has taken its key predictions to the data via a variety of

approaches, including factor regressions, structural estimation, and quantitative theories.



                                                 6
Factor Models

         Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) propose and test the q-factor model, which implements the

investment CAPM via the Fama-French (1993) portfolio approach. The q-factor model says that

the expected return of an asset in excess of the riskfree rate is described by its sensitivities to the

market factor, a size factor, an investment factor, and a return on equity (Roe) factor. The size,

investment, and Roe factors are constructed from 2 by 3 by 3 sorts on market equity, investment-

to-assets, and Roe. Empirically, the q-factor model goes a long way toward summarizing the

cross section of average stock returns. The model explains many anomalies that bedevil the

Fama-French 3-factor model, such as Jegadeesh and Titman's (1993) momentum (Fama and

French, 1996). Most anomalies are just different manifestations of investment and profitability.

         The data for the q-factors and testing portfolios are available for download at global-

q.org.



Intuition

         On the one hand, sorting on net stock issues, composite issuance, book-to-market and

other valuation ratios, as well as long-term reversal is closer to sorting on investment than on

profitability. As such, these diverse sorts reflect their common implied sort on investment.

         The flow-of-fund constraint of firms says that their uses of funds must equal their sources

of funds. As such, all else equal, equity issuers should invest more and have lower costs of

capital than nonissuers. In addition, firms use different capital goods in their operating activities,

including working capital, physical property, plant, and equipment, and (measured) intangibles.




                                                   7
As such, total asset growth is the most comprehensive measure of investment-to-assets, a simple

measure that aggregates over investments in heterogeneous capital goods.

       The value factor is redundant in the presence of the investment factor. In the investment

CAPM, investment increases with marginal q, which in turn equals average q with constant

returns to scale. Average q and market-to-book equity are close cousins and are identical twins

without debt. As such, value stocks with low valuation ratios should invest less and, all else

equal, should earn higher expected returns than growth stocks with high valuation ratios.

       High valuation ratios come from a stream of positive shocks on fundamentals, and low

valuation ratios a stream of negative shocks on fundamentals. Growth stocks typically have high

long-term prior returns, and value stocks low long-term prior returns. As such, long-term reversal

also reflects the investment factor. Firms with high long-term prior returns should invest more

and have lower costs of capital than firms with low long-term prior returns.

       On the other hand, sorting on earnings surprises, short-term prior returns, and financial

distress is closer to sorting on profitability than on investment. As such, these diverse sorts

reflect their common implied sort on profitability. Intuitively, shocks to earnings are positively

correlated with shocks to returns, contemporaneously. Firms with positive earnings shocks

experience immediate stock price increases, and firms with negative earnings shocks experience

immediate stock price drops. As such, momentum winners should have higher expected

profitability and earn higher expected returns than momentum losers.

       In addition, less financially distressed firms have higher profitability and, all else equal,

should earn higher expected returns than more financially distressed firms. As such, the distress

anomaly is just another manifestation of the profitability factor.




                                                  8
Subsequent Work

       The q-factor model has effectively ended the quarter-century reign of the Fama-French

(1993) 3-factor model as the leading model in empirical asset pricing. During the long process,

the q-factor model has stimulated a large subsequent literature on factor models.

       Fama and French (2015) attempt to fix their 3-factor model by incorporating their own

versions of the investment and profitability factors to form a 5-factor model. Fama and French

(2018) further add the momentum factor, UMD, to form their 6-factor model.

       However, Hou, Mo, Xue, and Zhang (2019a) show that the 4-factor q-model fully

subsumes the Fama-French 6-factor model in head-to-head spanning tests. In the 1967-2018

monthly sample, the investment and Roe factors in the q-factor model earn on average 0.38%

and 0.55% per month (t-value = 4.59 and 5.44), respectively. Their alphas in the Fama-French 6-

factor model are 0.1% and 0.27% (t-value = 2.82 and 4.32), respectively. The Gibbons, Ross,

and Shanken (GRS, 1989) test strongly rejects the null hypothesis that the 6-factor model can

jointly subsume the investment and Roe factors (p-value = 0.00).

       Conversely, HML, CMA (the investment factor), RMW (the profitability factor), and

UMD in the Fama-French 6-factor model earn on average 0.32%, 0.3%, 0.28%, and 0.64% per

month (t-value = 2.42, 3.29, 2.76, and 3.73), respectively. More important, their alphas in the q-

factor regressions are economically small (tiny in many cases) and statistically insignificant:

0.05%, 0.00%, 0.03%, and 0.14% (t-value = 0.49, 0.08, 0.32, and 0.61), respectively. The GRS

test cannot reject the null hypothesis that the q-factor model can jointly subsume the HML,

CMA, RMW, and UMD factors (p-value = 0.79). In all, despite having two fewer factors, the q-

factor model fully subsumes the Fama-French 6-factor model, including UMD.




                                                 9
       Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) group 11 anomalies into two clusters based on pairwise

cross-sectional correlations. The first cluster, denoted MGMT, contains net stock issues,

composite issues, accruals, net operating assets, investment-to-assets, and the change in gross

property, plant, and equipment plus the change in inventories scaled by lagged book assets. The

second cluster, denoted PERF, includes failure probability, O-score, momentum, gross

profitability, and return on assets. The composite scores, MGMT and PERF, are defined as a

stock's equal-weighted rankings across all the variables (realigned to yield positive low-minus-

high returns) within a given cluster. Stambaugh and Yuan form their factors from monthly

independent 2 by 3 sorts from interacting size with each of the composite scores.

       However, Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) deviate from the standard factor construction per

Fama and French (1993) in two important ways. First, the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints

of 20th and 80th percentiles are used, as opposed to the NYSE breakpoints of 30th and 70th,

when sorting on the composite scores. Second, the size factor contains stocks only in the middle

portfolios of the composite score sorts, as opposed to stocks from all portfolios. The Stambaugh-

Yuan factors are sensitive to their factor construction, and their nonstandard construction

exaggerates their factors' explanatory power. Most important, once replicated via the standard

procedure, the MGMT and PERF factors are close to the investment and Roe factors in the q-

factor model, with correlations of 0.8 and 0.84, respectively (Hou, Mo, Xue, and Zhang, 2019a).

       Hou, Mo, Xue, and Zhang (2019b) perform cross-sectional forecasting regressions of

future investment-to-assets changes on the log of Tobin's q, operating cash flows, and the change

in Roe. Independent 2 by 3 sorts on size and expected 1-year-ahead investment-to-assets changes

yield an expected growth factor, with an average premium of 0.84% per month (t-value = 10.27)

and a q-factor alpha of 0.67% (t-value = 9.75). Hou et al. augment the q-factor model with the



                                                10
expected growth factor to yield the  5 model. Using a large set of 150 anomalies that are

significant with NYSE breakpoints and value-weighted returns compiled in Hou, Xue, and

Zhang (2019), Hou et al. conduct a large-scale horse race of latest factor models. The  5 model

is the best performing model that substantially outperforms the Fama-French (2018) 6-factor

model. In fact, the q-factor model already compares well with the 6-factor model.

       However, unlike investment and profitability, expected growth is unobservable. The

performance of the  5 model depends on its expected growth specification, and crucially, on

operating cash flows as a key predictor of future growth. As such, although its underlying

intuition is clear, the  5 model should be interpreted primarily as a tool for dimension reduction.



Structural Estimation

       Factor models only explore directional predictions of the investment CAPM. In structural

estimation, one takes the model's key equation directly to the data for econometric estimation

and evaluation. Hansen and Singleton (1982) conduct the first such test for the consumption

CAPM. Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009) perform the first structural estimation for the investment

CAPM. Although by no means perfect, Liu et al.'s first stab yields much more encouraging

results than Hansen and Singleton's at the consumption CAPM. The baseline investment CAPM

with only physical capital manages to explain value and post-earnings-announcement drift

separately, albeit not jointly. Liu and Zhang (2014) show that the baseline model can explain

Jegadeesh and Titman's (1993) momentum separately, but not simultaneously with value.

       The joint estimation difficulty has been largely resolved by Goncalves, Xue, and Zhang

(2019), who introduce working capital into the investment CAPM. With plausible parameter

estimates, the two-capital investment CAPM manages to explain the value, momentum,


                                                11
investment, and Roe premiums jointly. Aggregation also plays an important role. Liu, Whited,

and Zhang (2009) and Liu and Zhang (2014) construct portfolio-level predicted returns from

portfolio-level accounting variables to match with portfolio-level stock returns. In contrast,

Goncalves et al. use firm-level accounting variables to construct firm-level predicted returns,

which are then aggregated to the portfolio level to match with portfolio-level stock returns.

       A surprising insight from Goncalves, Xue, and Zhang (2019) is that value and

momentum (as well as investment and Roe) are driven by related, if not identical, mechanisms.

Intuitively, current investment and expected investment are locked in a "tug of war" in the

investment CAPM equation. When current investment overpowers expected investment, the

model predicts the value and investment premiums. When expected investment overpowers

current investment, the model predicts the momentum and Roe premiums. The predicted value

and investment premiums are long-lived, persisting over 3-5 years after portfolio formation. The

predicted momentum and Roe premiums are short-lived, vanishing within 1 year after portfolio

formation. The model dynamics are intriguingly consistent with the dynamics in the data.



Quantitative Theories

       Zhang (2005) constructs the first neoclassical, dynamic investment model for the cross

section of returns in the spirit of real business cycles (Kydland and Prescott, 1982; Long and

Plosser, 1983). Instead of estimating the first-order conditions formally in structural estimation,

quantitative theory studies specify a dynamic model fully, calibrate and simulate it, and compare

its implied moments with observed moments in the data. Zhang highlights the role of costly

reversibility in explaining the value premium. Intuitively, value firms are burdened with more

unproductive capital in bad times, finding it more difficult to downsize so as to yield more



                                                 12
cyclical and riskier cash flows and earn higher expected returns than growth firms. In

contemporaneous and independent work, Cooper (2006) shows closely related mechanisms at

work in a real options model. Also in a related real options model, Carlson, Fisher, and

Giammarino (2014) emphasize the role of operating leverage in driving the value premium. The

Zhang model, recently labelled by Clementi and Palazzo (2019) as "the standard investment

model," has served as a launching pad for a large subsequent, theoretical literature on the cross

section of returns. A full review of this literature is far beyond this analytical essay.

        A long-standing controversy in this theoretical literature is that the CAPM alpha of the

value premium in Zhang's (2005) model is economically small, although the average value

premium itself matches that observed in the data. Subsequent studies have attempted to explain

the failure of the CAPM in explaining the value premium in the post-Compustat sample by

breaking the tight link between the stochastic discount factor (SDF) and the market factor with

multiple aggregate shocks. Prominent examples include short- and long-run shocks (Ai and

Kiku, 2013), investment-specific technological shocks (Kogan and Papanikolaou, 2013),

stochastic adjustment costs (Belo, Lin, and Bazdresch, 2014). However, these 2-shock models all

fail to explain the long sample evidence from 1926 onward that the CAPM alpha of the value

premium is economically small and statistically insignificant.

        Bai, Hou, Kung, Li, and Zhang (2019) embed disasters into a general equilibrium model

with heterogeneous firms to induce strong nonlinearity in the SDF to explain the CAPM failure.

Intuitively, when a disaster hits, value firms are burdened with more unproductive capital,

finding it more difficult with costly reversibility to reduce capital than growth firms. As such,

value firms are more exposed to the disaster risk than growth firms, giving rise to a high average

value premium. However, in a finite sample, in which disasters are not realized, the estimated



                                                  13
market beta fails to fully capture the disaster risk embedded in the value premium. Consequently,

the CAPM fails to explain the value premium in a finite sample without disasters.

       In the general equilibrium model of Bai, Hou, Kung, Li, and Zhang (2019), a nonlinear

consumption CAPM holds by construction, yet the standard consumption CAPM fails badly in

simulated data from the model. Intuitively, the aggregate consumption growth is a poor proxy for

the SDF based on recursive utility. Their correlation in simulated data is close to zero.

Surprisingly, the onset of disasters is not associated with particularly low contemporaneous

consumption growth, and the onset of recoveries not with particularly high consumption growth.

       Intuitively, when a disaster hits, the SDF spikes up immediately because investors

anticipate multiple years of high marginal utility (bad times). However, consumption smoothing

immediately kicks in, with forward-looking real investment falling drastically to smooth

consumption. Consequently, consumption only falls cumulatively over multiple years, making

the contemporaneous consumption growth a bad proxy for the SDF. Relatedly, consumption

smoothing also explains why the classic CAPM performs better than the standard consumption

CAPM. Because stock prices are forward-looking, the market factor is much more correlated

with the SDF than the contemporaneous consumption growth.

       A more recent controversy concerns the quantitative performance of the standard

investment model (Zhang, 2005). Clementi and Palazzo (2019) argue that upon hit by adverse

shocks, U.S. public firms have "ample latitude" to divest their unproductive assets. In particular,

"each quarter on average 18.2% of firms record negative gross investment (p. 282)," suggesting

that "plenty of firms downsize, at all times (p. 287)," and that there exists "no sign of

irreversibility (p. 289)." Quantitatively, Clementi and Palazzo argue that for the standard

investment model to explain the average value premium, its implied investment rates must be



                                                 14
counterfactual, with a tiny fraction of negative rates and a cross-sectional volatility that is an

order of magnitude smaller than that in the data.

        Bai, Li, Xue, and Zhang (2019) reexamine the evidence of costly reversibility in U.S.

public firms. Bai et al. document that the firm-level investment rate distribution is highly skewed

to the right, with a small fraction of negative investments, 5.79%, a tiny fraction of inactive

investments, 1.46%, and a large fraction of positive investments, 92.75%. The firm-level

evidence is even stronger than the prior plant-level evidence in Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006).

Sample criteria likely play an important role. While Cooper and Haltiwanger include only

relatively large manufacturing plants in continuous operations throughout their 1972-1988

sample, Bai et al. include virtually all Compustat firms in different industries (not just

manufacturing), with no restrictions on size or age.

        With a careful replication effort, Bai, Li, Xue, and Zhang (2019) trace the differences

between their evidence and Clementi and Palazzo's (2019) to 3 sources. First, both studies

measure gross investment rates as net investment rates plus depreciation rates. Both measure net

investment rates as the net growth rates of net property, plant, and equipment (PPE) in

Compustat. Bai et al. measure depreciation rates as Compustat's depreciation over net PPE,

depreciation rates that are embedded in net PPE. In contrast, Clementi and Palazzo use industry-

level geometric depreciation rates estimated by Bureau of Economic Analysis, depreciation rates

that are internally incompatible with net PPE in Compustat. Second, Clementi and Palazzo

impose sample criteria that are nonstandard in empirical finance, such as removing firm-years

with mergers and acquisitions, in which the target's assets are more than 5% (a low cutoff) of the

acquirer's. Finally, Clementi and Palazzo also engage in a highly questionable research practice

by cutting off the right tail of the quarterly investment rate distribution at 0.2.



                                                   15
       While Clementi and Palazzo's (2019) evidence is flawed, their point of matching

investment and returns moments jointly in quantitative studies is well taken. Using Simulated

Method of Moments (SMM), Bai, Li, Xue, and Zhang (2019) estimate four parameters (the

upward and downward adjustment cost parameters, the fixed cost of production, and the

conditional volatility of firm-specific productivity) to target seven data moments (the average

value premium, the cross-sectional volatility and skewness of individual stock excess returns, the

cross-sectional volatility, skewness, and persistence of investment rates, as well as the fraction of

negative investment rates). The SMM estimation strongly indicates costly reversibility and

operating leverage in U.S. public firms. The downward adjustment cost parameter is estimated to

be 508.2 (t-value = 13.39), which is substantially higher than the upward parameter, 0.63 (t-value

= 4.6). The fixed cost of production is estimated to be 0.0637 (t-value = 4.24). The model

matches the average value premium of 0.43% per month (t-value = 1.97) in the 1962­2018

sample. For investment rates, the cross-sectional volatility is 62% per annum (58.5% in the data)

and the fraction of negative investments 5.78% in the model (5.79% in the data). The

overidentification test fails to reject the model with the seven moments (p-value = 0.59).



Implications

       As a disruptive innovation, the investment CAPM thinks about asset pricing very

differently from the consumption CAPM and behavioral finance, with broad-ranging

implications for academic finance research and asset management practice.



Complementarity with the Consumption CAPM




                                                 16
       In his magnum opus, Alfred Marshall (1890, Principles of Economics [1961, 9th edition,

p. 348]) writes: "We might as reasonably dispute whether it is the upper or under blade of a pair

of scissors that cuts a piece of paper, as whether value is governed by utility or costs of

production. It is true that when one blade is held still, and the cutting is affected by moving the

other, we may say with careless brevity that the cutting is done by the second; but the statement

is not strictly accurate, and is to be excused only so long as it claims to be merely a popular and

not a strictly scientific account of what happens."

       Asset pricing theory is just value theory in microeconomics extended to uncertainty and

over time. From this perspective, clearly, the consumption CAPM is conceptually incomplete.

The crux is that it exclusively focuses on the demand of risky assets, while abstracting from the

supply altogether. Alas, anomalies are primarily empirical relations between firm characteristics

and expected returns. Without modeling firm characteristics, it is impossible to fully explain

anomalies within the consumption CAPM. Even if an SDF specification is discovered that fits

the consumption CAPM with anomaly portfolios, one still has to explain why the consumption

betas would be aligned with investment-to-assets, Roe, book-to-market, momentum, and other

anomaly variables. By focusing on the supply of risky assets, while abstracting from the demand

altogether, the investment CAPM is the missing "blade" of equilibrium asset pricing,

symmetrically and neatly complementing to the consumption "blade." The investment CAPM

and the consumption CAPM combine to form the pair of "scissors" of equilibrium pricing.

       The glorious achievements of the consumption CAPM are well known. I interpret its

major contribution as time-varying expected returns, which largely resolve Shiller's (1981)

excess volatility puzzle in aggregate asset pricing. But why does the consumption CAPM fail so

badly in explaining anomalies in the cross section? Zhang (2017) blames the intractable



                                                 17
aggregation problem. Investors are heterogeneous in preferences, beliefs, and information sets,

all of which make the demand-based pricing extremely difficult. The Sonnenschein-Mantel-

Debrew theorem in equilibrium theory says that individual rationality imposes essentially no

restrictions on aggregate demand, meaning that the aggregation problem over heterogeneous

investors is largely intractable (Kirman, 1992). It is possible that for aggregate, macro-level asset

pricing, a representative agent still suffices but fails for micro-level asset pricing in the cross

section. Who's the marginal investor for Apple Inc.? Anyone's guess is as good as mine.

        Derived from the first principle of individual firms, the investment CAPM is relatively

immune to the aggregation problem. Who's the marginal supplier for Apple Inc. shares? Well,

easy, that's Apple Inc.. Tim Cook most likely has more impact on Apple Inc.'s market value via

his operating, investing, and financing decisions than many Apple Inc. shareholders like me via

portfolio decisions in their retirement accounts. The investment CAPM formalizes the linkage

between corporate decisions and asset prices. The major contribution of the investment CAPM is

cross-sectionally varying expected returns, which largely resolve anomalies in the cross

section. In particular, the consumption CAPM anomalies are the investment CAPM regularities.

        Because of the inescapable aggregation difficulty facing the consumption CAPM and no

such challenge facing the investment CAPM, EMH must be detached from the consumption

CAPM and reattached to the investment CAPM. How many more decades of the consumption

CAPM failures do we have to endure to let the lesson sink in that firm characteristics are not

even modelled? The step going from an individual investor problem to a consumption-based

SDF that prices all assets requires aggregation, which is all but automatic. Asset pricing is not all

about SDF, which is only demand-based. The overreaching tendencies of the consumption




                                                  18
CAPM, detrimental to our Science, must stop. You don't see me pretending that the investment

CAPM has anything to do with personal finance, household finance, or portfolio allocation.



An EMH Counterrevolution to Behavioral Finance

       The anomalies literature is the empirical foundation of behavioral economics. The

investment CAPM shows that the empirical foundation is all but an illusion. Start with: Realized

returns = expected returns + abnormal returns. When an anomaly variable forecasts realized

returns, there are tautologically two parallel interpretations. One, which is the behavioral view,

says that the variable is forecasting abnormal returns. As such, pricing errors are predictable,

violating EMH. The other, which is the EMH view, says that the anomaly variable is related to

expected returns, but the pricing errors are unpredictable. The consumption CAPM and the

investment CAPM are both expected-return models. Both are consistent with EMH.

       In the anomalies literature (and in asset management industry), the behavioral view is

extremely popular. Behavioral finance has gained its prominence by documenting the CAPM

alphas and sticking labels such as under- and over-reaction to them. While rejecting the CAPM is

the more accurate interpretation of the evidence, the interpretation of rejecting EMH altogether

certainly appears to be more impactful. More important, for a long time, the consumption CAPM

is the only asset pricing theory in the land. Given the exclusive focus on investors, it's not

unreasonable to interpret the failure of the consumption CAPM as investor irrationality.

       The investment CAPM has changed the big picture in its entirety. I deal with Fama's

(1991) joint-hypothesis problem by replacing the consumption CAPM with the investment

CAPM. With the suppliers of risky assets at the center of analysis, the anomalous evidence is

largely consistent with the NPV rule in Corporate Finance. Remember EMH only says that



                                                 19
pricing errors are not predictable. The investment CAPM alphas are mostly small and

unpredictable. And the expectations of the investment CAPM are entirely rational.

       I separate EMH from investor rationality. Again, EMH only says that pricing errors are

not predictable. It doesn't say all investors are rational. A common counterargument against my

EMH defense is that if investors set a firm's equity price too high, its manager will just blindly

adjust her investment decisions per her first-order condition. As a result, both the equity price

and investment are wrong. This argument is specious at best. It ignores the powerful

equilibrating role of the supply side. Some investors might be optimistic and attempt to bid up

the equity price too high. But with a manager's cool head, the supply of risky shares goes up,

flooding cold water over the fire of irrational exuberance. The wrong price will drop toward the

equilibrium price. In the special case of no adjustment costs, in particular, Tobin's q will forever

be one, regardless of how irrational investors are. This equilibrating role of the supply side seems

to have been greatly underappreciated by academics and practitioners alike.

       I should concede that the complex equilibrating process between demand and supply is

largely unknown. I have seen models of heterogeneous investors, and separately, models of

heterogeneous firms. But I have yet to see a model with both heterogeneous investors and

heterogeneous firms, likely because of its computational intractability. As such, all we can do is

to use simpler models to gain insights. Behavioral finance relies on dysfunctional, inefficient

markets for its mechanisms to work. With the investment CAPM, I view anomalies as

regularities from the NPV rule in well functioning, efficient markets. As such, the argument that

anomalies must necessarily imply investor irrationality is wrong. Anomalies most likely have

less to do with investors and more to do with managers. The NPV rule is as fundamental an

economic principle as diversification. Capital markets obey standard economic principles!



                                                 20
       However, because the complex equilibrating process between demand and supply is

unknown, and perhaps even unknowable, I cannot say that the observed prices are completely

deprived of wrong decisions from investors. However, remember the Sonnenschein-Mantel-

Debrew theorem says that investor rationality and aggregate rationality are completely detached.

Investors can be irrational, but the marginal (aggregate) investor might not, and vice versa. As

such, the failures of the consumption CAPM might have nothing to say about EMH. Behavioral

economists can hide behind this aggregation problem all they want and claim relevance. But it's

no coincidence that a coherent behavioral theory has yet to appear after 35 years since De Bondt

and Thaler (1985). Given the time test, I feel that such a theory likely doesn't even exist.

       While I contend that behavioral finance has almost nothing to say about equilibrium asset

prices, I do think that it has a major role to play in areas like personal finance and household

finance. Identifying and rectifying investor mistakes in these areas are enormously important for

human welfare. However, these areas are partial equilibrium in nature. Without dealing with

aggregation, these fields have limited implications for equilibrium asset prices.



How I Defend Fama

       A watershed article is Fama and French (1992). It is this paper from the EMH inventor

that abandons the CAPM, which is largely the only asset pricing theory at the time, thereby

stimulating the development of behavioral finance. Although Fama and French (1993) quickly

attempt to patch up the hole with their 3-factor model by adding SMB and HML into the CAPM,

the floodgate has been opened. Fama (1998) tries to contain the resulting tsunami but to little

avail. With a wrong hammer in their hands (as firm characteristics are all condensed into a Lucas




                                                 21
tree), theorists have largely stood on the sidelines looking on, with precious little to say about the

EMH versus behavioral finance debate.

       It is informative to compare Fama's (1998) EMH defense 20 years ago with my current

defense based on the investment CAPM. Fama makes 2 points. First, apparent overreaction is

about as common as underreaction. As anomalies seem to split randomly between underreaction

and overreaction, Fama claims that EMH wins. Second, anomalies are sensitive to changes in

measurement. Anomalies with value-weighted returns are smaller than with equal-weighted

returns. Also, calendar-time 3-factor regressions are more reliable than long-horizon event

studies. Kothari (2001) echoes Fama in emphasizing the sensitivity of measurement and the need

of coming up with a theory of inefficient markets as null hypotheses.

       Like his EMH insight, Fama's empirics has no peers. As acknowledged in Zhang (2017),

the empirical design of the q-factor model, including its factor construction, formation of testing

portfolios, econometric tests, and most important, the taste of the economic question, are all

deeply influenced by Fama and French (1993, 1996). I also take the value- versus equal-weight

lesson to heart and give it a demonstration on steroids in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2019).

       Alas, I do not find Fama's (1998) chance argument persuasive. Anomalies do not just

randomly split between under- and over-reaction camps. The two types of anomalies are

systematically different. To a theorist, the systematic pattern is exciting, because it indicates

hidden economic law(s) to be discovered. The hidden law turns out to be the investment CAPM

(a restatement of the NPV rule in Corporate Finance), as demonstrated in Hou, Xue, and Zhang

(2015). The "overreaction" anomalies are all just different manifestations of the investment

factor, and the "underreaction" anomalies are all just different manifestations of the Roe factor.




                                                  22
       I do not find Fama and French's (1993, 1996) interpretation of risk factors for SMB and

HML persuasive either. To their credit, the lack of a risk interpretation for momentum has

stopped them from adding it into their factor model until 2018 (Fama and French, 2018). It is

statistically correct to view SMB, HML, and perhaps even UMD as risk factors from the

intertemporal CAPM and/or APT. However, the interpretation is on shaky economic grounds

because size, book-to-market, and prior short-term returns are never modeled in the two

theoretical frameworks. As such, the risk interpretation seems like a mere assertion.

       This concern is why Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) interpret the q-factors only as common

factors that summarize the cross-sectional variation of average stock returns. In particular, I find

the concept of covariance superfluous. Yes, the consumption CAPM is all about covariance, but

the investment CAPM is all about characteristics. If a characteristic is significant in cross-

sectional regressions, its long-short factor is likely to earn a significant average return. And if a

long-short factor earns a significant average return in the time series, its underlying characteristic

is likely to be significant in cross-sectional regressions. As such, the q-factor model is simply a

linear factor approximation to the nonlinear characteristics model of the investment CAPM.

       Going from a characteristic to a factor is mostly mechanical, and vice versa. In particular,

stock returns of firms with similar investment-to-assets tend to comove together because their

investment returns are similar as a result of similar investment-to-assets. Stock returns of firms

with similar Roe and expected growth tend to comove together because their investment returns

are also similar for analogous reasons. Comovement is nothing mysterious.

       More fundamentally, the investment CAPM advances a new perspective of "factors." In

the consumption CAPM, factor models are linear approximations of the intertemporal marginal

rate of substitution for the representative investor. Aggregate variables such as the growth rate of



                                                  23
industrial production, inflation rate, the default premium can be used to substitute out

consumption, giving rise to the classic macroeconomic risk factor model of Chen, Roll, and Ross

(1986). Because the consumption CAPM is in essence a macroeconomic model, factors are

commonly perceived as aggregate, systematic sources of covariation. To the extent that size,

book-to-market, and momentum are not modelled within the consumption CAPM, these factors

have been (wrongfully, in my view) perceived as ad hoc, arising from "fishing" expeditions.

        In contrast, the investment CAPM offers a new, microeconomic perspective of "factors."

The comovement of stock returns among stocks with similar investment, profitability, and

expected growth arises from the comovement of their similar investment returns. Characteristics-

based factors are on as solid economic grounds in the supply theory of asset pricing as aggregate

consumption growth in the demand theory of asset pricing. If one takes aggregation seriously,

aggregate consumption growth is not even a factor. Neither are most other aggregate variables.



Security Analysis within Efficient Markets

        Graham and Dodd (1934) define Security Analysis as "concerned with the intrinsic value

of the security and more particularly with the discovery of discrepancies between the intrinsic

value and the market price (p. 17)." Their philosophy is to invest in undervalued securities that

are selling below the intrinsic value "justified by the facts, e.g., the assets, earnings, dividends,

and definite prospects (p. 17)." Alas, the intrinsic value is not exactly identified. To protect

against its estimation errors, Graham (1949) advocates the "margin of safety," i.e., investors only

purchase a security when its market price is sufficiently below its intrinsic value.

        EMH and Security Analysis have historically been viewed as diametrically opposite. On

the one hand, the traditional view of academic finance, with the CAPM as its workhorse theory,



                                                  24
dismisses security analysis as pure luck, likens security analysts to astrologers, and recommends

investors to passively hold only the market portfolio. Bodie, Kane, and Marcus (2017) maintain:

"[T]he efficient market hypothesis predicts that most fundamental analysis is doomed to failure

(p. 356)." In a recent interview with Bloomberg on November 5, 2019, Fama even labels equity

research on Wall Street as "business-related pornography."

       On the other hand, honoring the 50th anniversary of Graham and Dodd (1934), Warren

Buffett (1984) showcases 9 famous investors and argues that their successful performance is

beyond chance. Buffett goes on to say: "Our Graham & Dodd investors, needless to say, do not

discuss beta, the capital asset pricing model or covariance in returns among securities. These are

not subjects of any interest to them. In fact, most of them would have difficulty defining those

terms (p. 7)." Buffett then mocks finance academics as out of touch with the real world: "Ships

will sail around the world but the Flat Earth Society will flourish (p. 15)." Wall Street

practitioners, not surprisingly, are overwhelmingly sympathetic to the behavioral view, and

believe EMH to be a relic of the past. An old joke helps illustrate the schism between academics

and practitioners. An asset manager asks an academic: "If you are so smart, why aren't you

rich?" to which the academic replies: "If you are so rich, why aren't you smart?"

       EMH is down in the dumps only because the consumption CAPM is a rundown dumpster

truck. I have yet to meet an asset manager who even mentions the consumption CAPM, not even

once, yet the consumption CAPM is virtually all we are allowed to talk about in academia

(unless you're a behavioral economist). The investment CAPM once again changes the big

picture. Recall the investment CAPM says: Discount rate = (profitability + expected investment

costs) / investment costs. In the denominator, investment costs equal Tobin's q (marginal costs of

investment equal marginal q). As such, the investment CAPM prescribes that to earn higher



                                                 25
expected returns, investors should buy stocks with high quality (measured as high profitability

and high expected growth) at bargain prices. This prescription is exactly what Graham and Dodd

(1934) have been saying and what Wall Street asset managers have been practicing for 85 years.

Finally, after such a long exile, Security Analysis has found its rightful home in finance theory.

       However, my treatment of Security Analysis differs from Graham and Dodd's (1934) in a

fundamental way. Writing way, way before the arrival of equilibrium theory, Graham and Dodd

largely have a constant discount rate in mind as the expected-return model. Their remarkable

business acumen enables them to intuit their way to the ever-lasting investment truth of buying

high quality stocks at bargain prices. Their monumental work predates academic finance by at

least 4 decades. Indeed, in at late as the 1970s, the random walk hypothesis (with a constant

discount rate) is still the workhorse theory for EMH.

       In the 1980s and 1990s, the consumption CAPM rises up to meet Shiller's (1981) excess

volatility challenge and moves the needle from a constant discount rate to time-varying expected

returns as the workhorse theory in EMH. With the investment CAPM, I am trying to move the

needle once again to cross-sectionally varying expected returns. Shiller attributes all excess

volatility to predictable pricing errors against EMH, but the consumption CAPM attributes it to

time-varying expected returns within EMH. Analogously, Graham and Dodd (1934) attribute the

performance of security analysis to predictable pricing errors against EMH, but the investment

CAPM attributes it to cross-sectionally varying expected returns, all within EMH.

       Empirically, Hou, Mo, Xue, and Zhang (2019c) show that their  5 model goes a long

way toward explaining prominent security analysis strategies, including Frankel and Lee's

(1998) intrinsic-to-market value, Piotroski's (2000) fundamental score, Greenblatt's (2005)

"magic formula," Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen's (2019) quality-minus-junk, Buffett's



                                                26
Berkshire, Bartram and Grinblatt's (2018) agnostic analysis, as well as Penman and Zhu's (2014,

2018) expected-return strategies. Also, Hou et al. show that the latest factor models cannot fully

explain Buffett's alpha and interpret the evidence as saying that discretionary, active

management cannot be fully replaced by passive factor investing. Identifying sources of quality

and quantifying their impact on expected returns leave plenty of room for active management.



Rational Expectations Economics

          Make no mistake. The investment CAPM is the latest product from the Lucas-Sargent

rational expectations economics. While I no longer believe that the end stage of economics is a

Fortran program, the Lucas-Sargent teaching of microfoundation is deeply embodied in the

investment CAPM. My Wharton theoretical training has given me a strong immune system

against behavioral finance, despite being embedded in the hostile territory of the anomalies

literature for 20 years. If I cannot write down an optimization-based model to explain a stylized

fact, I don't understand the fact. A "model" with no optimization is just sticking labels to the fact

to be explained. True to the nature of the anomalies literature, with my Rochester empirical

training, I have also given life to the investment CAPM with the careful, empirical measurement

in the Fama-French tradition. While there are still a few mopping-up operations left to do, the

anomalies literature, which used to be a major embarrassment for rational expectations

economics, is no more. On the contrary, I have turned it into a triumph of rational expectations.

My macroeconomist compatriots can go on refining the all-important DSGE models, without

worrying about all the fires of capital markets, as the investment CAPM has put them out,

mostly.




                                                 27
       I should clarify that my aggregation critique against the consumption CAPM applies to

the specific context of anomalies in the cross section. For aggregate asset pricing, the

consumption CAPM does well, although it remains to be seen to what extent aggregation would

bite once the consumption CAPM is embedded into a full-fledged equilibrium model with

production. Analogously, my aggregation critique does not apply, at least not directly, to the

mainstream DSGE models in modern quantitative macroeconomics.



Challenges

       While many open questions remain in the investment CAPM literature, due to space

limitations, I only discuss what I perceive as the two most important challenges in this essay.



A Risky Mechanism of Momentum

       Momentum is a success story for the investment CAPM. Recall from January 1968 to

December 2018, UMD earns on average 0.64% per month (t-value = 3.73). However, its q-factor

alpha is only 0.14% (t-value = 0.61). The Roe factor does all the heavy lifting, as UMD has a

large Roe-factor loading of 0.9 (t-value = 5.85), while its loadings on the other 3 factors are

insignificant. In the structural estimation of Goncalves, Xue, and Zhang (2019), the investment

CAPM explains value and momentum simultaneously, and the "tug of war" between current

investment and expected investment plays a key role in the model's performance.

       Nevertheless, a major gap in our knowledge exists. What exactly are the risks underlying

momentum? To answer this question, one needs more than factor regressions and Euler equation

tests. Only fully specified quantitative theories are up to the task. Recall Zhang (2005) has tied

the value premium to business cycle risks. Alas, I am aware that momentum, and equivalently,



                                                 28
the Roe factor premium are both significantly negative in that model. Also in partial equilibrium,

Johnson (2002) ties momentum to expected growth and argues that expected growth is risky.

Sagi and Seasholes (2004) argue that momentum winners have more growth options than

momentum losers and that growth options are risky. An important, open question is how to

combine Zhang's value with Johnson's and Sagi and Seasholes' momentum mechanisms in a

unified framework. A unified model imposes internal consistency that is vital for theories. Li

(2018) is the only exception that makes sense to me. More work is sorely needed.



Other Asset Classes

        An advantage of the consumption CAPM, and more generally, the SDF framework, is

that it can in principle be applied to different asset classes simultaneously. In contrast, the

investment CAPM has so far been mostly applied to equity pricing. However, I caution that the

consumption side's advantage of applying to different asset classes should not be taken too

literally. After all, failures in explaining returns of different asset classes are definitely worse

than failures in explaining just stock returns. Behavioral under- and overreaction apply to

different asset classes (Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen, 2013). But sticking labels is no theory.

        More important, any asset has suppliers, which must face certain tradeoffs in making

optimal supply decisions. It seems straightforward to apply the investment CAPM to global

stocks, country equity indices, corporate bonds, and real estates. Other asset classes such as

currencies, government bonds, and commodities require additional, creative theorizing. The

challenge is to cleanly separate the supply-side tradeoff from the SDF. Because of aggregation,

to me, SDF is the source of all ills in asset pricing and should be avoided at all costs.




                                                   29
Conclusion

       I am ready to answer the fundamental questions raised at the beginning of this essay.

What explains all the consumption CAPM anomalies? Well, the consumption CAPM anomalies

are the investment CAPM regularities, all of which conform to the NPV rule in Corporate

Finance. Capital markets obey standard economic principles. Anomalies in fact indicate well

functioning, efficient capital markets. The world makes sense! The consumption CAPM fails so

badly because of the well known aggregation problem (Kirman, 1992). The pain of aggregation

is likely manageable for aggregate asset pricing (and for DSGE models, unless you want to study

wealth inequality). However, the pain is insurmountable for the cross section, which is in essence

a microeconomic problem. And our ubiquitous representative investor is out of depth.

       Despite its enormous, ever-lasting influence in practice, Graham and Dodd's (1934)

Security Analysis has yet to find its rightful home in finance theory. We're blind to this parallel

universe (otherwise known as practice) because of the consumption CAPM's single-minded,

dogmatic focus on demand. Graham and Dodd are squarely on supply. And the NPV rule is the

first place one would go to put the 2 and 2 together. Characteristics-based factors are linear

approximations to the nonlinear investment return equation in the investment CAPM.

Characteristic factors are on as solid theoretical grounds in the investment CAPM as aggregate

consumption growth in the consumption CAPM. Taking aggregation seriously, aggregate

consumption growth is not even a factor. Neither are all other macroeconomic factors.

       Post-earnings-announcement drift persists for 50 years since Ball and Brown (1968)

because it is part of expected returns, as predicted by the investment CAPM (the Roe factor).

Why has there not been a coherent behavioral theory for 35 years since De Bondt and Thaler

(1985)? Because such a theory likely doesn't exist. If a full menu of psychological biases gives



                                                 30
rise to underreaction, and another full menu to overreaction, we have an embarrassment of

riches. A "theory" that explains everything (with no discipline) explains nothing.




References

Ai, H., & Kiku, D. (2013). Growth to value: option exercise and the cross section of equity

returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 325-349.

Asness, C. S., Frazzini, A., & Pedersen, L. H. (2019). Quality minus junk. Review of

Accounting Studies, 24, 34-112.

Asness, C. S., Moskowitz, T. J., & Pedersen, L. H. (2013). Value and momentum everywhere.

Journal of Finance, 68, 929-985.

Bai, H., Hou, K., Kung, H., Li, E. X. N., & Zhang, L. (2019). The CAPM strikes back? an

equilibrium model with disasters. Journal of Financial Economics, 131, 269-298.

Bai, H., Li, E. X. N., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2019). Does costly reversibility matter for U.S.

public firms? Working paper. The Ohio State University.

Ball, R., & Brown, P. (1968). An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers. Journal of

Accounting Research, 6, 159-178.

Bartram, S. M., & Grinblatt, M. (2018). Agnostic fundamental analysis works. Journal of

Financial Economics, 128, 125-147.

Belo, F., Lin, X., Bazdresch, S. (2014). Labor hiring, investment, and stock return predictability

in the cross section. Journal of Political Economics, 122, 129-177.

Bernard, V. L., & Thomas, J. K. (1989). Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price

response or risk premium? Journal of Accounting Research, 27, Supplement, 27-48.



                                                31
Bernard, V. L., & Thomas, J. K. (1990). Evidence that stock prices do not fully reflect the

implications of current earnings for future earnings. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 13,

305-340.

Bodie, Z., Kane, A., & Marcus, A. J. (2014). Investments. McGraw-Hill Education.

Buffett, W. E. (1984). The superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville. The Columbia

Business School Magazine 4-15.

Carlson, M., Fisher, A., & Giammarino, R. (2004). Corporate investment and asset price

dynamics: implications for the cross-section of returns. Journal of Finance, 59, 2577-2603.

Chen, N. F., Roll, R., & Ross, S. A. (1986). Economic forces and the stock market. Journal of

Business, 59, 383-403.

Clementi, G. L., & Palazzo, B. (2019). Investment and the cross-section of equity returns.

Journal of Finance, 74, 281-321.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991). Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and

economic fluctuations. Journal of Finance, 46, 209-237.

Cooper, I. (2006). Asset pricing implications of nonconvex adjustment costs and irreversibility

of investment. Journal of Finance 61, 139-170.

Cooper, R. W., & Haltiwanger, J. C. (2006). On the nature of capital adjustment costs. Review of

Economic Studies, 73, 611-633.

De Bondt, W. F. M., & Thaler, R. (1985). Does the stock market overreact? Journal of Finance

40, 793-805.

Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. Journal of

Finance, 25, 383-417.

Fama, E. F. (1991). Efficient capital markets: II. Journal of Finance, 46, 1575-1617.



                                                 32
Fama, E. F. (1998). Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance. Journal of

Financial Economics, 49, 283-306.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of

Finance, 47, 427-465.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.

Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1996). Multifactor explanation of asset pricing anomalies. Journal

of Finance, 51, 55-84.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial

Economics, 116, 1-22.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2018). Choosing factors. Journal of Financial Economics, 128,

234-252.

Frankel, R., & Lee, C. M. C. (1998). Accounting valuation, market expectation, and

cross-sectional stock returns. Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283-319.

Gibbons, M. R., Ross, S. A., & Shanken, J. (1989). A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio.

Econometrica, 57, 1121-1152.

Goncalves, A. S., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2019). Aggregation, capital heterogeneity, and

the investment CAPM. Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Graham, B. (1949). The Intelligent Investor, 1st ed., New York: Harper & Brothers.

Graham, B., & Dodd, D. (1934). Security Analysis. Whittlesey House, New York, NY.

Greenblatt, J. (2005). The Little Book That Beats the Market. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Hansen, L. P., & Singleton, K. J. (1982). Generalized instrumental variables estimation of

nonlinear rational expectations models. Econometrica, 50, 1269-1288.



                                                33
Hou, K., Mo, H., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2019a). Which factors? Review of Finance, 23(1), 1-35.

Hou, K., Mo, H., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2019b). An augmented  5 model with expected growth.

Working paper, The Ohio State University.

Hou, K., Mo, H., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2019c). Security analysis: an investment perspective.

Working paper, The Ohio State University.

Hou, K., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2015). Digesting anomalies: an investment approach. Review of

Financial Studies, 28(3), 650-705.

Hou, K., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2019). Replicating anomalies. Forthcoming, Review of Financial

Studies.

Jegadeesh, N., & Titman, S. (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications

for stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance, 48, 65-91.

Johnson, T. C. (2002). Rational momentum effects. Journal of Finance, 57, 585-608.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D. (2013). Firm characteristics and stock returns: the role of

investment-specific shocks. Review of Financial Studies, 26, 2718-2759.

Kirman, A. P. (1992). Whom or what does the representative individual represent? Journal of

Economic Perspectives, 6, 117-136.

Kothari, S. P. (2001). Capital markets research in accounting. Journal of Accounting and

Economics, 31, 105-231.

Kydland, F. E., & Prescott, E. C. (1982). Time to build and aggregate fluctuations.

Econometrica, 50(6), 1345-1370.

Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R.W. (1994). Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and

risk. Journal of Finance, 49, 1541-1578.




                                                34
Li, J. (2018). Explaining momentum and value simultaneously. Management Science, 64, 4239-

4260.

Lintner, J. (1965). The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock

portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 13-37.

Liu, L. X. L., Whited, T. M., & Zhang, L. (2009). Investment-based expected stock returns.

Journal of Political Economy, 117, 1105-1139.

Liu, L. X. L., & Zhang, L. (2014). A neoclassical interpretation of momentum. Journal of

Monetary Economics, 67, 109-128.

Long, J. B., & Plosser, C. I. (1983). Real business cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 91(1),

39-69.

Loughran, T., & Ritter J. R. (1995). The new issues puzzle. Journal of Finance, 50, 23-51.

Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1972). Expectations and the neutrality of money. Journal of Economic Theory,

4, 103-124.

Marshall, A. (1890). Principles of Economics (9th ed.) (London: Macmillan, first published in

1890, 1961).

Merton, R. C. (1973). An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica, 41, 867-887.

Muth, J. F. (1961). Rational expectations and the theory of price movements. Econometrica, 29,

315-335.

Penman, S. H., & Zhu, J. L. (2014). Accounting anomalies, risk, and return. Accounting Review

89, 1835-1866.

Penman, S. H., & Zhu, J. L. (2018). An accounting-based asset pricing model and a fundamental

factor. Working paper. Columbia University.




                                                 35
Piotroski, J. D. (2000). Value investing: The use of historical financial statement information to

separate winners from losers. Journal of Accounting Research, 38, Supplement: Studies on

accounting information and the economics of the firm, 1-41.

Ritter, J. R. (1991). The long-run performance of initial public offerings. Journal of Finance, 46,

3-27.

Ross, S. A. (1976). The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic Theory,

13, 341-360.

Sagi, J. S., & Seasholes, M. S. (2007). Firm-specific attributes and the cross-section of

momentum. Journal of Financial Economics, 84, 389-434.

Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under conditions of

risk. Journal of Finance, 19, 425-442.

Shiller, R. J. (1981). Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in

dividends? American Economic Review, 71(3), 421-436.

Stambaugh, R. F., & Yuan, Y. (2017). Mispricing factors. Review of Financial Studies, 30,

1270-1315.

Sloan, R. G. (1996). Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about

future earnings? Accounting Review, 71, 289-315.

Zhang, L. (2005). The value premium. Journal of Finance, 60, 67-103.

Zhang, L. (2017). The investment CAPM. European Financial Management, 23(4), 545-603.




                                                36
