                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE OLD BOYS' CLUB:
                            SCHMOOZING AND THE GENDER GAP

                                            Zoë B. Cullen
                                        Ricardo Perez-Truglia

                                        Working Paper 26530
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26530


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2019




We are thankful for excel-lent comments from several colleagues and seminar discussants. We thank
seminar participants at Berkeley-Econ, Berkeley-Haas, UCSD, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan, University of British Columbia, University of Southern California, Tufts University, INSEAD,
Columbia University Micro and Macro Labor Conference, Harvard Business School Behavioral Conference,
American Economic Association Annual Meetings and the Discrimination and Disparities intercollegiate
seminar. We are especially thankful to Leonardo Bursztyn, Thomas Fujiwara and Amanda Pallais.
The collaborating institution provided financial support for the research being conducted. Additionally,
Zoe Cullen was a full-time, salaried employee at that institution while the research was being conducted.
Dylan Balla-Elliott, Katherine Fang, Anh Nguyen, Giacomo Stazi, Andrew Kao, Aakaash Rao and
Jenna Anders provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Zoë B. Cullen and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Old Boys' Club: Schmoozing and the Gender Gap
Zoë B. Cullen and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 26530
December 2019, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. J01,J16,J7,Z1,Z13

                                         ABSTRACT

Offices are social places. Employees and managers take coffee breaks together, go to lunch, hang
out over drinks, and talk about family and hobbies. In this study, we provide evidence that
employees' social interactions with their managers can be advantageous for their careers and that
this phenomenon can contribute to the gender pay gap. We use administrative and survey data
from a large financial institution. We conduct an event-study analysis of manager rotation to
estimate the causal effect of managers' gender on their employees' career progressions. We find
that male employees assigned to male managers were promoted faster in the following years than
male employees assigned to female managers; female employees, on the contrary, had the same
career progression regardless of their managers' gender. These differences were not accompanied
by any differences in effort or performance, and they explain a third of the gender gap in
promotions at this firm. Then, we provide evidence suggesting that these effects were mediated
by the social interactions between male employees and male managers. First, we show that the
effects were present only among employees who worked in close proximity to their managers.
Second, we show that the effects coincided with an uptick in the share of breaks taken with the
managers. Third, we estimate the impact of social interactions on career progression using quasi-
random variation induced by smoking habits. When male employees who smoke transitioned to
male managers who smoke, they took breaks with their managers more often and were
subsequently promoted at higher rates than male smokers who transitioned to non-smoking
managers. The boost in socialization and promotion rates closely mirrors the pattern among male
employees assigned a male manager.


Zoë B. Cullen
Rock Center 210
Harvard Business School
60 N. Harvard
Boston, MA 02163
zcullen@hbs.edu

Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ricardotruglia@berkeley.edu

An Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26530
1       Introduction
Workplaces are social places. Employees and managers often discuss all sorts of non-work related
topics, such as sports, family, and movies. These personal interactions extend outside of office
hours, such as during lunch, smoking, or coffee breaks. Through these interactions, employees form
social bonds with their managers. In this study, we explore whether these social bonds influence
employees' careers and whether they can help explain the gender pay gap.
    Women have a harder time than men climbing the corporate ladder. Among U.S. corpora-
tions, 48% of entry-level employees are women, but female representation falls to 38% at middle-
management, 22% at the C-Suite level, and 5% at the CEO level (McKinsey & Company, 2019).
Improvement has been agonizingly slow over the last several decades. The gap in internal promo-
tion rates accounts for the vast majority of the gender pay gap at the population level (Bronson and
Thoursie, 2019). Not only is this unfair, it is inefficient, as misallocation of talent slows economic
growth (Hsieh et al., 2019).
    A growing literature has investigated what causes women to lag behind men in the corpo-
rate world. According to the "old boys' club" hypothesis, this gap arises in part because men
can schmooze, network, and interact with more powerful men in ways that are less accessible to
women.1 This mechanism can create a self-perpetuating cycle: male managers promote a dispro-
portionate share of male employees, who continue promoting other men.
    Ample anecdotal evidence suggests that the old boys' club is real (Lang, 2011; Lee, 2014; Elt-
ing, 2018). For example, 81% of women say that they feel excluded from relationship-building at
work, and many also feel excluded from after-work hours socializing (Gray and Barbara, 2013).
Some women even believe that being able to use the men's bathroom would give them an advan-
tage at work (Lee, 2014). Despite all the anecdotes, however, there is little quantitative evidence
showing that the old boys' club exists. The self-selection of those who engage in social activities
creates a number of research challenges to isolating the impact of social interactions. In this study,
we propose a quasi-experimental approach for testing this hypothesis and provide novel evidence
based on data from a large financial organization.
    We partnered with a large commercial bank in Asia (referred to hereinafter as the firm) with
millions of customers, billions of dollars in assets and in revenues, and thousands of employees.
The firm is typical in that female representation drops off at higher levels: 75% of entry-level
employees are women, which falls to 61% in middle management, 25% at the C-Suite level, and
0% at the CEO and company board levels. Indeed, the gender gaps in pay and promotion rates at
the firm are similar to those documented for other corporations in both developed and developing
countries.
    We have rich sources of administrative data spanning four years (2015-2018) and 14,736 unique
employees, 1,269 of whom had a managerial role at some point. These records include the employ-
ees' pay grades, the floor their desks are on, the managers to which they were assigned, as well
as measures of effort and performance. We also conducted a series of surveys to measure other
1 The term "old boys' club" was coined in reference to the British elite who attended certain public schools together.
 In current popular language, the term references the preservation of social elites in general.


                                                          2
aspects of the employees' lives, such as whether they take breaks with their managers, whether
they know the manager's favorite sports team, as well as their smoking status to supplement annual
health exam reports.
    We start by measuring the effect that the manager's gender has on the careers of the employees
working under that manager. In an ideal experiment, we would randomize employees to male and
female managers and then measure the effects on their career progression in subsequent years.
According to the old boys' club prediction, those assigned to a male manager would benefit the
careers of the male employees more than the female employees. Obviously, it would be much too
costly and disruptive for any real-world company to randomly shuffle its employees and managers.
Instead, we exploit the naturally occurring rotation of managers between teams. These manager
transitions are not literally decided by a coin toss, but anecdotal evidence and supporting empirical
tests suggests that they can be as good as random.
    Our identification strategy is based on event-study analysis. The identification leverages the
timing of manager transitions and comparisons between different types of transitions. For example,
consider two teams, each managed by a female manager. One of these teams then transitions from
the female manager to a male manager, and the other team transitions from the female manager
to a different female manager. We can compare the outcomes of the male employees each month
leading up to the manager transition date and each month after the transition. As both teams are
affected by a manager transition, this design nets out the effect of the transition. The hypothesis is
that transitioning to a male manager, relative to transitioning to the female manager, results in better
promotion prospects for the male employees but has no effect (or little effect) on the promotions of
female employees.
    We focus on manager transitions that are out of the control of the employee. The typical case
is a manager rotating laterally to a different team. Our data comprises 8,670 transition events
involving 6,021 unique employees and 690 unique managers. Events are uniformly distributed
across the four years, and they affect employees at every level. Whether the employee has an event
and the type of event (e.g., transitioning from a female to a male manager) are largely unrelated to
the characteristics of the employee, the incoming manager and the outgoing manager.
    We find that male employees are promoted more quickly after they transition from a female
to a male manager: at 10 quarters after such a manager transition, male employees' pay grades
were 0.60 points (p-value = 0.003) higher than those of male employees who transitioned from a
female manager to a different female manager. This 0.60 point increase in pay grade is equivalent
to a 14.6% increase in salary. By contrast, female employees experienced similar promotion rates
regardless of whether they transitioned from a male manager to a female manager or from a male
manager to another male manager.
    We provide two main robustness checks for our identification strategy. First, we analyze the
reverse transition. In the baseline results presented above, we look at employees who "lose" a male
manager (i.e., transitioning from a male manager to a female manager versus transitioning from
a male manager to a different male manager). Next, we look at employees who "gain" a male
manager (i.e., transitioning from a female manager to a male manager versus transitioning from
a female manager to a different female manager). The expectation is that the effects of gaining

                                                   3
a male manager should be roughly a mirror image the effects of losing a male manager, in terms
of both timing and magnitude. This is a sharp test, in the sense that the coefficients are identified
by a disjoint set of transition events and thus there are no "mechanical" reasons why the results
should mirror each other. Indeed, we find that the effects of losing a male manager are in the
opposite direction of the effects of gaining a male manager, and they are similar in terms of timing
and magnitude. Male employees who transition to a female manager (relative to transitioning to
another male manager) end up with a pay grade that is 0.30 points lower at 10 quarters later (p-value
= 0.032), whereas the evolution of pay grades for female employees is unrelated to the manager's
gender.
    The second robustness test is based on placebo events. We reproduce the whole analysis, but
instead of focusing on gender as the relevant characteristic of managers and employees, we focus
on a characteristic that we know ex ante should not be relevant: whether someone was born on an
even or odd date. In other words, we would not expect that managers born on an odd date would
be beneficial to the careers of their subordinates. We reproduce the whole event-study analysis, but
instead of slicing the data based on manager and employee genders, we focus on their birth dates.
This test rules out mechanical reasons why our event-study framework would generate spurious
effects, and allows us to assess whether our standard errors are adequate. As expected, we find that
the estimates are close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated.
    We define the male-to-male advantage as the effect of male managers (relative to female man-
agers) on the careers of male employees (relative to female employees). Our preferred estimate,
based on the transitions in both directions, indicates that the male-to-male advantage in pay grade
is highly statistically significant (p-value<0.001) and economically large (0.65 pay grades at 10
quarters after the event). In back of the envelope calculations, we estimate that removing the male-
to-male advantage would reduce the gender gap in pay grades by 40%.2
    We show that the male-to-male advantage cannot be explained by differences in retention or
performance. One potential explanation is that male managers are better at retaining male employ-
ees. However, when we estimate the effects of manager transitions on the probability of staying at
the firm, we find point estimates that are close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely es-
timated. Another potential explanation is that male employees work harder and more productively
under male managers than they would under female managers. For example, male managers might
be better than female managers at motivating and monitoring male employees, or male employees
may be more responsive to the directions of their male bosses. Contrary to this interpretation, when
we estimate the effects of the manager transitions on measures of effort (the number of days worked
and the number of hours spent in the office) and performance (the employee's own sales revenues),
we find point estimates that are close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated.
    Next, we provide evidence on the role of social interactions in the male-to-male advantage
in promotions. For example, male employees may use their interactions to gain their managers'
sympathy and favor. Male managers also may learn more about their male employees during the
interactions and thus be better able to identify their potential. Such interactions may make the
2 For   more details, see Section 4.6.



                                                   4
accomplishments and efforts of male employees more noticeable to the manager or may give the
male employees opportunities for self-promotion. During interactions with their managers, male
employees may learn useful information, such as which tasks or training are more conducive to
promotions.
    The first test of the social interactions channel exploits the fact that physical proximity is a
necessary condition for social interactions. Alternative channels for the male-male advantage, such
as statistical discrimination or in-group biases, should not depend on physical proximity. If driven
by socialization, the male-to-male advantage should be stronger when manager and employee pairs
work in close physical proximity; by contrast, the effects should be smaller, or even null, when
the manager does not work in physical proximity to the employee. We categorize positions by the
physical proximity with the manager using administrative data on office locations as well as survey
data asking employees if their managers work in physical proximity. Consistent with the social
interactions channel, we find that the male-to-male advantage is large and statistically significant
when the managers and employees work in close physical proximity but approximately zero and
statistically insignificant if they do not work in close proximity.
    Second, we collect survey data on the frequency of social interactions between employees and
their managers. We ask a sub-sample of the firm to report how often they share breaks with their
managers. Finding a male-to-male advantage in this form of social interactions would constitute
suggestive evidence of the schmoozing mechanism. Indeed, we find that male employees are sig-
nificantly more likely to share work breaks with their manager after transitioning from a female
manager to a male manager (relative to transitioning from a female manager to another female
manager). Female employees, on the contrary, are equally likely to spend breaks with male and
female managers.
    Third, we provide evidence that social interactions in this firm translate into a promotion ad-
vantage among male employees. In the ideal experiment, we would flip of a coin to decide which
male employees get to socialize more with their male managers. According to the schmoozing
channel, the male employees who get to socialize more with their male managers would be pro-
moted faster. While the ideal experiment is not feasible, we exploit quasi-experimental variation
based on co-smoking habits. We collected data on the smoking habits of the employees and their
managers. 33% of male employees and 37% of male managers smoke.3 We conduct an event-study
analysis of the rotation of managers, but this time focusing on their smoking habits instead of their
gender. We conjectured that when a male employee who smokes transitions to a male manager
who also smokes, they will interact more because of shared smoking breaks. And, according to the
schmoozing channel, that increase in social interactions will translate into higher promotion rates.4
    Consistent with our conjecture, we find a smoker-to-smoker advantage in the frequency of social
interactions. After transitioning from a non-smoking manager to a smoking manager (relative to
transitioning to another non-smoking manager), smoking employees end up spending more breaks
with their new managers; in contrast, there is no effect on non-smoking employees. Indeed, the
3 Thesmoking rates are negligible among women, and thus we focused this analysis on males only.
4 Thispart of the analysis is based on a sub-sample (males for whom we can infer smoking status) comprising 1,094
 unique employees, 250 unique managers and 1,499 unique manager transitions.


                                                       5
magnitude of the smoker-to-smoker advantage in shared breaks is similar to the corresponding
male-to-male advantage reported above. Most important, we show that these manager transitions
affect promotion rates too: after transitioning from a non-smoking manager to a smoking manager
(relative to transitioning to another non-smoking manager), the smoking employees are promoted
faster; in comparison, there is no effect on the pay grade of non-smoking employees. This evidence
indicates that, consistent with the schmoozing channel, the increased social interactions caused by
co-smoking translates into higher promotion rates. By contrast, the increased social interactions do
not affect performance (employees' sales revenue) or effort (hours spent working in the office or
absenteeism).
    This study is related to various strands of literature. Most important, it is related to a literature
on the role of social interactions at work. Despite the universality of socializing in the workplace,
relatively little is known about the returns of these personal interactions and whether these returns
differ by gender. Cai and Szeidl (2018) provide experimental evidence that increasing the connec-
tions between business owners can increase firm productivity. There is also evidence of spillovers
between business school classmates and executives (Shue, 2013; Lerner and Malmendier, 2013;
Agarwal et al., 2016; Field et al., 2016).5 There is evidence that the managers' social skills affect
employee turnover Hoffman and Tadelis (2020). In the context of fruit-pickers, managers with fixed
pay will favor workers with whom they share a connection, to the detriment of firm productivity
(Bandiera et al., 2010, 2009). And in the context of politics, public officials may capitalize on their
political and personal networks to gain influence (Cruz and Tolentino, 2019; Xu, 2018; Bertrand
et al., 2018; Voth and Xu, 2019).
    We contribute to this literature by providing novel evidence on the career and productivity con-
sequences of social interactions in the corporate world. This is a context for which there is abundant
anecdotal evidence on the importance of social interactions and its effects on the gender pay gap,
yet little quantitative evidence. The lack of evidence is probably due to data challenges (e.g., per-
sonal interactions are difficult to measure and also sensitive information) as well as challenges with
causal identification (e.g., social interactions are highly endogenous). We address both of these
challenges. First, we provide causal evidence based on quasi-experimental variation in the gender
and smoking habits of the managers. Furthermore, we collected unique sources of administrative
and survey data about social interactions and physical proximity in a real corporation that spans
culturally distinct regions.
    Our paper more broadly contributes to the large literature on the gender wage gap (Goldin,
2014). There is a consensus that the majority of this gap is due to differences in promotion rates
(Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz, 2010; Manning and Swaffield, 2008; Goldin, Kerr, Olivetti, and Barth,
2017). By one careful account, the gap in internal promotion rates can account for approximately
70% of the gender pay gap by the age of forty-five (Bronson and Thoursie, 2019). Several expla-
nations have been provided for these differences in promotions.6 Most related to our study, there
5 Another  related study is Lleras-Muney et al. (2019), showing that friendships accumulated during high school can
  have lasting impacts on labor market outcomes. Also, Mengel (Mengel) use a laboratory experiment to show that
  men and women both engage in networking but men develop closer connections.
6 Some examples include the marriage market incentives (Bursztyn, Fujiwara, and Pallais, 2017), cultural norms




                                                        6
are some studies on the role of the gender of superiors in the education industry, with mixed re-
sults. On the one hand, male teachers in public schools are more satisfied with their jobs and more
likely to remain working at a school if it is has a male, rather than female, principal (Grissom,
Nicholson-Crotty, and Keiser, 2012; Husain, Matsa, and Miller, 2018). On the other hand, female
referees and female committee members in academia do not increase the odds of acceptance of
female-authored papers or promotion of female candidates (Bagues, Sylos-Labini, and Zinovyeva,
2017; Card, Dellavigna, Funk, and Iriberri, 2019).7
    We contribute to this literature by showing that the gender of managers can be a major source of
gender pay gaps in the corporate world ­ this mechanism explains around one-third of the gender
pay gap in the firm that we study. To the best of our knowledge, Kunze and Miller (2017) provides
the only related evidence in the context of a corporation.8 The authors use data from a private firm
in Norway to measure the association between the gender of managers and the outcomes of their
employees. They found that the gender gap in promotions is significantly larger in establishments
with a higher share of male superiors. We contribute to this literature in at least three ways. First, we
provide causal estimates with the use of quasi-experimental methods. Second, we provide novel
evidence about a specific mechanism, social interactions, for which there is abundant anecdotal
evidence yet it has been largely ignored in the literature on the gender pay gap. Third, we provide
evidence on the limited productivity advantages of socialization between managers and employees
despite the fact that they generate career advantages for certain employees.
    Although we offer evidence from a specific firm, the firm's establishments span regions with
distinct cultural heritage, allowing us to examine heterogeneity by gender norms. Moreover, our
methodology is not specific to our setting. The rotation of managers is a common practice in large
organizations, and the data on pay grades, assignments, and demographics could be obtained for
most firms. Thus, our research design can be applied in other firms from different industries and
countries to identify the contexts in which the male-to-male advantage is most pervasive. Our study
already provides suggestive evidence that the male-to-male advantage may be exacerbated in some
occupations (i.e., in which the manager and the employee work in close proximity with each other)
and regions (i.e., where stronger gender norms prevail).
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes the research design and our
econometric specification. Section 3 presents the institutional context for this study and describes
the data. Sections 4 and 5 present the results. Section 6 concludes.
  (Bursztyn, Gonzalez, and Yanagizawa-Drott, 2018; Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn, 2013; Jayachandran, 2020), recog-
  nition for group work (Sarsons, 2017; Isaksson, 2019; Sarsons et al., 2019), differences in aspirations and performance
  (Azmat and Ferrer, 2017), the child penalty (Schönberg and Ludsteck, 2014; Bertrand et al., 2010; Kleven et al., 2019;
  Kuziemko et al., 2018), preference for flexible hours (Wasserman, 2018) and household work more generally (Cortés
  and Pan, 2019).
7 Other related studies look at gender roles among peers instead of among managers (Dahl et al., 2018; Hill, 2017;

  Karpowitz et al., 2020) and at the role of other demographics besides gender, such as race (Mas and Moretti, 2009;
  Bandiera et al., 2010; Giuliano et al., 2011; Hjort, 2014; Glover et al., 2017).
8 A related literature studies whether female representation at the very top of the firm, such as owners, CEOs, and

  chairs, can affect the female employees working at those companies (Bell, 2005; Bertrand et al., 2019; Cardoso and
  Winter-Ebmer, 2010; Dalvit et al., 2018; Flabbi et al., 2019).




                                                           7
2     Research Design
2.1   Conceptual Framework
Our analysis revolves around the effects of manager characteristics on the subsequent career pro-
gressions of their employees. For example, we want to measure whether male employees fare
better after transitioning from a female to a male manager and whether employees who smoke
are promoted faster when they transition from a non-smoking to a smoking manager. To estimate
these manager effects, ideally we would randomize employees to their managers. As this type of
experiment is not feasible, we instead exploit naturally occurring variations in manager assign-
ments generated by the rotation of managers within the organization. Rather than assuming that
these natural manager transitions are as good as random changes, we test that assumption using an
event-study analysis. The formal econometric framework for the event-study analysis is provided
below.


2.2   Effects of Manager's Gender
Let yi,t be a generic outcome, where the subscripts i and t denote employees and time, respectively.
The main outcome in our analysis is the employee's pay grade, but we also consider other outcomes
such as firm exit, effort, and performance.
    The transition between two managers can result in one of four different types of gender tran-
sitions. Let JG denote the set of these types: JG = {F 2M , F 2F, M 2F, M 2M }, where F 2M denotes
a transition from a female manager to a male manager, F 2F denotes a transition from one female
                                                       j
manager to another female manager, and so on. Let Di,. denote the traditional event-study variables
                                                                                            j
that indicate the periods leading up to and following a transition event. For example, Di,t +s is an
indicator variable that equals 1 if individual i experiences an event of type j in period t + s.
    The event-study regression relates the outcome variable to the event-study dummies:
       yi,t =      jF,s · Fi · Dij,t +s +    jM                  j                  F   M
                                              ,s · (1 - Fi ) · Di,t +s + i + i,t + t + t + i,t    (1)
                jJG sS                 jJG sS

    Note that we interact the event-study dummies with a gender indicator (Fi ) to estimate event-
time coefficients for men ( jM                    F
                               ,t ) and women ( j,t ) separately. The set S, the event-study window,
spans from 30 months before the event to 30 months after the event (this time window is due to
the length of our panel data). We include the usual absorbing dummies at extremes of  -31 and
> +31 months (Stevenson and Wolfers, 2006). In the event-study graphs, we aggregate these
monthly coefficients to the quarterly level for ease of presentation. The omitted categories in S are
the three months prior to the event (i.e., -3, -2, and -1 months), aiding our visual depiction at the
quarterly frequency. This baseline specification includes employee fixed effects (i ), manager fixed
effects (i,t ) and gender-specific month effects (tM and tF ). In this study, we always use two-way
clustering of the standard errors at the team and manager levels.
    To isolate the impact of a change in manager gender from a change in manager more generally,


                                                   8
we always compare employees undergoing manager transitions where one of those transitions re-
sults in a change of manager gender and the other does not. For example, we compare the effects
of transitioning from a female manager to a male manager versus the effects of transitioning from a
female manager to a different female manager. In the case of male employees, the object of interest
     M         M
is F  2M ,s - F 2F,s , where s indicates the time since (or until) the transition date. In the case female
                                                          F          F
employees, the corresponding object of interest is F       2M ,s - F 2F,s . Hereinafter, we refer to these
objects as the single-differences, because they are differences between types of transitions.
    What we capture with the single-difference estimates is the impact of receiving a male manager
relative to the impact of receiving a new female manager. However, we are ultimately interested
in whether the effects of manager gender differ for male and female employees. For example, if
male managers increase pay grades for male and female employees alike, that would not constitute
evidence of a male-to-male advantage. Thus, we must take the difference of the single-difference
                                                        M          M           F         F
estimates between male and female employees: (F          2M ,s - F 2F,s ) - (F 2M ,s - F 2F,s ). A positive
difference would be consistent with a male-to-male advantage. We refer to these estimates as
the double-differences, because they take differences first with respect to types of transitions and
second with respect to the employee's own gender.
    The key assumption is that, prior to the transitions, male and female employees were on the
same pay-grade trajectories. The event-study framework provides a natural test of the identifying
assumption: we can assess the evolution of the outcome in each month before the date of the
transition to confirm if the trends were truly parallel before the event date.
    The manager transitions provide an additional validation check, based on the principle that
transitions in the opposite direction should result in approximately the opposite effects. In the pre-
vious example, we discussed the effects of "gaining" a male manager (i.e., what happens when
an employee transitions from a female manager to a female manager, relative to what would have
happened if the employee transitioned from a female manager to another female manager). Like-
wise, we can measure the effects of "losing" a male manager (i.e., what happens when an employee
transitions from a male manager to a female manager, relative to what would have happened if the
employee transitioned from a male manager to another male manager). The expectation is that
the effects of gaining a male manager should roughly mirror the effects of losing a male manager
in terms of timing and magnitude. Because these coefficients are identified by a disjointed set of
transition events, there are no mechanical reasons why the results should mirror each other.
    To maximize statistical power, we estimate the average male-to-male advantage using all four
types of gender transitions. That is, we average the double-difference estimates from "gaining" a
male manager and the (negative of) the double-difference estimates from "losing" a male manager:
1     M          M           F         F           M         M             F        F
2 {(F 2M ,s - F 2F,s ) - (F 2M ,s - F 2F,s ) - [(M 2F,s - M 2M ,s ) - (M 2F,s - M 2M ,s )]}. We refer to
this object as the dual-double-difference.
    When interpreting the event-study results, there are a few caveats to keep in mind. First, our
estimates measure a reduced form effect of an increased but likely transitory exposure to a given
managerial gender. As time goes by, many reasons explain why an employee ends up with a
manager of a different gender. For example, the employee may be promoted to a different position
and assigned a manager of a different gender, or the employee may move laterally to another team

                                                    9
with a manager of a different gender. In this sense, our estimates will under-estimate the effect
of the manager's gender: if the employee were to stay with the new manager gender forever, the
effects would presumably be even stronger. In practice, this is a minor concern, as we find gender
transitions to be persistent over time.
    A second caveat is that our framework cannot disentangle whether male managers are favorable
to male employees or female managers are dis-favorable to male employees. Indeed, this challenge
is not unique to our methodology or to our context. Even in a randomized controlled trial, we
could compare male managers versus female managers only, because there are no gender-neutral
managers to compare against. Likewise, the favorable or dis-favorable conditions may be due to the
behavior of the employee, the behavior of the manager, or both. For example, male employees may
do better under male managers because the managers treat them better or because the employees
are more attentive to them.


2.3    Placebo: Effects of Manager's Birthday-Evenness
As a robustness check, we reproduce the analysis, but instead of focusing on gender as the relevant
characteristic of managers and employees, we focus on a characteristic that we know ex ante should
not be relevant: whether someone was born on an even or odd date. This placebo test is designed to
rule out mechanical reasons why our event-study framework would generate spurious effects. This
placebo analysis can also be used to assess whether our standard errors are adequate: e.g., if we
found statistically significant coefficients, it would suggest that the inference is misleading. Let Oi
be an indicator variable that equals 1 if the employee was born on an even day and 0 otherwise. The
regression of interest is identical to the main specification from equation (1), except that gender is
replaced everywhere by the birthday-evenness:
                                j                              j
       yi,t =      jO                      E                                      E   O
                    ,s · Oi · Di,t +s +    j,s · (1 - Oi ) · Di,t +s + i + i,t + t + t + i,t       (2)
                jJE sS                 jJE sS

    where JE is the set of manager transitions JE = {E 2O, E 2E , O2E , O2O}: E 2O denotes a tran-
sition from a manager with an even birthday to a manager with an odd birthday, and so on. We
identify analogous single-difference, double-difference, and dual-double-difference estimates for
these placebo events. For example, the following single-difference estimate measures how the
odd-birthday employee reacts to gaining an odd-birthday manager (i.e., transitioning from an even-
birthday manager to an odd-birthday manager, relative to transitioning from an even-birthday man-
                                            O         O
ager to another even-birthday manager): E    2O,s - E 2E ,s . We use the following double-difference
                                                   O          O         E        E
estimate to measure the odd-to-odd advantage: (E    2O,s - E 2E ,s ) - (E 2O,s - E 2E ,s ).
    In the results section, we present an additional placebo test measuring if the transitions in the
manager's gender affect even-birthday and odd-birthday employees differentially.




                                                  10
2.4     Effect of Manager's Smoking Habits
We also directly evaluate a non-gender shock to social interactions. Intuitively, we begin by restrict-
ing to the sample to male employees and male managers. We then compare two teams, each led
by a non-smoking manager. One team transitions to a smoking manager, and the other team transi-
tions to a different non-smoking manager. We compare the differential effects of the transitions for
smoking employees and for non-smoking employees separately. The prediction is that transitioning
to the smoking manager should benefit the subsequent career of the smoking employees, whereas
it should not affect, or less prominently affect, the careers of the non-smoking employees.
     We use a variant of the same specification to identify the smoker events, based on the restricted
sample of male employees and male managers. Again, the event-study specification is identical to
that in equation (1), except that the gender status is replaced everywhere by the smoker status:
            yi,t =      jS,s · Si · Dij,t +s +    jN,s · (1 - Si) · Dij,t +s + i + i,t + tS + tN + i,t        (3)
                     jJS sS                    j   s

    where JS is the set of the types of manager transitions JS = {N 2S, N 2N , S2N , S2S}. For instance,
N 2S denotes a transition from a non-smoking manager to a manager who smokes. Again, we de-
fine analogous single-difference, double-difference, and dual-double-difference estimates for these
manager transitions. For example, the following single-difference estimate measures how smoker
employees react to gaining a smoker manager (i.e., transitioning from a non-smoker manager to a
smoker manager, relative to transitioning from a non-smoker manager to another non-smoker man-
         S        S
ager): N   2S,s - N 2N ,s . Likewise, we can use the following double-difference estimate to measure
                                        S        S            N        N
the smoker-to-smoker advantage: (N        2S,s - N 2N ,s ) - (N 2S,s - N 2N ,s ).



3     Institutional Context and Data
3.1     Institutional Context
We collaborated with a private commercial bank in Asia. To keep the identity of the firm secret,
we refrain from providing exact information about its characteristics. This bank spans several cul-
turally distinct regions and has millions of customers, billions of dollars in assets and in revenues,
and thousands of employees. Although we do not claim that this firm is representative of all firms
in the world, we have evidence that this is not an extreme context. The firm may be unusual for
the financial sector in that a majority (64%) of its employees are female. Besides that, the gender
gaps at this organization are average by U.S. standards. The gender pay gap at this firm (26%) is
close to the average of similar-sized firms in the financial sector in the United States (31%).9 The
firm is typical in that men and women in a given position get paid similarly. The bulk of the gender
pay gap thus is due to differences in positions among men and women. For example, 75% of firm
employees at the entry-level are female, and that fraction falls to 61% in middle management, 25%
9 Resultsbased on wage rates for men and women working in the financial sector in firms with over 1,000 employees,
 as reported in Yildirmaz et al. (2019).


                                                        11
at the C-Suite level, and 0% at the CEO level. Data for U.S. corporations suggest a similar drop
from 48% of female employees in entry-level positions to 38% in middle management, 22% in
C-Suite positions, and 5% in CEO positions (McKinsey & Company, 2019).
    When looking at the regions where the firm operates as a whole, the gender gaps are similar
to those in the United States. For example, the gender gap in labor force participation (8.5%) is
similar to the one in the United States (13.2%).10 According to survey data, the gender norms also
are not unusual. For example, data from the 2006 World Value Survey suggest that 12% of women
in the firm's country describe work as unimportant or of little importance, and the respective share
is 19% in the United States. In Section 4.5, we leverage variation in gender norms across culturally
distinct regions where the firm operates to examine the mediating role of local norms.


3.2     Administrative Data: Pay Grade
We collaborated with different divisions of the organization to create a centralized and anonymous
database of every employee in the firm. We constructed a monthly panel spanning four years, from
January of 2015 to December of 2018. This panel includes 14,736 unique employees, 1,269 of
whom have been assigned to a manager role at some point. Finally, 64% of the employees are
female, and 49% of the managers are female.
    Our main outcome variable is pay grade. This outcome ranges from 41 to 66 and is the best
measure of the vertical career progression in the organization, and the metric over which managers
have the most direct input.11 Indeed, employees commonly use pay grades as a measure of their
rank in the firm in conversations with other employees. An increase in pay grade is associated with a
promotion, or increase in responsibilities. Conditional on an increase in pay grade, there is an 84%
chance of a change in position title; in comparison, there is a 1% chance of a change in position title
when there is no pay grade increase. Variation in pay grade suggests that, consistent with anecdotal
evidence, there is ample opportunity for upward mobility in the firm. Among the 7,622 employees
who worked at the bank during the full sample period of four years, 50% experienced at least one
pay grade increase, and 16% experienced more than one increase.
    Due to the sensitive nature of the data, we do not have the exact compensation details for the
whole sample of employees. However, for a different project on a different topic (Cullen and Perez-
Truglia, 2018), we have a cross-section of the pay grades and base salaries of employees in a given
month (March of 2017). According to these data, there is a strong linear relationship between
the logarithm of salary and the pay grade (results presented in Appendix A.1). The slope of the
relationship (0.227) indicates that a 1-point increase in pay grade is associated with a 25% increase
in salary (= e0.227 - 1). The R2 of the regression (0.83) also indicates that pay grade explains the
vast majority of variation in salaries.
10 Labor force participation data come from the World Bank Databank and International Labour Organization ILOSTAT

   database. These 2017 figures are the most recent for which male and female labor force participation data are
   available in both countries.
11 HR personnel often carry out the precise salary negotiation within the range determined by pay grade, using market

   benchmark data.



                                                         12
    Although the setting involves employees competing for promotions, employees are not nec-
essarily competing with their teammates. There are no limits on the number of employees on a
team that can be promoted, and different employees from the same team may seek promotions into
different positions. Indeed, these employees compete for promotions with employees from other
teams in the firm, and as the company routinely hires new employees, they also implicitly compete
with outside candidates.12


3.3       Other Outcomes: Attrition, Effort, and Performance
We know the dates when the employees join and exit the company, which allows us to construct a
dummy variable for employee attrition. We also have some measures of effort and performance.
The first measure of effort is the number of days worked. We construct this measure using data from
the human resources divisions on absences. We subtract the number of absences, including parental
leave, sick days, and vacation days, from the total number of workdays in the month. We use an
additional measure of effort to complement the administrative data: the number of hours spent in
the office. However, we measure this outcome only for employees working in the headquarters
offices (29% of the sample), as those employees clock in and out using an electronic card-swipe
system that is strictly enforced by security personnel. We use these time stamps to calculate the
average number of hours in the office. Finally, our measure of performance is based on the 38%
of employees who have a sales role. We measure sales performance based on their sales revenues.
The bank uses an official formula to aggregate an employee's sales across all products (e.g., credit
cards, loans, mortgages) by mapping each product to the expected revenue generated from the sale.
We use these data to construct a monthly sales performance index.


3.4       Manager Assignments
Because a single employee may consider more than one person to be his or her manager, we iden-
tify the most relevant manager as the one who has the most power over the employee. We use
longitudinal data from the firm's organizational chart to link each employee to a manager in each
month that the employee appears in the sample. The employee-manager assignment is constructed
using a simple, two-step algorithm: identify the employee's team, and then identify the "director"
of that team.13 To validate our manager assignments, we conducted a survey of the sales and distri-
bution division (described in Section 3.6). We asked employees to identify the managers who "have
directly influenced your key performance indicator and pay grade." In the month of the survey, De-
cember 2017, 91% of the managers we identify using the organization chart also are reported by
the employees to be their managers.14
12 More   specifically, there is both a high employee turnover (12.5% yearly) and growth in the number of employees
   (5.9% yearly).
13 In cases where the team has no directors listed in the organizational chart, we assign the team to the director listed

   at the next highest level in the organizational chart hierarchy.
14 Our comparison is restricted to pairs in the administrative organization chart that remain together for one year or

   more. When we include all pairs, even those who have been together for just one month, we still find substantial


                                                          13
    The managers tend to be significantly above their subordinates in the firm's hierarchy. For
example, the modal (mean) distance between managers and their employees is 5 (5.3) pay grades.
The manager typically can influence the careers and daily lives of the employees in various ways.
Most importantly, the manager provides key input in decisions to promote employees. Even if the
employee is not promoted, the manager still provides input that influences employee raises and
bonuses. The manager also has discretion to distribute workload across team members. Even if
the work hours are rigid, such as for a tellers, the manager still has latitude to approve leaves of
absences or late days.


3.5    Manager Transitions
Employees can change managers over time for a variety of reasons. Some of those reasons are
under the control of the employee and thus likely endogenous. For example, employees may be
promoted to a higher position and thus assigned to a different team with a different manager, or an
employee who dislikes his or her manager may ask to be transferred to another team. In this study,
we focus on manager transitions that are outside the control of the employee. The most typical
case occurs when managers rotate laterally across different teams, but also include instances when
the team's manager is promoted to a higher position or accepts a position at a different firm and a
replacement is necessary.
    In identifying these exogenous transition events in the data, we impose a few conditions. We
require that the new manager must assume responsibility for all employees in the team. In other
words, the whole team, rather than a specific employee, experiences the manager transition. We
also exclude managers who are temporary replacements by requiring the new manager to remain
with the team for at least one quarter, and we exclude events in which more than half of the team
members changed at the transition event. In the results section, we show that the results are robust
under different criteria for the definition of the transition events.
    We use the event-study framework to assess whether the manager transitions are exogenous.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that this exogeneity is plausible. As part of corporate strategy, man-
agers are expected to gain experience in all areas of banking. For this reason, managers are tran-
sitioned across teams within divisions and across divisions to gain exposure to new people and
activities; for example, a manager from HR may move to a team in IT and vice versa. By the time
they reach the position of senior vice president, most managers will have directed teams in most
divisions. When managers quit or request a transfer, they are required to give thirty days' notice,
and the set of candidates available to fill the role in time is (anecdotally) very small and sometimes
empty. This shortage contributes helps explain why banks reward managers who are willing to
transfer quickly from distant divisions and why job postings for every managerial level of the bank
can be found on the internal and external company dashboards.
    Over the span of our data, we identify 8,670 events involving 6,021 unique employees and
690 unique managers. These events are distributed uniformly over the four-year panel (e.g., see
Appendix Figure A.2.i). 41% of employees experience at least one event at some point in the
  overlap: 78% of the managers we identify also are listed by the employee.

                                                        14
four-year period, but only 13% experience two or more events. Each event will affect on average
9.75 employees, and the inter-quartile range of events affects teams of 3 and 10 employees. In
Appendix A.2 we show that the sample of employees who experience a manager transition (41%)
is quite representative of the whole firm in observable characteristics. Moreover, we show that
the characteristics of employees and managers are similar across the different types of manager
transitions.
    When we define placebo events or smoker events, the manager transitions are the same, but we
categorize those events differently, basing them on manager's birthday-evenness or smoking habits
instead of gender. By construction, the number of placebo events equals the number of gender
events. Because the smoker analysis is based on a subsample (male employees and managers for
whom we could infer smoking status), the number of smoking events is smaller than the number of
gender events. As for gender events, we find that the placebo events and smoker events are largely
homogeneous over time and across individuals (see also Appendix A.2).


3.6     Survey Data: Relationship with Managers
We collected self-reported data on manager assignments to validate our method of identifying man-
agers through the administrative data. To obtain data on relationship between employees and their
managers, we distributed a survey to the employees in the largest division: sales and distribution.
Sales and distribution comprise 62% of the firms employees, and 100% of employees outside of
headquarters.15 Appendix B includes a sample of the survey instrument. The survey asks respon-
dents to list managers who "directly influenced your key performance indicator and pay grade either
in your current position or past positions". They could select up to six managers.16 The rest of the
survey asked a series of questions (described in the following sections) for each manager listed by
the respondent.
    We invited 4,847 employees by email to complete the survey in December 2017. Appendix B
includes a sample of the emailed invitation. The head of the sales and distribution division requested
full participation from employees and gave permission to conduct the survey during work hours.
We emphasized that answers to these survey questions would not be revealed to co-workers or
managers. A total of 3,345 employees completed the survey, implying an 70% response rate. The
modal respondents reported information on their last three managers. The final dataset contained
9,068 employee-manager pairs.


3.7     Proximity to the Manager
To investigate the social interaction mechanism, we split positions by whether the employee works
in physical proximity to the manager. For employees working in the headquarters offices, we use
card swipe data provided by the security division. These data include information about the floor
15 We   were able to coordinate a detailed survey with the Sales and Distribution division because of the strong relation-
   ship we built with the head of that division.
16 If they had more than six managers to list, we asked employees to prioritize the most important ones since 2015.




                                                           15
where the employee works, which we use to calculate the share of employees of each position
who work on the same floor as their managers. We split these positions by whether the position
averages exceed or fall below the median. As a result, roughly half of the employees are categorized
as higher-proximity and the other half as lower-proximity. In the higher-proximity positions, 80%
of employees work on the same floor as their manager, compared to only 8% among the lower-
proximity positions.
    Security data are not available for positions outside headquarters. Thus, we included a question
in the manager relationship survey to supplement these data. The question was repeated for each
manager whom the employee identified in the survey. We asked "How often are (or were) you
physically working near <manager name> (i.e. same floor and area)?". Respondents could choose
from the following options: "Every day or most days (4-6 times per week)", "Some days (2-3
times per week) ", or "Infrequently". Similar to the procedure for the swipe data, we calculate the
average proximity of each position and then split positions by whether their average exceeds or
falls below the median. Using this method, we categorize 62% of the position titles in the sales and
distribution division for which survey data were collected. By construction, half of these employees
are categorized as higher-proximity and the other half as lower-proximity.17


3.8     Frequency of Social Interactions
A third goal of the survey is to measure social interactions between employees and managers.
For each manager listed by the employee, we ask, "Out of 10 work breaks (including lunch or
random breaks), how many would include [Manager's Name]?"18 We construct a simple variable
that equals the fraction of breaks shared with the manager.19 To assess whether employees and
managers discuss personal matters, we ask respondents to share their favorite sport teams and to
guess the favorite sport team of their managers. For the pairs of employees and managers who
responded to the survey, we measure the accuracy of the employee's answers to this question.


3.9     Smoking Habits
We measure the smoker status of employees and their managers in two ways. We use data on
smoking status from the 2017 annual health exam that occurs onsite during the workday and a cor-
responding online workplace health survey with the same questions and framing. To complement
the previously described data comprising snapshots of employees working in September 2017, we
use two additional supplemental surveys.
17 In  the higher-proximity positions, 88% of employees report working with their manager every day or most days,
   compared to only 65% of employees in the lower-proximity positions.
18 We ask the question about a share of 10 breaks, rather than asking about the overall number of breaks, to minimize

   the incentive to under-report so as to appear more focused and productive. The downside is that we do not have a
   measure of the overall number of minutes spent together in a given week.
19 The survey also asks about an alternative form of social interactions with the manager: "Of the last 10 emails you

   sent to [Manager's Name], how many included some part that was personal?" However, there is too little variation
   in this outcome to be useful for the analysis: the average share of personal emails is just 5%. We suspect employees
   may have under-reported this type of behavior for fear of violating company policy.


                                                         16
    Section 3.6 describes the survey of manager relationship, which includes a question about
whether the employee and their current and past managers smoke. Additionally, we deployed a
2-minute survey exclusively about smoking. Appendix C includes a sample of this survey. This
survey asks about the respondent's own smoking status and the smoking status of current and past
co-workers, including those who left the bank prior to the annual health exam. We emailed invita-
tions to the survey on February 2018, and the invitation included information about cash prizes to
be raffled to survey respondents. We invited a total of 6,022 employees and had a response rate of
39%.
    If an employee appears in the 2017 annual health exam data, we use his or her response to
assign the smoker status. For employees who do not appear in the annual health exam data, we
impute their smoker status using the crowdsourced survey data. Using this method, we assign
smoking status to 57% of employees from the main sample.20 Some employees appear on both the
annual health exam data and the crowdsourced survey data. We can use that overlap to validate the
crowdsourced data. As expected, we find that the two sources of data are highly consistent with
each other: the crowdsourced measure of smoker status coincides with the health records 82% of
the time.21


4       Results: Effects of Manager's Gender
In this section, we document the effects of manager gender on the employee's career progression.


4.1       Descriptive Analysis
Before diving into the event-study analysis, we provide some simple descriptive evidence on the
association between past exposure to male managers and the employee's subsequent promotions.
Let Pi,t be employee i's change in pay grade from t at 10 quarters later. Let Si,t -1 indicate the
employee's recent exposure to male managers (i.e., the fraction of the past year that employee i
was assigned to a male manager). Consider the following regression:
             M               M                         F        F
      Pi,t = 0 · (1 - Fi ) + 1 · Si,t -1 · (1 - Fi ) + 0 · Fi + 1 · Si,t -1 · Fi +  · Ti,t + Pi,t + i,t              (4)

    Note that we interact Si,t -1 with a gender indicator (Fi ) to estimate the relationship separately
for male and female employees. The regression includes basic control variables: the employee's
tenure (Ti,t ) and, to flexibly compare employees who started at the same level, fixed effects for
initial pay grade (Pi,t ).
    Figure 1 presents the results in binned scatterplot form. The x-axis indicates if the employee
is assigned to a female (towards the left) or male (towards the right) manager. The y-axis indi-
20 Of those, 59% (33% of the sample) are classified using their annual health exam, and the remaining 41% are classified

    using crowdsourced data.
21 More   precisely, we classify an individual as a smoker if over one-third of the crowdsourced survey reports flag
    the individual as a smoker. This one-third threshold is arbitrary but largely inconsequential for the categorization.
    Moreover, in Appendix A.16 we show the results are robust to the use of alternative thresholds.


                                                           17
cates the change in pay grade 10 quarters later. This figure suggests that women are promoted at
roughly similar rates under male and female managers (F = 0.056, p-value<0.001). In contrast,
male employees are promoted substantially faster under male managers than they are under female
managers (F = 0.380, p-value<0.001). More precisely, Figure 1 shows that when employees are
assigned mostly (i.e., above 75% of the time) to female managers, they tend to be promoted at
the same rate, regardless of whether they are female or male. The gender gap is small (0.022
pay grades) and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.403). On the contrary, when employees are
assigned mostly (i.e., above 75% of the time) to male managers, then the male employees are
promoted 0.30 pay grades higher than female employees (p-value<0.001).
    The evidence from Figure 1 suggests that female and male employees receive equal treatment
under female managers, but male managers promote their male employees faster than their female
employees. This evidence, however, is subject to the usual concerns with causal inference. For
example, it is possible that the share of male managers correlates with manager, employee, or
position characteristics that are favorable to the promotion of male employees. In the following
sections, we address these causality concerns with the event-study analysis of manager transitions.


4.2     Event-Study Analysis
We start by comparing the pay grade effects from transitioning from a female to male manager
relative to transitioning from a female manager to another female manager. Figure 2.a presents the
results based on the econometric framework described in Section 2. This event-study graph shows
the evolution of pay grades in each of the 10 quarters leading up to a manager transition and the 10
quarters after the manager transition. We present coefficients for female employees (red squares)
and male employees (blue circles) separately. The quarter before the event (-1) corresponds to the
omitted category, and thus the corresponding coefficient is always zero by construction.
    When inspecting Figure 2.a, note that these coefficients refer to differences across transition
types.22 As a result, a coefficient of zero in the post-treatment period does not imply that em-
ployees remain in the same pay grade; rather, it indicates similar growth rates of pay grades across
employees transitioning from female to male managers versus employees transitioning from female
to female managers. This context has ample upward mobility, meaning that employee pay grades
increase over time.
    Figure 2.a shows that, in the 10 quarters prior to the transition, the coefficients are similar
in magnitude between male employees and female employees, confirming that female and male
employees share similar trends prior to the manager transition.23 On the contrary, the evolution of
22 We focus on the single-difference estimates to isolate the effects of the change of gender from the effects of changing

   manager per se. For reference, Appendix A.3 reports the raw coefficients  jM              F
                                                                                     ,s and  j,s , that is, without "differencing"
   between transition types.
23 The most important fact is that there are no systematic trends. Having said that, some of the pre-treatment gender

   differences are statistically significant (most notably, at quarter 4 before the transition the difference p-value is 0.022).
   This is probably spurious: given the large number of falsification coefficients presented in the paper, a minority of
   them are expected to be statistically significant just by chance. In any case, as discussed below, the pre-treatment
   coefficients are consistently close to zero for the transitions in the opposite direction (from male to female managers)



                                                               18
pay grades diverge substantially between male and female employees after the transition date. On
the one hand, male employees advance further in the organization after being assigned to a male
manager, relative to how they would have fared if they instead were assigned to female managers.
At 10 quarters after the transition, pay grades among men exceed those among women by 0.65
points (p-value < 0.001), roughly equivalent to a salary that is 15% higher,24 when transitioning
from a female manager to a male manager (relative to transitioning from a female manager to a
different female manager). An alternative way of illustrating the magnitude of this effect is to
compare it to a baseline: 10 quarters after experiencing a manager transition employees gain an
average of 0.96 pay grades (for details, see Appendix A.1).
    On the other hand, Figure 2.a shows that female employees do not advance similarly after being
assigned to male managers, relative to being assigned to female managers. Female employees have
pay grades that are 0.043 points (p-value = 0.736) lower at 10 quarters after transitioning from a
female to a male manager (relative to transitioning to a different female manager).25 Moreover,
this coefficient of -0.043 points for female employees is statistically significantly different from the
corresponding coefficient of 0.60 for male employees (p-value<0.001).
    Now, we assess the robustness of the identification strategy by analyzing the manager transitions
in the opposite direction. Figure 2.b is equivalent to Figure 2.a, except that it corresponds to the
opposite type of transition (comparing a transition from a male manager to a female manager minus
the transition from a male manager to a different male manager). Keep in mind that the coefficients
are identified by a disjointed set of transition events, and thus there are no "mechanical" reasons
why the results should mirror each other. A comparison of Figures 2.a and 2.b indicates that, as
expected, the effects of "losing" a male manager are the opposite of the effects of "gaining" a male
manager, both in terms of timing and order of magnitude. For example, Figure 2.a indicates that
male employees gain 0.60 points (p-value < 0.001) at 10 quarters after gaining a male manager.
In turn, Figure 2.b indicates that male employees lose 0.30 points (p-value = 0.031) at 10 quarters
after losing a male manager.
    Figure 3 presents the double-difference estimates described in Section 2. Intuitively, the coeffi-
cients from Figure 3.a correspond to the difference between the male and female coefficients from
Figure 2.a. Figure 3.a shows that at 10 quarters after the transition, the male-to-male advantage
amounts to 0.65 pay grades, which is not only highly statistically significant (p-value<0.001) but
also economically large. Figure 3.b is equivalent to Figure 3.a, except that it corresponds to the
transitions in the opposite direction. According to Figure 3.b, there is a statistically significant
(p-value=0.001) male-to-male advantage of 0.44 pay grades at 10 quarters after the transition. This
point estimate of 0.44 is smaller in magnitude than the corresponding estimate of 0.65 from Figure
3.a, but we cannot reject the null hypothesis that these two coefficients are equal (p-value= 0.343).
    In Figure 3.c, we present the dual-double-difference estimates. Intuitively, Figure 3.c corre-
   and in the dual-double-differences specification.
24 A  single pay-grade increase is associated with a log increase of 0.227 (Appendix A.1), and thus a 0.65 pay grade
   increase should be equivalent to a salary that is 15% (= e0.65·0.227 - 1) higher.
25 Although this evidence suggests that promotions among male employees do not crowd out promotions among female

   teammates, it also does not imply that male employees do not crowd out anyone. Indeed, male employees are
   probably crowding out other employees in the same position but on different teams, as well as external hires.


                                                        19
sponds to the average male-to-male advantage implied by Figures 3.a and 3.b. The estimated male-
to-male advantage amounts to 0.54 pay grades at 10 quarters after the transition (p-value<0.001).
Unsurprisingly, this point estimate is in the middle of the corresponding point estimates from Fig-
ures 3.a and 3.b. However, these estimates combine their variation and are thus more precisely
estimated than the corresponding coefficients from Figures 3.a and 3.b on their own. As a result,
we use the dual specification to maximize statistical power, such as when measuring the hetero-
geneity of the effects.
    Given that we have the most statistical power for the dual-double-difference specification, we
can use it to explore the timing of the effects. First of all, notice that there is a significant jump
in the first quarter after the manager switch: the coefficient corresponding to +1 quarters after
the switch is 0.10, and statistically significant (p-value=0.006). Note also that the male-to-male
advantage grows smoothly over time, which happens mechanically because while some employees
may happen to be up for promotion right after the manager switch, most employees are months or
sometimes years away from their next promotion opportunity at the time of the switch. Just like in
academia, this company reviews promotions at the end of the year, and depending on the position
some employees may be considered up for promotion every other year or so.
    To illustrate this better, we can compare the size of the male-to-male advantage relative to
the average change in pay grade at each time horizon. In the first four quarters after a manager
transition, the male-to-male advantages are estimated at 0.10, 0.10, 0.12, and 0.16 (each of them
statistically significant, with p-values of 0.006, 0.032, 0.022, and 0.012). The average pay grade
change in each of the first four quarters after a manager transition were 0.05, 0.15, 0.25, and
0.34, respectively. The male-to-male advantage grows stronger during the second year: in the fifth
through eight quarters after the transition, the male-to-male advantages are estimated at 0.20, 0.21,
0.30, and 0.38 (each of them statistically significant, with p-values of 0.011, 0.016, 0.001, and
<0.001. For comparison, the average pay grade change in the fifth through eight quarters after a
manager transition were 0.47, 0.56, 0.67, and 0.75. The male-to-male advantage seems to taper
off in the third year: the point estimates for the ninth and tenth quarters are 0.48 and 0.54 (both
p-values < 0.001), with their difference being small and statistically insignificant. For comparison,
the average pay grade change in the ninth and tenth quarters after a manager transition were 0.84
and 0.96.
    In the appendix, we report some additional robustness checks. In Appendix A.4, we measure the
persistence of gender transitions. Appendix A.5 shows that the results are similar under alternative
specifications; including controls for employee characteristics and specifications with and without
manager fixed effects. Appendix A.6 shows that the results are robust under alternative definition
of events, such as excluding the largest events. Appendix A.7 shows that the results are robust if we
restrict the sample to employees who joined the firm before the start of the panel. In Appendix A.8,
we show that the results are robust if we focus on the employees' first transition event only.




                                                 20
4.3    Placebo Analysis: Birthday-Evenness
As a placebo test, we reproduce the whole analysis, but instead of focusing on gender as the relevant
characteristic of managers and employees, we focus on a characteristic that we know ex ante should
not be relevant: whether someone was born on an even or odd date. This placebo provides a useful
sanity check. First, it helps rule out mechanical reasons why our event-study framework would
generate spurious effects. Second, this placebo analysis can be used to assess whether our standard
errors are conservative enough.
    Figure A.9.i is equivalent to Figure 2, but it is based on birthday-evenness instead of gender.
Figure 4.a compares transitions from an even-birthday manager to an odd-birthday manager versus
transitions from an even-birthday manager to another even-birthday manager. We directly present
double-difference coefficients for odd-birthday employees relative to even-birthday employees.
    As expected, Figure 4.a shows no significant difference between the two types of transition,
either before or after the event. For instance, at 10 quarters after transitioning from an even-birthday
to an odd-birthday manager (relative to another even-birthday manager), the difference between
the pay grades of odd-birthday and even-birthday employees is close to zero (0.06), statistically
insignificant (p-value=0.518), and precisely estimated. Moreover, we can reject the null hypothesis
that this coefficient for odd-birthday employees the same as the corresponding coefficient of 0.65
estimated for male employees in Figure 2.a (p-value=0.001). Moreover, Figure 4.b shows that the
results are virtually the same if we use the transitions in the opposite direction (i.e., odd-to-even
instead of even-to-odd). For the sake of brevity, we report the single-difference and dual-double-
difference estimates in Appendix A.9.
    In Appendix A.10, we also show that the results are robust to an alternative placebo specification
that combines the gender of the manager with the birthday-evenness of the employees. We take the
same gender transitions of the managers from the previous section and show that, despite strong
heterogeneity with respect to the gender of the employee, there is no significant heterogeneity with
respect to the birthday-evenness of the employee.
    Ideally we could replicate the results using an alternative characteristic, such as race or ethnicity,
that would provide another shared demographic trait against which to benchmark the gender results.
Unfortunately, in our context, racial and ethnic diversity are too limited for such a benchmark.


4.4    Effects on Attrition, Effort and Performance
Male employees may reach higher positions under male managers because they are less likely to
leave the firm, work longer hours, or perform better than their female counterparts. Alternatively,
the male-to-male advantage may be the consequence of favoritism without accompanying produc-
tivity justifications. To probe these factors, we measure the effects of manager transitions on addi-
tional outcomes. Figure 5 presents the results under the dual-double-difference specification, which
combines all transition types and thus maximizes statistical power. Each panel of Figure 5 is equiv-
alent to Figure 3.c, except it uses a different dependent variable instead of pay grade. As we use
different dependent variables, we follow Hastings et al. (2019) by setting the scale of each graph at


                                                   21
approximately twice the within-individual standard deviation.26 For example, the within-individual
standard deviation in pay grade is about 0.5, so in the event-study graphs for that dependent variable
the y-axis ranges from -1 to 1.27 This hopefully allows for a more intuitive comparison between
event-study graphs that involve different outcomes.
    Figure 5.a shows the effects on the probability of leaving the firm (i.e., a dummy variable that
equals 1 for every month after the employee leaves the firm). When using this specific depen-
dent variable, there is an extra challenge for the event-study analysis. By construction, employees
do not experience manager transitions after they leave the company. We can still estimate the
post-treatment coefficients, but we cannot estimate the pre-treatment coefficients. We address this
common challenge in event-study analysis by using the standard approach of assigning hypotheti-
cal events to individuals who left the firm (Kleven et al., 2019). To do this, we take advantage of
the fact that after an employee leaves the firm, the employee's former team still exists. Thus, we
take the transition events experienced by the team and assign them to the employee, even if the
employee no longer works for the firm.
    Figure 5.a shows that, consistent with the assumption of balanced pre-trends, the coefficients
preceding the transition date are close to zero, precisely estimated, and statistically insignificant.
The evidence also indicates a lack of male-to-male advantage on attrition: the post-event coeffi-
cients are also close to zero, precisely estimated, and statistically insignificant. For example, at 10
quarters after the event, the male-to-male coefficient for attrition is close to zero (-0.3 percentage
points), statistically insignificant (p-value = 0.667), and precisely estimated. On average, the prob-
ability of leaving the firm at 10 quarters after an event is 35 percentage points. Thus, the estimated
effect of less than one percentage point is quite small relative to that baseline.
    Next, we assess whether there is a male-to-male advantage in employee effort or performance.
For example, male managers may be better role models than female managers for male employ-
ees (Kofoed and McGovney, 2019), or perhaps male managers are better than female managers at
communicating with or monitoring male employees. Figure 5.b shows the event-study graph with
the (logarithm of) the monthly number of days worked as the dependent variable. The coefficients
are close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated. For example, the male-to-male
advantage at 10 quarters after the transition is close to zero (0.012 log points), statistically insignif-
icant (p-value=0.313), and precisely estimated. We can interpret the magnitude as a percentage
increase of <1% in the days worked. This difference is tiny compared with the magnitude of the
male-to-male advantage in pay grades reported in Figure 3.c, which is roughly equivalent to a 13%
salary difference.28
    Figure 5.c presents the results for the other measure of effort: (the logarithm of) the average
number of hours spent in the office, according to security log data for employees working at head-
quarters (43% of the sample).29 Again, we find no male-to-male advantage on time spent in the
26 Hastings  et al. (2019) perform a similar normalization but use the inter-quartile range instead.
27 To allow for familiar scales, we use round numbers. For example, the within-individual standard deviation of pay
   grade is 0.479, so instead of using a range from -0.958 to 0.958, we use a range from -1 to 1.
28 A single pay-grade increase is associated with a log increase of 0.227 (Appendix A.1), and thus a 0.54 pay-grade

   increase should be equivalent to a salary that is 13% (= e0.54·0.227 - 1) higher.
29 In Appendix A.13, we report the effects on paygrade for this same subsample. The effects are less precisely estimated



                                                          22
office. The point estimates are close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated. For
example, at 10 quarters after the transition, the male-to-male advantage is small (relative to the
within-individual standard deviation) and statistically insignificant (p-value = 0.822).
    Figure 5.d presents the effects on sales revenue for the subsample of employees who have a sales
role (42% of the sample).30 The point estimates are again close to zero, statistically insignificant,
and precisely estimated.31 For instance, at 10 quarters after the transition, the male-to-male ad-
vantage is small (relative to the within-individual standard deviation) and statistically insignificant
(p-value = 0.790).
    In sum, the analysis presented in this section indicates that the higher promotion rates that male
employees enjoy under male managers are not accompanied by any differences in attrition, effort,
or performance, compared to female employees.
    A related mechanism could be that male managers are better able to discern the best candidates
to promote by virtue of their social interactions with their male employees (Brogaard et al., 2014).32
If male managers were systematically better at allocating tasks or roles to male employees through
an information advantage, in most circumstances this would translate into higher sales revenue, the
firm's bottom line. We do not find this to be true even 10 quarters after the manager switch. In
Appendix A.11.1,we focus on a sample of employees, junior sales associates, for whom their post-
promotion productivity is revealed ex-post through their sales performance. We show that, across
men and women, the employees who are promoted by male managers are on average significantly
less productive than those promoted by female managers in their subsequent sales roles, while
overall rates of promotion do not differ significantly.
    In the appendix, we present some additional robustness checks. For instance, the results pre-
sented here are based on the dual-double-difference specification. In Appendix A.12, we show that
the results are robust when looking at two directions of the transitions (i.e., gaining and losing a
male manager) separately.


4.5     Heterogeneity by Gender Norms
The effects of manager gender could be mediated by social norms about gender roles (Jayachan-
dran, 2020). For example, in more chauvinistic contexts, male managers may be more prone to
spending time, becoming friends with and promoting their male employees. While we do not have
data on the gender norms at the individual level, we take advantage of geographic variation.
    The employees of the firm work in hundreds of geographically dispersed branches and two
corporate towers, one in the "northern region" and one in the "southern region". There are sharp
  but still follow the basic patterns from the whole sample.
30 In Appendix A.13, we report the effects on paygrade for this same subsample.  The effects are less precisely estimated
   but still follow the basic patterns from the whole sample.
31 As shown in Appendix A.11, the results are robust to using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. As this

   outcome equals zero a non-trivial fraction of the time, we cannot use the logarithm of sales revenues as a dependent
   variable. We use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation instead, which can be interpreted like a log transformed
   variable, as arcsinh(x)  ln(2x) = ln(2) + ln(x) rapidly.
32 According to the asymmetric information story, the marginal employee who is promoted by a male manager should

   ex-post be more productive than the marginal employee promoted by a female manager.

                                                          23
differences in the cultural and institutional past between the northern and southern regions that
could generate persistent differences in gender norms. Anecdotally, southerners are more western-
ized due to early European colonization while northerners are more communist-influenced due to
Chinese rule. Based on these roots and prior research on persistent gender differences between East
and West Germany by Boelmann, Raute, and Schönberg (2020), we expect the southern regions to
have stronger and more unequal gender norms around roles at work.
    Indeed, these anecdotal accounts are supported by different sources of data. First, the gender
gap in the labor force participation is three times as large in the southern regions (5 percentage
points) as in the northern regions (16 percentage points).33 The anecdotal accounts are also sup-
ported by survey measures of gender norms. The most recent wave of the World Values Survey
covered the country where the firm is located and included a relevant question on the role of gen-
der in business leadership. Respondents were asked whether they agree with the statement "Men
make better business executives than women do" in a scale from "strongly disagree" to "strongly
agree." Among respondents in the top income quartile (which is the most relevant population for
the employees in our firm), 52% of men agreed with the statement that they men are better business
executives than women. This is roughly 12 percentage points higher (or 31% higher) than the share
of men in the northern regions who agreed with this statement (difference p-value = 0.016).34
    For the purpose of the heterogeneity analysis, we split units between the northern and southern
regions using data on the birthplace of employees. A unit is categorized as northern if the modal
employee in that unit was born in one of the northern provinces under greater communist-influence.
Under this categorization, 68% of employees work in northern units and the remaining 32% work in
the southern units. Employees are broadly similar between the northern and southern units in terms
of their observable characteristics. A slightly greater share of the workers in the northern units are
male (32% relative to 30%) or have a college degree (86% relative to 78%), and the average worker
in a northern unit works in a slightly larger unit (100 workers relative to 77) ­ for more details, see
Appendix A.17. Using the firm's pay grade data, we find that the gender pay gaps is 39% higher
in the southern units than in the northern units (1.1 pay grade gap in the south versus 0.8 pay grade
gap in the north, p-value of the difference=0.016). The sign of this difference is consistent with the
anecdotal accounts of the difference in gender norms between the north and the south.
    Figure 6 presents the heterogeneity of results between northern and southern units. To maxi-
mize statistical power, we estimate the same dual-double-difference model from Figure 3 but split
the set of event dummies in two: one set for the northern units and another set for the southern
units. Figure 6.a presents coefficients for the southern units and Figure 6.b presents coefficients
for the northern units. Figure 6.a shows a significant male-to-male advantage in the southern units
(where there are stronger gender norms), while Figure 6.b shows that the male-to-male advantage
is smaller and less statistically significant in the northern units. For example, at 10 quarters after
the transition the male-to-male advantage in pay grade is 0.69 (p-value<0.001) in the south (Fig-
ure 6.a ), compared with 0.44 (p-value=0.001) in the north (Figure 6.b). This specific difference
33 Thesefigures were calculated from the most recently available census data (from 2009).
34 Thedifference is similar, but less precisely estimated, among female respondents. For more details, see Appendix
  A.17


                                                       24
must be taken with a grain of salt because, although large, it is not precisely estimated and thus is
statistically insignificant (p-value= 0.269). The difference between Figure 6.a and Figure 6.b are
consistent in direction and magnitude for all the time horizons.35 In sum, the evidence suggest that
while the effects are present in both the northern and southern units, they are more pronounced in
the southern units, where there are stronger gender norms.


4.6      Interpreting the Magnitude of the Effects
Next, we discuss the economic magnitude of the male-to-male advantage. Under the assumption
that our findings are due to a positive effect of male managers on male employees, we compute what
would happen to the overall gender gap if we were to remove this male-to-male advantage.36 The
unconditional gender gap in pay grade in our setting is approximately 0.90 pay grades.37 As 66%
of male employees have male managers, the gender pay gap would be reduced by 0.36 pay grades
(= 0.54 · 0.66) if the male-to-male advantage were removed. That is, removing the male-to-male
advantage would reduce the gender pay gap by 40% (from 0.90 to 0.54 pay grades).3839
    We can also compare our findings to the results from related studies. However, we must take
these comparisons with a grain of salt due to obvious differences in context and research design
(e.g., we rely on quasi-experimental methods). The closest related study is Kunze and Miller
(2017), which is based on data on white-collar employees from a private firm in Norway. Consistent
with our findings, they find that the gender gap in promotions is higher in establishments where the
share of male superiors is higher.40 We also provide a quantitative comparison to Kunze and Miller
(2017). They report a gender gap in promotion rates of 3.3 percentage points (page 772). That gap
is 2 percentage points larger in establishments with 100% male superiors, relative to establishments
with 0% male superiors (column (1) of Table 2). We can use the estimates from Kunze and Miller
(2017) in an equivalent counterfactual analysis as the above. Since 83% of managers in their sample
                                            832
are male, this gap can explain 50% = 0.3     .3 of the gender gap in promotions. This is in the same
35 For  example, looking at the effects 4 quarters after the transition, the male-to-male advantage is estimated at 0.29
   pay grades in the south (p-value=0.010) vs. 0.09 pay grades in the north (p-value=0.205).
36 As discussed in Section 2, our specification cannot distinguish whether the male-to-male advantage is driven by

   favorable treatment from male managers, unfavorable treatment by female managers, or a combination of both. The
   descriptive analysis presented in Section 4.1, however, suggests that the favorable treatment by male managers is a
   more likely explanation.
37 This figure is estimated using a cross section of the bank in the last period of our sample (December, 2018).
38 This exercise combines all types of manager transition. The resulting magnitude would be bit larger if we used

   the transitions starting with a male manager only (it would explain 48% of the gender gap, instead of 40%) or the
   transitions starting with a female manager only (it would explain 32%).
39 One caveat with this interpretation is that if some effects were due to a negative effect of female managers on male

   employees, then the effects on the gender pay gap would be smaller and the 40% reported here could be considered
   an upper bound. In the extreme case where all effects are due to negative effects of female managers on male
   employees, then removing these manager effects should actually increase the gender pay gap, as male employees'
   pay grades would increase and female employees' would remain unaffected. As discussed throughout, we did not
   find any supporting empirical evidence of a negative bias of female managers against male employees.
40 While their preferred interpretation is that the difference is due to female managers helping female employees, they

   also describe the indeterminacy between women helping women or men helping men given the absence of a gender-
   neutral benchmark. Our evidence instead suggests that male managers help male employees.


                                                          25
order of magnitude as our baseline estimate of 40% presented above.
    Our finding that women do not benefit from having female managers echoes results from earlier
studies in non-corporate contexts: female referees and female committee members do not increase
the odds of acceptance of female-authored papers or promotion of female candidates (Bagues et al.,
2017; Card et al., 2019); and female teachers in public schools show similar job satisfaction and
turnover rates whether working in schools run by female principals or male principals (Grissom
et al., 2012; Husain et al., 2018).
    Last, to contextualize this effect size further, we turn to a result that is well established in
the literature: the so-called "motherhood penalty". From the administrative HR data, we are able
to identify workers who take maternity leave at any point in our sample. Women are entitled
to six months of maternity with partial pay, and in our sample, the average leave is 22 weeks
(4.5 months). Looking at the same December 2018 cross section, we find that the gap between
men and women who never take maternity leave is 0.83 pay grades. When this gap is measured
instead using women who ever take maternity leave, the gap is 31% larger or 1.09 pay grades. The
difference is highly statistically significant with a p-value of p < 0.001.41 While we do not have
an instrument to causally estimate the impact of childbirth and maternity leave on the pay gap, the
unconditional difference in means is similar to the carefully estimated gender gap in Kleven et al.
(2019), which grows between 20% to 30% over four years after birth. Overall, this constitutes
suggestive evidence that the male-to-male advantage in this firm may be in the same order of
magnitude as the motherhood penalty (Schönberg and Ludsteck, 2014; Kleven et al., 2019).


5       Results: Social Interactions Channel
We use social interactions as an all-encompassing term to refer to a family of mechanisms featuring
face-to-face, personal interactions between employees and their managers. For example, male man-
agers may become emotionally attached to male employees over time and thus feel increasing pres-
sure to promote them. Perhaps male employees use the interactions to gain the manager's sympathy
and schmooze their way into promotions. Socializing with the manager may make the accomplish-
ments and efforts of employees more salient to the manager, thus making those employees more
likely to be rewarded with a promotion. With more frequent interactions, male managers might
better identify potential among their male employees (Brogaard et al., 2014). Male employees also
may use the time spent with their manager to claim credit and engage in self-promotion (Sarsons
et al., 2019; Isaksson, 2019; Coffman et al., 2019). Male employees may get favorable treatment
from managers by getting assigned tasks that are more conducive to promotions (Lehmann, 2013;
Babcock et al., 2017). It is also possible that male managers are more willing to work alongside
with and train their male subordinates, compared with their female subordinates (Ranganathan,
2019).
41 We   measure maternity leave using the HR records of the firm. This is a rough estimate. For example, it is possible
    that some employees had children before they joined the company. It is also possible that employees became parents
    without formally logging parental leave with HR.



                                                          26
    In each of the following sections, we provide suggestive evidence that the male-to-male pay
grade advantage operates at least partially through the social interactions channel, and that these so-
cial interactions are not accompanied by higher employee productivity or the managers' enhanced
ability to discern and promote more productive employees.


5.1     Heterogeneity by Proximity to the Manager
The first test of the social interactions channel exploits heterogeneity according to proximity to
the manager. If socializing with the manager plays an important role, then we should observe
stronger effects for employees whose jobs require frequent face-to-face interactions with the man-
ager (Bandiera et al., 2009).
    Recall from Section 3.7 that we use a combination of administrative and survey data to split
positions into higher and lower proximity to the manager. An example of a high-proximity position
is customer support specialist, who normally sit in a specific location near the manager. An exam-
ple of a low-proximity position is the sales and quality development director, who usually travels
between branches and reports back to the manager by phone or email. We were able to successfully
classify the proximity for a large majority (88.2%) of the employees in the sample.42
    Figure 7 presents the heterogeneity results. To maximize statistical power, we estimate the
same dual-double-difference model from Figure 3. However, rather than having a single set of
event dummies, we split this set in two: one set for high-proximity positions and another for low-
proximity positions. Figure 7.a presents coefficients from high-proximity events, and Figure 7.b
presents coefficients from low-proximity events. Figure 7.a shows a significant male-to-male ad-
vantage when the employee works in high proximity to the manager. Figure 7.b further shows that
the male-to-male advantage is close to zero and statistically insignificant when the employee works
in a low proximity environment. For example, Figure 7.a indicates that at 10 quarters after the
transition, the male-to-male advantage in pay grade is 0.76 (p-value<0.001) in the high-proximity
group, compared with 0.21 (p-value=0.178) in the low-proximity group, and their difference is
statistically significant (p-value= 0.013).
    In the appendix, we present some additional robustness checks. In the baseline results presented
above, we estimate the dual-double-difference estimator that combines all types of transitions and
thus maximizes the statistical power. In Appendix A.14, we show that the results are robust when
looking at transitions in each direction (i.e., a "gain" or a "loss" of a male manager). Similarly,
to maximize power, our measure of proximity combines administrative data and survey data. In
Appendix A.14, we show that the results are robust even when looking at the administrative and
survey measures of proximity separately.
    In Appendix A.14.1 we compare the observable characteristics across those low and high prox-
imity groups and show that, although not large, there are some systematic differences. One potential
concern is that the differences in results between high and low proximity groups stem partially from
differences along those other characteristics. We provide evidence against this concern. We repli-
42 InAppendix A.13, we report the effects on paygrade for this same subsample. The effects are almost identical as for
  the whole sample.


                                                         27
cate the analysis using propensity score matching to maintain balance along critical observables,
including position pay grade, position share male, and position share sales roles and average sales
revenue.43 We show that the results are practically identical after re-weighting.


5.2     Effects on the Time Spent with the Manager
If the social interactions channel plays a role, we should observe that male employees interact
more with their managers after transitioning to a male manager (relative to transitioning to another
female manager). To test this hypothesis, we use our survey measure of social interactions: the
fraction of the last ten breaks that the employee took that was shared with his or her manager.
    Although the share of breaks taken with the manager is probably not the perfect measure of so-
cial interactions, we start by providing some suggestive evidence that it contains some meaningful
variation. First, we show that employees who spend more breaks with their managers get to know
them better. Among the 3,072 employee-manager pairs for whom both the manager and employee
responded to our survey (so that we can determine if the employee guessed the manager's prefer-
ence correctly), we find that spending more breaks with the manager is positively associated with
an accurate guess about their favorite sports team. The association is highly statistically significant
(p-value < 0.001) and large in magnitude: increasing the share of breaks taken with the manager
from 0% to 100% is associated with a 44% increase in the probability of correctly guessing the
manager's favorite team (from 25 to 36 percentage points). Moreover, we show that our measure
of shared breaks is correlated to promotion rates. Among the 5,047 employee-manager pairs for
which the employee answered our survey, we find that spending breaks with the manager is pos-
itively associated with promotions. This correlation is not only statistically significant (p-value =
0.014), but also economically significant: increasing shared breaks from 0% to 100% is associated
with an additional increase of 0.1 pay grade.44
    Next, we assess whether male employees change the shared breaks with their managers after
transitioning to a male manager. Ideally, we would implement the same quarterly event-study
analysis that we employ for the outcomes measured with administrative data. Unfortunately, due
to the smaller sample size, that is not feasible for this survey outcome. For instance, although
the analysis of pay grades is based on 374,913 observations (employee-month pairs), the dataset on
share of breaks has only 9,068 observations (employee-manager pairs).45 Instead, we use a stylized
version of the event-study framework tailored to the smaller survey dataset.
    We follow the same notation from Section 2.2, with a few differences. The first difference is
that, instead of the employee-level pair, observations are denoted by employee-manager pair, where
i denotes the employee and m the manager, respectively. Let Sharei,m be the share of breaks that
43 We   selected these observables based on a study by Bandiera et al. (2009) showing that managers exhibit favoritism
   under low powered incentives in particular, so we are careful to re-weight so that the incentive schemes and mas-
   culinity across the two groups are balanced.
44 For a binned scatterplot of these two relationships, see Appendix Figure A.15.ii.
45 The smaller sample size is due to two reasons. First, we collected survey data on a minority of employees. Second,

   even among surveyed employees, we measure their social interactions only at a handful of points in time (as opposed
   to the monthly data for four years from the administrative records).


                                                         28
employee i took with manager m. Consider the following regression:

     Sharei,m =      jF, post · Fi · Dij,m +   jM                      j
                                                , post · (1 - Fi ) · Di,m +                                             (5)
                   jJG                        jJG

                  +     jF, pre · Fi · Dij,m+1 +   jM                     j      F   M
                                                    , pre · (1 - Fi ) · Di,m+1 + m + m + Xi,m  + i,m
                      jJG                           jJG

      j
    Di,m is a dummy variable that equals 1 if individual i experiences an event of type j from
manager m - 1 to manager m. As in Section 2.2, we interact these dummies with gender indicators
to allow the effects to be gender-specific. The coefficients  jF           M
                                                               , post and  j, post are intended to capture
                                                                                                                    j
the change in social interactions after the employee transitions to the new manager. In turn, Di,m+1
is a dummy variable that equals 1 if individual i experiences an event of type j from manager m to
manager m + 1. The coefficients next to these variables ( jF           M
                                                            , pre and  j, pre ) are intended to provide the
usual tests for pre-trends: they measure whether future manager transitions affect the employee's
social interactions with the current manager. Additionally, the regression includes gender-specific
time effects (m  F and  M ) and a set of basic controls (X ): unit size, manager's pay grade, and
                         m                                 i,m
position title dummies.
     Figure 8 presents the results from the stylized event-study analysis. Figure 8.a presents the
results for the gender manager transitions. The findings suggest that social interactions may play
a role in the male-to-male promotion advantage. The coefficients for the male employees are con-
sistent in sign with the effects on pay grades reported in the previous section. The male coefficient
labeled "after transition" corresponds to the effects following a transition. For male employees,
the share of breaks taken with the manager increases by 15 percentage points (p-value=0.017) after
transitioning from a female manager to a male manager, relative to transitioning from a female
manager to another female manager. This coefficient is statistically and economically significant:
it is almost as large as the within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable (17.4
percentage points). The corresponding falsification test is reported in Figure 8.a as the coefficient
labeled "before transition". As expected, the falsification coefficients is close to zero (0.2 percent-
age points) and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.987).
     For female employees, in contrast, there is no robust evidence that the share of breaks with the
manager changed as a result of a change in gender of the manager.46 This evidence also aligns with
the lack of female-to-female advantage in promotions. One possible interpretation is that female
managers socialize equally with female and male employees, thus offering no advantages to one
gender. Another possible interpretation is that even if male and female employees spend equal time
with their manager, gender differences may still occur in their ability to convert those interactions
into a higher promotion probability. That is, female employees may be less successful than male
employees at taking advantage of opportunities to schmooze with managers.
     We also validate this research design by estimating the stylized event-study with our placebo
46 Figure  8.a shows that even though for female employees the "after transition" coefficient (-8 percentage points) is
  statistically significant (p-value = 0.037), it is probably spurious because it is almost identical to the corresponding
  falsification coefficient (-11 percentage points, p-value=0.080).



                                                           29
events. Figure 8.b presents the results. As expected, both even-birthday and odd-birthday employ-
ees are equally likely to share breaks with their manager after transitioning from an even-birthday
manager to an odd-birthday manager (relative to transitioning from an even-birthday manager to
another even-birthday manager).


5.3    Co-Smoking Shocks to Social Interactions
For a final test of the social interactions channel, ideally we would flip a coin to determine the
frequency of social interactions among male employees and male managers. According to the
schmoozing channel, the male employees assigned to socialize more with their male managers
should be promoted faster. Although this ideal experiment is not feasible, we exploit quasi-
experimental variation based on the transitions between non-smoker and smoker managers.
    We conjecture that for an employee who smokes, having a manager who also smokes can in-
crease the frequency of their social interactions due to shared smoking breaks. We start by using
the survey measure of shared breaks to test this conjecture. Figure 8.c is equivalent to Figure 8.a
except focusing on smoking status rather than gender. The results from Figure 8.c confirm the con-
jecture that sharing a smoking habit constitutes a significant shock to social interactions between
an employee and manager. The "after transition" coefficient indicates that male employees who
smoke increase the share of breaks taken with their managers by 25 percentage points (p-value =
0.002) after transitioning from a non-smoking male manager to a smoking male manager (relative
to transitioning from a non-smoking male manager to another non-smoking male manager). In
contrast, the corresponding coefficient for non-smoking employees is close to zero (-3 percentage
points) and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.702). Moreover, the falsification coefficients, la-
beled "before transition", are close to zero and statistically insignificant, both for the smoker and
non-smoker employees.
    These results confirm that a shared smoking habit increases socialization between an employee
and manager. According to the social interactions channel, this increased socialization should result
in higher promotion rates for those employees. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the event-
study effects of smoker-manager transitions on pay grades. Figure 9 presents the results, which
are identical to Figure 2, except focusing on manager smoking status rather than manager gender.
Note that the event-study coefficients from Figure 9 (on smoker transitions) are substantially less
precisely estimated than the corresponding coefficients from Figure 2 (on gender transitions), due
to differences in sample sizes. The smoker analysis is limited to male employees and managers,
who constitute less than half the sample, and is further limited to employees and managers for
whom data on smoking status is available. Thus, the analysis of smoker transitions are based on
a sample size (94,750 observations) that is roughly a quarter of the sample size used for gender
transitions (380,964 observations).
    Figure 9.a compares the pay grades of male employees who transition from a male manager
who does not smoke to a male manager who smokes (relative to transitioning from a male manager
who does not smoke to another male manager who does not smoke). Prior to the event date, the
coefficients for the smoking employees (denoted by the violet triangles) are statistically indistin-

                                                 30
guishable from the coefficients for the non-smoking employees (denoted by the orange diamonds).
This evidence indicates that the assumption about parallel trends holds. In contrast, after the transi-
tion date, the evolution of pay grades starts to gradually diverge between smoking and non-smoking
employees. At 10 quarters after transitioning to a smoker manager (relative to transitioning to an-
other non-smoker manager), the pay grades of smoker employees increase by an additional 0.70
points (p-value=0.002). In contrast, the corresponding point estimate is close to zero (0.07) and
statistically insignificant (p-value=0.722) for the non-smoking employees.
    We also examine the reverse smoker-status transitions: among everyone who starts with a smok-
ing manager, we compare those who transition to a non-smoking manager versus those who transi-
tion to another smoking manager. Unfortunately, these types of transitions are much less common,
resulting in estimates that are highly imprecisely estimated. Figure 9.b presents the results. The
point estimates have the expected sign, indicating that smoker employees are less likely to be pro-
moted as a result of losing their smoking manager. However, the point estimates are somewhat
smaller in magnitude, less precisely estimated, and thus statistically insignificant.
    For a more direct measurement of the smoker-to-smoker advantage, Figure 10 presents the
double-difference estimates. Figure 10.a corresponds to the difference of coefficients between
smoking and non-smoking employees from Figure 9.a. At its peak in the 8th quarter after the
transition, the smoker-to-smoker advantages is estimated at 0.84 pay grades (p-value < 0.001) and
remains 0.63 pay grades (p-value= 0.035) 10 quarters after the transition. Figure 10.b corresponds
to the manager transitions in the opposite direction; the smoker-to-smoker advantage of 0.37 pay
grades is statistically insignificant at its peak 7 quarters out, with a p-value of 0.117. Figure 10.c
presents the dual-double-difference estimates, which combine the transitions in both directions.
Due to noisy estimates in the late quarters of the manager transitions with an outgoing smoking
manager, the estimated smoker-to-smoker advantage at 10 quarters is somewhat understated (0.30
pay grades, p-value = 0.145). However, in quarters 7, 8, and 9, the smoker-to-smoker advantage is
large (0.49, 0.49, and 0.44) and statistically significant (p-values 0.003, 0.013, and 0.029).
    We also present productivity results for smoking events in Appendix A.12. We find no evi-
dence of differential performance (sales revenue) or effort (hours worked in the office, retention or
absenteeism) after the manager switch. If the smoking managers were better at allocating tasks or
roles to smokers through an information advantage gained during smoking breaks, in most circum-
stances this would translate into higher sales revenue within 10 quarters after the manager switch.
However, we find no evidence of allocation improvements; mean sales revenue across smokers and
non-smokers remains constant across manager switch events and the variance remains constant as
well.
    The surprising similarly-sized boost in social interactions arising from a match in smoking sta-
tus and a match between males allows for a simple comparison of subsequent patterns of employee
promotions. Both the timing and magnitude of the smoker-to-smoker advantage are similar to those
of the male-to-male advantage reported in the previous section. The smoker-to-smoker advantage
in the share of breaks together (a 25 percentage point increase, from Figure 8.c is comparable in
magnitude to the corresponding male-to-male advantage (15 percentage points, from Figure 8.a) ­
we cannot reject the null hypothesis that these two effects are equal (p-value=0.360). At 10 quarters

                                                  31
after the transition, the smoker-to-smoker advantage (0.63 pay grades, from Figure 10.a) is statis-
tically indistinguishable from the corresponding male-to-male advantage (0.65 pay grades, from
Figure 3.a), with a p-value of the difference 0.956.
    In the appendix, we present some additional robustness checks. Given the differences by gender
in rates of smoking (33% of men smoke, and less than 5% of women smoke), a natural question
is whether the male-to-male advantage arises purely because of co-smoking between men. In Ap-
pendix A.15, we show that only a small fraction of the male-to-male advantage can be attributed
directly to the smoker-to-smoker advantage. Smoking-breaks are likely just one of several social
outlets men share. Appendix A.16 further shows that the results are robust using a different criteria
to code the smoker status.


6    Conclusions
We test the old boys' club hypothesis using data from a real-world corporation. At this firm, man-
ager rotations across teams are common and create transitions in the gender of the manager that
are largely out of the employee's control. We use an event-study analysis of these manager tran-
sitions to show that male employees are promoted at a faster rate when assigned to male manager
than when assigned to a female manager. Women, in turn, are promoted at the same rate whether
they are assigned to a male or female manager. The magnitude of this male-to-male advantage in
promotions explains over one-third of the gender gap in pay grades, but it cannot be explained by
gender differences in attrition, effort, or performance.
    We provide evidence that social interactions play a role in the male-to-male advantage in pro-
motions. The effects of male managers on male employees is only evident in positions where
managers and employees work in close physical proximity, which is a necessary condition for the
social interactions channel. We show that the male-to-male advantage in promotions coincides with
an increase in the frequency of social interactions with the manager. Furthermore, we provide ev-
idence that social interactions are important even among male employees: when male employees
who smoke transitioned to male managers who smoke, they took breaks with their managers more
often and were subsequently promoted at higher rates.
    Thus far we have evidence that some contextual features may be important for the male-to-male
advantage. In the case where the employee and manager are physically distant, such as in traveling
sales roles or when the manager is assigned to sit on a different floor than the employee, the male-
to-male advantage disappears. We also find that two regions of the country with distinct cultural
norms and attitudes toward gender equality predicts differences in the male-to-male advantage at
work. In the region with long-standing communist rule and more equal gender roles, the male-to-
male advantage is weaker than in regions colonized early by Europe, where people tend to believe
men are better equipped for executive roles.
    Our identification strategy can be applied to other contexts. The rotation of managers is com-
mon in large corporations, and the data necessary for the analysis, such as pay grades, demograph-
ics, and manager assignments, are likely collected and preserved by most large organizations. We


                                                 32
hope this methodology will be applied to other firms, countries, and industries, which will help to
generalize the findings and identify where the male-to-male advantage is most pervasive and why.


References
Agarwal, S., W. Qian, D. M. Reeb, and T. F. Sing (2016). Playing the boys game: Golf buddies and board
  diversity. American Economic Review 106(5), 272­276.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013). On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2), 469­530.
Azmat, G. and R. Ferrer (2017). Gender Gaps in Performance: Evidence from Young Lawyers. Journal of
  Political Economy 125(5), 1306­1355.
Babcock, L., M. P. Recalde, and L. Vesterlund (2017). Gender Differences in the Allocation of Low-
  Promotability Tasks: The Role of Backlash. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 107 (5),
  131­135.
Bagues, M., M. Sylos-Labini, and N. Zinovyeva (2017). Does the Gender Composition of Scientific Com-
  mittees Matter? American Economic Review 107 (4), 1207­1238.
Bandiera, O., I. Barankaray, and I. Rasul (2010). Social Incentives in the Workplace. Review of Economic
  Studies 77 (2), 417­458.
Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2009). Social Connections and Incentives in the Workplace: Evi-
  dence From Personnel Data. Econometrica 77 (4), 1047­1094.
Bell, L. A. (2005). Women-Led Firms and the Gender Gap in Top Executive Jobs. IZA Discussion Paper
  No. 1689.
Bertrand, M., S. E. Black, S. Jensen, and A. Lleras-Muney (2019). Breaking the Glass Ceiling? The Effect
  of Board Quotas on Female Labour Market Outcomes in Norway. Review of Economic Studies 86(1),
  191­239.
Bertrand, M., R. Burgess, A. Chawla, and G. Xu (2018). Social Proximity and Bureaucrat Performance:
  Evidence from India. NBER Working Paper No. 25389.
Bertrand, M., C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2010). Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the
  Financial and Corporate Sectors. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3), 228­255.
Boelmann, B., A. Raute, and U. Schönberg (2020). Wind of Change? Cultural Determinants of Maternal
  Labor Supply. Mimeo.
Brogaard, J., J. Engelberg, and C. A. Parsons (2014). Networks and productivity: Causal evidence from
  editor rotations. Journal of Financial Economics 111(1), 251­270.
Bronson, M. A. and P. S. Thoursie (2019). The Wage Growth and Within-Firm Mobility of Men and Women:
  New Evidence and Theory. Working Paper.
Bursztyn, L., T. Fujiwara, and A. Pallais (2017). Acting Wife: Marriage Market Incentives. American
  Economic Review 107 (11), 3288­3319.
Bursztyn, L., A. Gonzalez, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2018). Misperceived Social Norms: Female Labor
  Force Participation in Saudi Arabia. NBER Working Paper No. 24736.
Cai, J. and A. Szeidl (2018). Interfirm relationships and business performance. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 133(3), 1229­1282.



                                                   33
Card, D., S. Dellavigna, P. Funk, and N. Iriberri (2019). Are Referees and Editors in Economics Gender
  Neutral? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Cardoso, A. R. and R. Winter-Ebmer (2010). Female-Led Firms and Gender Wage Policies. Industrial and
  Labor Relations Review 64(1), 143­163.
Coffman, K., C. B. Flikkema, and O. Shurchkov (2019). Gender Stereotypes in Deliberation and Team
  Decisions. Working Paper.
Cortés, P. and J. Pan (2019). When time binds: Substitutes for household production, returns to working
  long hours, and the skilled gender wage gap. Journal of Labor Economics 37 (2), 351­398.
Cruz, C. and C. Tolentino (2019). Gender, Social Recognition, and Political Influence. Working Paper.
Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018). How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects of Salary Compar-
  isons. NBER Working Paper No. 24841.
Dahl, G. B., A. Kotsadam, and D.-O. Rooth (2018). Does Integration Change Gender Attitudes? The Effect
  of Randomly Assigning Women to Traditionally Male Teams. NBER Working Paper No. 24351.
Dalvit, N., A. Patel, and J. Tan (2018). Intra-firm Hierarchies and Gender Gaps. Working Paper.
Elting, L. (2018). How To Navigate A Boys' Club Culture. Forbes, July 27 2018.
Field, E., S. Jayachandran, R. Pande, and N. Rigol (2016). Friendship at Work: Can Peer Effects Catalyze
   Female Entrepreneurship? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(2), 125­153.
Flabbi, L., M. Macis, A. Moro, and F. Schivardi (2019). Do Female Executives Make a Difference? The
   Impact of Female Leadership on Gender Gaps and Firm Performance. The Economic Journal 129(622),
   2390­2423.
Giuliano, L., D. I. Levine, and J. Leonard (2011). Racial Bias in the Manager-Employee Relationship.
  Journal of Human Resources 46, 26­52.
Glover, D., A. Pallais, and W. Pariente (2017). Discrimination as a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy: Evidence from
  French Grocery Store. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), 1219­1260.
Goldin, C. (2014). A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter. American Economic Review 104(4),
  1091­1119.
Goldin, C., S. P. Kerr, C. Olivetti, and E. Barth (2017). The expanding gender earnings gap: Evidence from
  the LEHD-2000 census. American Economic Review 107 (5), 110­114.
Gray, J. and A. Barbara (2013). Work With Me: Eight Blind Spots Between Men and Women in Business.
  Palgrave Macmillan.
Grissom, J. A., J. Nicholson-Crotty, and L. Keiser (2012). Does My Boss's Gender Matter? Explaining Job
  Satisfaction and Employee Turnover in the Public Sector. Journal of Public Administration Research and
  Theory 22(4), 649­673.
Hastings, J. M., R. Kessler, and J. Shapiro (2019). The Effect of SNAP on the Composition of Purchased
  Foods: Evidence and Implications. Working Paper.
Hill, A. J. (2017). The Positive Influence of Female College Students on their Male Peers. Labour Eco-
  nomics 44(July 2016), 151­160.
Hjort, J. (2014). Ethnic Divisions and Production in Firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 4(4), 1899­
  1946.
Hoffman, M. and S. Tadelis (2020). People Management Skills, Employee Attrition, and Manager Rewards:
  An Empirical Analysis.



                                                    34
Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, C. I. Jones, and P. J. Klenow (2019). The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic
  Growth. Econometrica 87 (5), 1439­1474.
Husain, A., D. A. Matsa, and A. R. Miller (2018). Do Male Workers Prefer Male Leaders? An Analysis of
  Principals' Effects on Teacher Retention. NBER Working Paper No. 25263.
Isaksson, S. (2019). It Takes Two: Gender Differences in Group Work. Working Paper.
Jayachandran, S. (2020). Social Norms as a Barrier to Women's Employment in Developing Countries.
  Working Papers.
Karpowitz, C., J. Preece, and O. Stoddard (2020). Strength in Numbers : A Field Experiment in Gender ,
  Influence , and Group Dynamics. Mimeo, 1­80.
Kleven, H., C. Landais, and J. E. Sogaard (2019). Children and Gender Inequality: Evidence from Denmark.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11(4), 121.
Kofoed, M. S. and E. McGovney (2019). The Effect of Same-Gender or Same-Race Role Models on Occu-
  pation Choice. The Journal of Human Resources 54(2), 430­467.
Kunze, A. and A. R. Miller (2017). Women Helping Women? Evidence from Private Sector Data on
  Workplace Hierarchies. The Review of Economics and Statistics 99(5), 769­775.
Kuziemko, I., J. Pan, J. Shen, and E. Washington (2018). The Mommy Effect: Do Women Anticipate the
  Employment Effects of Motherhood? NBER Working Paper Series, 24740.
Lang, I. H. (2011). Co-Opt the Old Boys' Club. Harvard Business Review, November 2 2011.
Lee, A. S. (2014). How to break up the old boys' club in your office. Quartz, April 8 2014.
Lehmann, J.-Y. (2013). Job Assignment and Promotion Under Statistical Discrimination: Evidence from the
  Early Careers of Lawyers. Working Paper.
Lerner, J. and U. Malmendier (2013). With a little help from my (random) friends: Success and failure in
  post-business school entrepreneurship. Review of Financial Studies 26(10), 2411­2452.
Lleras-Muney, A., M. Miller, S. Sheng, and V. Sovero (2019). Party On: The Labor Market Returns to Social
  Networks and Socializing. pp. 1­69.
Manning, A. and J. Swaffield (2008). The Gender Gap in Early-Career Wage Growth. Economic Jour-
 nal 118(530), 983­1024.
Mas, A. and E. Moretti (2009). Peers at Work. American Economic Review 99(1), 112­145.
McKinsey & Company (2019). Women in the Workplace. Technical report.
Mengel, F. Gender Differences in Networking. Economic Journal.
Ranganathan, A. (2019). Getting their Hands Dirty: How Female Managers Motivate Female Worker Pro-
  ductivity through Subordinate Scut Work. Working Paper.
Sarsons, H. (2017). Interpreting Signals in the Labor Market: Evidence from Medical Referrals. Working
  Paper.
Sarsons, H., K. Gërxhani, E. Reuben, and A. Schram (2019). Gender Differences in Recognition for Group
  Work. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Schönberg, U. and J. Ludsteck (2014). Expansions in maternity leave coverage and mothers' labor market
  outcomes after childbirth. Journal of Labor Economics 32(3), 469­505.
Shue, K. (2013). Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random assignment of MBA
  peers. Review of Financial Studies 26(6), 1401­1442.
Stevenson, B. and J. Wolfers (2006). Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce Laws and Family


                                                    35
  Distress. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), 267­288.
Voth, J. and G. Xu (2019). Patronage for Productivity: Selection and Performance in the Age of Sail. Working
  Paper.
Wasserman, M. (2018). Hours Constraints, Occupational Choice, and Gender: Evidence from Medical
 Residents. Working Paper.
Xu, G. (2018). The Costs of Patronage: Evidence from the British Empire. American Economic Re-
  view 108(11), 3170­3198.
Yildirmaz, A., C. Ryan, and J. Nezaj (2019). 2019 State of the Workforce Report: Pay, Promotions and
  Retention. Technical report, ADP Research Institute.




                                                    36
Figure 1: Link between Past Exposure to Male Managers and Future Pay Grade Changes

   Pay Grade Change, +10 Quarters Later
                                          1.50
                                                          Female Employee
                                                          Male Employee
                                          1.25



                                          1.00



                                          0.75



                                          0.50
                                                 0.00       0.25          0.50     0.75         1.00
                                                        Share of Male Managers, Previous Year
             Notes: See Section 4.1 for details about the regression specification. This binned scat-
             terplot shows the relationship between the share of male managers in the previous year
             and the change in pay grade at 10 quarters later. Results based on employees who
             are in the panel for at least 14 quarters (so that we can compute the left-hand-side and
             right-hand-side variables without truncation). The red squares correspond to the female
             employees while the blue circles correspond to the male employees. The analysis uses
             the following control variables: the employee's seniority, an indicator variable for the
             employee's gender and initial pay grade fixed effects. The 95% confidence intervals
             are represented by the shaded areas.




                                                                     37
                                   Figure 2: Effects of Manager's Gender on Pay Grade: Single-Differences Estimates

                                a. Female to Male Manager                                                               b. Male to Female Manager
                              minus Female to Female Manager                                                            minus Male to Male Manager
             1.00                                                                                     1.00
                       Female Employee                                                                         Female Employee
             0.75      Male Employee                                                                  0.75     Male Employee
             0.50                                                                                     0.50
Pay Grade




                                                                                         Pay Grade
             0.25                                                                                     0.25
             0.00                                                                                     0.00
            -0.25                                                                                    -0.25
            -0.50                                                                                    -0.50
            -0.75                                                                                    -0.75
            -1.00                                                                                    -1.00
38




                  0
                 -9
                 -8
                 -7
                 -6
                 -5
                 -4
                 -3
                 -2
                 -1
                   0
                 +1
                 +2
                 +3
                 +4
                 +5
                 +6
                 +7
                 +8
                +19
                  0




                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                          -9
                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                          -3
                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                          +1
                                                                                                          +2
                                                                                                          +3
                                                                                                          +4
                                                                                                          +5
                                                                                                          +6
                                                                                                          +7
                                                                                                          +8
                                                                                                         +19
                                                                                                           0
                -1




                 +




                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                          +
                         Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                                     Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959             All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959
   observations of 14,638 employees (5,193 Male & 9,445 Female). 2,712                    observations of 14,638 employees (5,193 Male & 9,445g    Female). 4,157 g
     Notes: See
   employees   (729 Section   2 for
                    Male & 1,983    details
                                  Female)    about the
                                           experience    regression
                                                       events:         specification. Each
                                                               1,417 transitions            panel plots
                                                                                          employees        single-difference
                                                                                                      (1,309                   estimates
                                                                                                             Male & 2,848 Female)           Gender
                                                                                                                                    experience  events: 1,571 transitions
                                                                                                                                                     Transition ,t - Same Gender,t
     where g  {Male, Female} indexes the gender of the employee and the subscript indexes the transition event type and time since the event.
   from a female  manager  to a male manager  and  1,916 from  a female manager  to       from a male  manager  to a female manager   and 3,766 from a  male  manager  to    All
   another female manager. The within-employee standard deviation of the                  another male manager. The within-employee standard deviation of the
     coefficients   were   estimated
   dependent variable is 0.475.       from    a single  regression    including   380,959 observations     of 14,638
                                                                                          dependent variable is 0.475. employees     (5,193   Male   &  9,445     Female). Panel
        (a) corresponds to the difference between transitions from a female manager to a male manager and transitions from a female manager to another
        female manager. 2,712 employees (729 Male & 1,983 Female) experience events: 1,417 transitions from a female manager to a male manager
        and 1,916 from a female manager to another female manager. Panel (b) corresponds to the difference between transitions from a male manager
        to a female manager and transitions from a male manager to another male manager. 4,157 employees (1,309 Male & 2,848 Female) experience
        events: 1,571 transitions from a male manager to a female manager and 3,766 from a male manager to another male manager. The 95% confidence
        intervals are presented in brackets, with two-way clustering by manager and employee. The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent
        variable is 0.475.
                                              Figure 3: Effects of Manager's Gender on Pay Grade: Double-Differences Estimates

                    a. Female to Male Manager minus                                                  b. Male to Female Manager minus                                                 c. Dual-Double-Differences:
                         Female to Female Manager                                                         Male to Male Manager                                                          Combined (a) and (b)
             1.00                                                                           1.00                                                                          1.00
                      Male - Female                                                                 Male - Female                                                                 Male - Female (Dual)
             0.75                                                                           0.75                                                                          0.75
             0.50                                                                           0.50                                                                          0.50




                                                                                                                                                             Pay Grade
Pay Grade




                                                                               Pay Grade
             0.25                                                                           0.25                                                                          0.25
             0.00                                                                           0.00                                                                          0.00
            -0.25                                                                          -0.25                                                                         -0.25
            -0.50                                                                          -0.50                                                                         -0.50
            -0.75                                                                          -0.75                                                                         -0.75
            -1.00                                                                          -1.00                                                                         -1.00




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                              -9
                                                                                                                                                                              -8
                                                                                                                                                                              -7
                                                                                                                                                                              -6
                                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                                                                                                                                                              -4
                                                                                                                                                                              -3
                                                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                                                                                              -1
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                              +1
                                                                                                                                                                              +2
                                                                                                                                                                              +3
                                                                                                                                                                              +4
                                                                                                                                                                              +5
                                                                                                                                                                              +6
                                                                                                                                                                              +7
                                                                                                                                                                              +8
                                                                                                                                                                             +19
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                   0
                 -9
                 -8
                 -7
                 -6
                 -5
                 -4
                 -3
                 -2
                 -1
                   0
                 +1
                 +2
                 +3
                 +4
                 +5
                 +6
                 +7
                 +8
                +19
                   0



                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                -9
                                                                                                -8
                                                                                                -7
                                                                                                -6
                                                                                                -5
                                                                                                -4
                                                                                                -3
                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                +1
                                                                                                +2
                                                                                                +3
                                                                                                +4
                                                                                                +5
                                                                                                +6
                                                                                                +7
                                                                                                +8
                                                                                               +19
                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                              +
                -1




                 +




                                                                                               -1




                                                                                                +
                         Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                           Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                           Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959     All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959    All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959
39




   observations of 14,638 employees (5,193 Male & 9,445 Female). 2,712            observations of 14,638 employees (5,193 Male & 9,445 Female). 4,157           observations of 14,638 employees (5,193 Male & 9,445 Female). 6,021
   employees (729 Male & 1,983 Female) experience events: 1,417 transitions employees (1,309 Male & 2,848 Female) experience events: 1,571 transitions employees (1,839 Male & 4,182 Female) experience events: 1,417 transitions
   from a female
           Notes: manager
                        See to a male manager
                               Section     2 and
                                              for1,916
                                                    details     female manager
                                                         from a about          to from a male manager
                                                                         the regression                  to a female manager
                                                                                                 specification.        All and    3,766 from a male
                                                                                                                             coefficients        aremanager  to from a
                                                                                                                                                      estimated        female manager
                                                                                                                                                                      from     the same to a male manager (F2M):
                                                                                                                                                                                              regression           1,916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                that      F2F, 1,571 M2F,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       includes           3,766
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     380,964
   another female manager. The within-employee standard deviation of the          another male manager. The within-employee standard deviation of the           M2M. The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable is
           observations of 14,638 workers (5,193 Maledependent
   dependent  variable is 0.475.                                                    & 9,445        Female).
                                                                                             variable is 0.475.    The dependent variable is the pay grade of the employee. The estimates shown
                                                                                                                                                                0.475.

              in the graph are based on the coefficients of the event-study variables. The coefficients shown in panel (a) correspond to the double-differences
                 M        M         F        F             M       F
              (F2M  ,t - F2F,t ) - (F2M,t - F2F,t ) where  and  are effects for male and female workers, respectively and F 2M , F 2F are manager transition
              events from female to male managers and from one female manager to another, respectively. Panel (b) is equivalent to panel (a), but based on the
                                                                                                                                               M        M
              comparison between transitions from a male manager to a female manager and from a male manager to another male manager: (M2F         ,t - M2M,t ) -
                 F        F
              (M2F  ,t - M2M,t ). Panel (c) corresponds to the average between the coefficients from panel (a) and the (negative value of) the coefficients from
                                                                                1    M       M          F       F           M       M          F        F
              panel (b). This "symmetric" double-differences estimates is then 2  {(F2M ,t - F2F,t ) - (F2M,t - F2F,t ) - [(M2F,t - M2M,t ) - (M2F,t - M2M,t )]}.
              The 95% confidence intervals are presented in brackets, with two-way clustering by manager and employee.
                                                                           Figure 4: Placebo: Double-Difference Estimates

                      a. Even to Odd Manager minus                                                   b. Odd to Even Manager minus                                                c. Dual-Double-Differences:
                          Even to Even Manager                                                           Odd to Odd Manager                                                         Combined (a) and (b)
             1.00                                                                          1.00                                                                       1.00
                      Odd BD - Even BD                                                             Odd BD - Even BD                                                           Odd BD - Even BD (Dual)
             0.75                                                                          0.75                                                                       0.75
             0.50                                                                          0.50                                                                       0.50




                                                                                                                                                         Pay Grade
Pay Grade




                                                                              Pay Grade
             0.25                                                                          0.25                                                                       0.25
             0.00                                                                          0.00                                                                       0.00
            -0.25                                                                         -0.25                                                                      -0.25
            -0.50                                                                         -0.50                                                                      -0.50
            -0.75                                                                         -0.75                                                                      -0.75
            -1.00                                                                         -1.00                                                                      -1.00




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                          -9
                                                                                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                                                                                          -3
                                                                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                          +1
                                                                                                                                                                          +2
                                                                                                                                                                          +3
                                                                                                                                                                          +4
                                                                                                                                                                          +5
                                                                                                                                                                          +6
                                                                                                                                                                          +7
                                                                                                                                                                          +8
                                                                                                                                                                         +19
                                                                                                                                                                            0
                   0
                 -9
                 -8
                 -7
                 -6
                 -5
                 -4
                 -3
                 -2
                 -1
                   0
                 +1
                 +2
                 +3
                 +4
                 +5
                 +6
                 +7
                 +8
                +19
                   0



                                                                                                 0
                                                                                               -9
                                                                                               -8
                                                                                               -7
                                                                                               -6
                                                                                               -5
                                                                                               -4
                                                                                               -3
                                                                                               -2
                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                               +1
                                                                                               +2
                                                                                               +3
                                                                                               +4
                                                                                               +5
                                                                                               +6
                                                                                               +7
                                                                                               +8
                                                                                              +19
                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                                                          +
                -1




                 +




                                                                                              -1




                                                                                               +
                        Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                          Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                        Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
40




   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959    All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959 All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959
   observations of 14,638 employees (7,105 Odd BD & 7,533 Even BD). 4,536 observations of 14,638 employees (7,105 Odd BD & 7,533 Even BD). 4,244 observations of 14,638 employees (7,105 Odd BD & 7,533 Even BD). 6,947
   employees (2,151 Odd BD & 2,385 Even BD) experience events: 3,014             employees (2,089 Odd BD & 2,155 Even BD) experience events: 2,922           employees (3,363 Odd BD & 3,584 Even BD) experience events: 2,922
   transitions from a even-birthday
            Notes:      All          manager to awere
                                                   odd-birthday
                              coefficients                       manager and
                                                           estimated         fromtransitions
                                                                                    a  singlefromregression
                                                                                                   a odd-birthday manager   to a even-birthday
                                                                                                                    including       380,964    manager   and transitions
                                                                                                                                                                      of from
                                                                                                                                                    observations              a odd-birthday
                                                                                                                                                                          14,638              manager to
                                                                                                                                                                                      employees          a even-birthday
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (7,533      Even      BD (O2E):
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          manager  &
   3,131 from a even-birthday manager to another even-birthday manager. The 2,453 from a odd-birthday manager to another odd-birthday manager. The 2,453 O2O, 3,014 E2O, 3,131 E2E. The within-employee standard deviation
            7,105 Odd BD). Panel (a): 4,536 employees (2,385 Even BD & 2,151 Odd BD) experience events: 3,014 transitions from a even-birthday
   within-employee   standard deviation of the dependent  variable is 0.475.     within-employee    standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.475.   of the dependent variable is 0.475.

              manager to a odd-birthday manager and 3,131 from a even-birthday manager to another even-birthday manager. Panel (b): 4,244 employees
              (2,155 Even BD & 2,089 Odd BD) experience events: 2,922 transitions from a odd-birthday manager to a even-birthday manager and 2,453
              from a odd-birthday manager to another odd-birthday manager. Panel (c): Panel (c) corresponds to the average between the coefficients
              from panel (a) and the (negative value of) the coefficients from panel (b). This "symmetric" double-differences estimates is then 1   E
                                                                                                                                                2 {(E2O,t -
                E          O       O           E       E           O         O
              E2E  ,t ) - (E2O,t - E20,t ) - [(O2E,t - O2O,t ) - (O2E,t - O2O,t )]}. The 95% confidence intervals are presented in brackets, with two-way
              clustering by manager and employee. The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.475.
                                                 Figure 5: Dual-Double-Differences Estimates: Additional Outcomes

                                                        a. Firm Exit                                                                   b. Log(Days Worked)
                              0.30                                                                                     0.3
                                         Male - Female (Dual)                                                                Male - Female (Dual)
                              0.20                                                                                     0.2




                                                                                                   Ln(Days Worked)
                              0.10                                                                                     0.1
Left Firm




                              0.00                                                                                     0.0
                             -0.10                                                                                    -0.1
                             -0.20                                                                                    -0.2
                             -0.30                                                                                    -0.3
                                      0
                                     -9
                                     -8
                                     -7
                                     -6
                                     -5
                                     -4
                                     -3
                                     -2
                                     -1
                                       0
                                     +1
                                     +2
                                     +3
                                     +4
                                     +5
                                     +6
                                     +7
                                     +8
                                    +19
                                      0




                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                          -9
                                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                                          -3
                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                          +1
                                                                                                                          +2
                                                                                                                          +3
                                                                                                                          +4
                                                                                                                          +5
                                                                                                                          +6
                                                                                                                          +7
                                                                                                                          +8
                                                                                                                         +1 9
                                                                                                                           0
                                    -1




                                     +




                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                          +
                                           Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                                  Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
         All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 359,225                     All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 352,282
         observations of 14,601 employees (5,157 Male & 9,444 Female). 6,579                            observations of 14,154 employees (4,913 Male & 9,241 Female). 5,647
         employees (2,046 Male & 4,533 Female) experience events: 1,865 transitions                     employees (1,697 Male & 3,950 Female) experience events: 1,261 transitions
         from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 2,106 F2F, 1,770 M2F, 4,243                     from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 1,766 F2F, 1,490 M2F, 3,388
         M2M. The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable is                       M2M. The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable is
         0.177.                                                                                         0.138.


                                                   c. Log(Work Hours)                                                                  d. Sales Revenues
                              0.4                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                             Male - Female (Dual)
Ln(Avg Daily Hours Worked)




                                       Male - Female (Dual)
                              0.3                                                                                     150
                              0.2                                                                                     100
                              0.1                                                                                      50
                                                                                                Sales




                              0.0                                                                                       0
                             -0.1                                                                                    -50
                             -0.2                                                                                    -100
                             -0.3                                                                                    -150
                             -0.4                                                                                    -200
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                         -9
                                                                                                                         -8
                                                                                                                         -7
                                                                                                                         -6
                                                                                                                         -5
                                                                                                                         -4
                                                                                                                         -3
                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                         +1
                                                                                                                         +2
                                                                                                                         +3
                                                                                                                         +4
                                                                                                                         +5
                                                                                                                         +6
                                                                                                                         +7
                                                                                                                         +8
                                                                                                                        +19
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                        -1




                                                                                                                         +
                                   0
                                 -9
                                 -8
                                 -7
                                 -6
                                 -5
                                 -4
                                 -3
                                 -2
                                 -1
                                   0
                                 +1
                                 +2
                                 +3
                                 +4
                                 +5
                                 +6
                                 +7
                                 +8
                                +19
                                   0
                                -1




                                 +




                                          Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                                  Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
                                                                                                 All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 136,341
         All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 104,215              observations of 6,244 employees (1,814 Male & 4,430 Female). 2,444
         observations of 4,875 employees (1,881 Male & 2,994 Female). 1,677                      employees (611 Male & 1,833 Female) experience events: 581 transitions
         employees (581 Male & 1,096 Female) experience events: 370 transitions                  from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 572 F2F, 542 M2F, 1,701
         from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 690 F2F, 548 M2F, 588 M2M.               M2M. The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable is
         The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.208.              95.1.


                             Notes: See Section 2 for details about the regression specification. These results are based on the symmetric specification reported
                             in panel (c) of Figure 3, which combines data on the four types of gender transitions. The only difference is that in this figure,
                             instead of pay grade, we use different dependent variables: in panel (a) the dependent variable is an indicator that takes the value
                             1 in every month after the employee left the firm (these results include additional events after the employees left the firm); in panel
                             (b) the dependent variable is the logarithm of the total number of days worked in the month (inferred from data on approved leaves
                             of absence); in panel (c) the dependent variable is the logarithm of the average number of hours worked in a given month (inferred
                             from data on swipes in and out of the building, and available for headquarter employees only); in panel (d) the dependent variable
                             is the sales revenue (available for employees with sales roles only) normalized to have mean 100. The 95% confidence intervals are
                             presented in brackets, with two-way clustering by manager and employee.

                                                                                              41
            Figure 6: Effects of Manager Gender on Pay Grade: Heterogeneity by North/South Birthplace (Dual-Double-Differences
            Estimates)


                                       a. Southern Units                                                                       b. Northern Units

             1.00                                                                                     1.00
                       Male - Female (Dual)                                                                    Male - Female (Dual)
             0.75                                                                                     0.75
             0.50                                                                                     0.50
Pay Grade




                                                                                         Pay Grade
             0.25                                                                                     0.25
             0.00                                                                                     0.00
            -0.25                                                                                    -0.25
            -0.50                                                                                    -0.50
42




            -0.75                                                                                    -0.75
            -1.00                                                                                    -1.00
                  0
                 -9
                 -8
                 -7
                 -6
                 -5
                 -4
                 -3
                 -2
                 -1
                   0
                 +1
                 +2
                 +3
                 +4
                 +5
                 +6
                 +7
                 +8
                +19
                  0




                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                          -9
                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                          -3
                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                          +1
                                                                                                          +2
                                                                                                          +3
                                                                                                          +4
                                                                                                          +5
                                                                                                          +6
                                                                                                          +7
                                                                                                          +8
                                                                                                         +19
                                                                                                           0
                -1




                 +




                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                          +
                         Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                                     Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959             All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 380,959
     Notes: See
   observations  of Section  2 for details
                    14,638 employees   (5,193about
                                              Male &the9,445  Female).specification.
                                                         regression    1,890         These  results use
                                                                                          observations  ofthe symmetric
                                                                                                           14,638 employeesspecification
                                                                                                                             (5,193 Male & reported   in panel
                                                                                                                                             9,445 Female).      (c) of Figure 3,
                                                                                                                                                              4,225
   employees   (566  Male &  1,324  Female) experience  events: 496 transitions           employees   (1,297  Male & 2,928 Female)  experience  events:
     based on the four types of gender transitions. We split the events in two subsets: South and North, based on the birthplace of the modal worker in 893 transitions
   from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 482 F2F, 399 M2F, 1,284                 from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 1,396 F2F, 1,130 M2F, 2,424
     the unit.
   M2M.          All coefficients
           The within-employee       are estimated
                                  standard  deviation from   the samevariable
                                                      of the dependent          is with 380,959
                                                                        regression        M2M. The observations    of 14,638
                                                                                                       within-employee         employees
                                                                                                                        standard deviation of(5,193   Male &
                                                                                                                                               the dependent     9,445
                                                                                                                                                              variable is Female).
   0.475. 95 CI  are trimmed  at -1 and 1.                                                0.475.
     1,890 employees (566 Male & 1,324 Female) in predominantly-southern units (panel (a)) experience events. There are 496 transitions from a
        female manager to a male manager (F2M): 482 F2F, 399 M2F, and 1,284 M2M. 4,225 employees (1,297 Male & 2,928 Female) in predominantly-
        northern units (panel (b)) experience events: 893 transitions from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 1,396 F2F, 1,130 M2F, and 2,424
        M2M. The 95% confidence intervals are presented in brackets, with two-way clustering by manager and employee. Confidence intervals in panel
        (a) are trimmed at +1.
             Figure 7: Effects of Manager Gender on Pay Grade: Heterogeneity by Proximity to the Manager (Dual-Double-Differences
             Estimates)

                         a. Events with Higher-Proximity Managers                                                b. Events with Lower-Proximity Managers
             1.00                                                                                      1.00
                       Male - Female (Dual)                                                                    Male - Female (Dual)
             0.75                                                                                      0.75
             0.50                                                                                      0.50
Pay Grade




                                                                                          Pay Grade
             0.25                                                                                      0.25
             0.00                                                                                      0.00
            -0.25                                                                                     -0.25
            -0.50                                                                                     -0.50
            -0.75                                                                                     -0.75
 43




            -1.00                                                                                     -1.00
                  0
                 -9
                 -8
                 -7
                 -6
                 -5
                 -4
                 -3
                 -2
                 -1
                   0
                 +1
                 +2
                 +3
                 +4
                 +5
                 +6
                 +7
                 +8
                +19
                  0




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                           -9
                                                                                                           -8
                                                                                                           -7
                                                                                                           -6
                                                                                                           -5
                                                                                                           -4
                                                                                                           -3
                                                                                                           -2
                                                                                                           -1
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                           +1
                                                                                                           +2
                                                                                                           +3
                                                                                                           +4
                                                                                                           +5
                                                                                                           +6
                                                                                                           +7
                                                                                                           +8
                                                                                                          +19
                                                                                                            0
                -1




                 +




                                                                                                          -1




                                                                                                           +
                         Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                                      Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 360,234               All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 360,234
          Notes:
   observations     See Section
                 of 13,814         2 for
                           employees      details
                                      (4,912 Male &about
                                                      8,902the
                                                             Female).   2,983 specification.
                                                                regression                     These results
                                                                                            observations        useemployees
                                                                                                          of 13,814   the symmetric     specification
                                                                                                                                (4,912 Male             reported
                                                                                                                                            & 8,902 Female).   3,056in panel (c)
   employees   (1,043  Male & 1,940 Female)  experience  events: 617  transitions           employees   (783 Male  &  2,273 Female)  experience events:
          of Figure 3, based on the four types of gender transitions. The only difference is that we split the events in two subsets: high and low      762 transitions
   from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 1,075 F2F, 754 M2F, 1,508                 from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 751 F2F, 742 M2F, 2,182
   M2M. proximity       events, based
           The within-employee         on deviation
                                 standard  whetherof the  position
                                                        the dependentof  the employee
                                                                        variable is     in the
                                                                                            M2M.   The of
                                                                                               month       the event was
                                                                                                         within-employee     of higher
                                                                                                                           standard     or lower
                                                                                                                                    deviation of the dependent to
                                                                                                                                                   proximity       the manager.
                                                                                                                                                               variable is
   0.475. All
          95 CI  are trimmed at -1 and 1.                                                   0.475.
               coefficients are estimated from the same regression with 360,239 observations of 13,814 employees (4,912 Male & 8,902 Female). The
             higher-proximity events (panel (a)) affect 2,983 employees (1,043 Male & 1,940 Female), with 743 transitions from a female manager to a
             male manager and 617 transitions from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 1,075 F2F, 754 M2F, 1,508 M2M. The lower-proximity
             events (panel (b)) affect 3,056 employees (783 Male & 2,273 Female), with 743 transitions from a female manager to a male manager and
             762 transitions from a female manager to a male manager (F2M): 751 F2F, 742 M2F, 2,182 M2M. The 95% confidence intervals are
             presented in brackets, with two-way clustering by manager and employee.
                                                         Figure 8: Effects of Manager Transitions on the Share of Breaks Taken with the Manager

                                       a. Female to Male Manager                                                                 b. Even to Odd Manager                                                         c. Non-Smoking to Smoking Mgr.
                                     minus Female to Female Manager                                                            minus Even to Even Manager                                                   minus Non-Smoking to Non-Smoking Mgr.

                                .4                                                                                    .4                                                                                   .4
                                      Female Employee                                                                       Even BD Employee                                                                     Non-Smoking Employee
Share of Breaks with Manager




                                                                                                                                                                           Share of Breaks with Manager
                                                                                      Share of Breaks with Manager
                                      Male Employee                                                                         Odd BD Employee                                                                      Smoking Employee
                                .2                                                                                    .2                                                                                   .2


                                0                                                                                     0                                                                                    0


                               -.2                                                                                   -.2                                                                                  -.2


                               -.4                                                                                   -.4                                                                                  -.4
                                     Before Transition          After Transition                                           Before Transition       After Transition                                             Before Transition       After Transition
44




          All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 4,843              All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 4,947             All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 1,287
          observations of 2,638 employees (698 Male & 1,940 Female). 411 employees              observations of 2,648 employees (1,352 Odd BD & 1,296 Even BD). 813                  observations of 699 employees (176 Smoking & 523 Non-Smoking). 196
          (82 Male & 329 Female) experience events: 235 transitions from a female               employees (429 Odd BD & 384 Even BD) experience events: 418 transitions              employees (51 Smoking & 145 Non-Smoking) experience events: 50 transitions
                                 Notes: Regression results with the share of breaks. See Section 5.2 for full econometric specification. Panel (a): This regression includes
          manager to a male manager and 241 from a female manager to another female
          manager. The within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable
                                                                                                from a even-birthday manager to a odd-birthday manager and 494 from a
                                                                                                even-birthday manager to another even-birthday manager. The
                                                                                                                                                                                     from a non-smoking manager to a smoking manager and 160 from a non-smoking
                                                                                                                                                                                     manager to another non-smoking manager. The within-employee standard
          is 0.174.              4,843 observations of 2,638 workers (698 Male & 1,940 Female). 411 employees (82 Male & 329 Female) of these workers experience a
                                                                                                within-employee standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.174.               deviation of the dependent variable is 0.159.

                                 transition event. There are 235 transitions from a female manager to a male manager and 241 from a female manager to another female
                                 manager. Panel (b): This regression includes 4,947 observations of 2,648 employees (1,352 Even BD & 1,296 Odd BD). 813 employees
                                 (429 Even BD & 384 Odd BD) experience events.418 transitions from a even-birthday manager to a odd-birthday manager and 494 from
                                 a even-birthday manager to another even-birthday manager. Panel (c): This regression includes 1,287 observations of 699 workers (176
                                 smoker & 523 Non-smoker). 193 employees (50 Smoking & 143 Non-Smoking) of these workers experience a transition event. There are
                                 49 transitions from a non-smoking manager to a smoking manager and 157 from a non-smoking manager to another non-smoking manager.
                                 The within-individual standard deviation of this outcome is 0.174. The 95% confidence intervals are presented in brackets, with two-way
                                 clustering by manager and employee.
                              Figure 9: Effects of Manager's Smoking Habits on Pay Grade: Single-Differences Estimates

                       a. Non-Smoking to Smoking Manager minus                                                b. Smoking to Non-Smoking Manager minus
                         Non-Smoking to Non-Smoking Manager                                                         Smoking to Smoking Manager

             1.00                                                                                     1.00
                      Non-Smoking Employee                                                                    Non-Smoking Employee
             0.75     Smoking Employee                                                                0.75    Smoking Employee
             0.50                                                                                     0.50




                                                                                         Pay Grade
Pay Grade




             0.25                                                                                     0.25
             0.00                                                                                     0.00
            -0.25                                                                                    -0.25
            -0.50                                                                                    -0.50
            -0.75                                                                                    -0.75
45




            -1.00                                                                                    -1.00




                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                          -9
                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                          -7
                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                          -3
                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                          +1
                                                                                                          +2
                                                                                                          +3
                                                                                                          +4
                                                                                                          +5
                                                                                                          +6
                                                                                                          +7
                                                                                                          +8
                                                                                                         +19
                                                                                                           0
                  0
                 -9
                 -8
                 -7
                 -6
                 -5
                 -4
                 -3
                 -2
                 -1
                   0
                 +1
                 +2
                 +3
                 +4
                 +5
                 +6
                 +7
                 +8
                +19
                  0




                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                          +
                -1




                 +       Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                                     Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 94,728              All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 94,728
   observations
     Notes:      of 2,907
               See        employees
                    Section   2 for  (966 Smoking
                                    details  about  &  1,941
                                                     the     Non-Smoking).
                                                          regression           912
                                                                       specification. All observations of
                                                                                          coefficients     2,907
                                                                                                         are      employees
                                                                                                              estimated        (966 the
                                                                                                                             from    Smoking
                                                                                                                                         same&regression
                                                                                                                                                1,941 Non-Smoking).   464 94,728
                                                                                                                                                           that includes
   employees (275 Smoking & 637 Non-Smoking) experience events: 287                       employees (198 Smoking & 266 Non-Smoking) experience events: 296
     observations
   transitions from a of
                       non-smoking   manager (966
                         2,907 employees            Smoking
                                              to a smoking     & 1,941
                                                            manager        Non-Smoking).
                                                                      and 939 from          The dependent
                                                                                          transitions          variable
                                                                                                      from a smoking       is the to
                                                                                                                                   pay
                                                                                                                        manager          grade of the
                                                                                                                                      a non-smoking   employee.
                                                                                                                                                     manager      The
                                                                                                                                                             and 276    estimates
                                                                                                                                                                     from
   a non-smoking    manager  to another non-smoking   manager.   The  within-employee     a smoking   manager  to  another  smoking   manager. The  within-employee
     shown in the graph are based on the coefficients of the event-study variables. The orange diamonds correspond to the coefficient for non-smoking
   standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.517. 95 CI are trimmed               standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.517.
   atemployees,
      -1 and 1.     while the lavender triangles correspond to the coefficients for smoking employees. Panel (a) corresponds to the difference between
        transitions from a non-smoker manager to a smoker manager versus transitions from an non-smoker manager to another non-smoker manager.
        912 employees (275 Smoking & 637 Non-Smoking) experience events. There are 287 transitions from a non-smoking manager to a smoking
        manager and 939 from a non-smoking manager to another non-smoking manager. Panel (b) corresponds to the difference between transitions
        from a smoker manager to a non-smoker manager versus transitions from a smoker manager to another smoker manager. 464 employees (198
        Smoking & 266 Non-Smoking) experience events, comprised of 296 transitions from smoker manager to non-smoker manager and 276 from a
        smoker manager to another smoker manager. The 95% confidence intervals are presented in brackets, with two-way clustering by manager and
        employee.
                                    Figure 10: Effects of Manager's Smoking Habits on Pay Grade: Double-Differences Estimates

                     a. Non-Smoker to Smoker minus                                                 b. Smoker to Non-Smoker minus                                                 c. Dual-Double-Differences:
                       Non-Smoker to Non-Smoker                                                          Smoker to Smoker                                                           Combined (a) and (b)
             1.00                                                                         1.00                                                                       1.00
                      Smoking - Non-Smoking                                                       Smoking - Non-Smoking                                                     Smoking - Non-Smoking (Dual)
             0.75                                                                         0.75                                                                       0.75
             0.50                                                                         0.50                                                                       0.50
Pay Grade




                                                                             Pay Grade




                                                                                                                                                        Pay Grade
             0.25                                                                         0.25                                                                       0.25
             0.00                                                                         0.00                                                                       0.00
            -0.25                                                                        -0.25                                                                      -0.25
            -0.50                                                                        -0.50                                                                      -0.50
            -0.75                                                                        -0.75                                                                      -0.75
            -1.00                                                                        -1.00                                                                      -1.00
                   0
                 -9
                 -8
                 -7
                 -6
                 -5
                 -4
                 -3
                 -2
                 -1
                   0
                 +1
                 +2
                 +3
                 +4
                 +5
                 +6
                 +7
                 +8
                +19
                   0



                                                                                                0
                                                                                              -9
                                                                                              -8
                                                                                              -7
                                                                                              -6
                                                                                              -5
                                                                                              -4
                                                                                              -3
                                                                                              -2
                                                                                              -1
                                                                                                0
                                                                                              +1
                                                                                              +2
                                                                                              +3
                                                                                              +4
                                                                                              +5
                                                                                              +6
                                                                                              +7
                                                                                              +8
                                                                                             +19
                                                                                                0



                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                         -9
                                                                                                                                                                         -8
                                                                                                                                                                         -7
                                                                                                                                                                         -6
                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                                                                                                                                                         -3
                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                         +1
                                                                                                                                                                         +2
                                                                                                                                                                         +3
                                                                                                                                                                         +4
                                                                                                                                                                         +5
                                                                                                                                                                         +6
                                                                                                                                                                         +7
                                                                                                                                                                         +8
                                                                                                                                                                        +19
                                                                                                                                                                           0
                -1




                 +




                                                                                             -1




                                                                                              +



                                                                                                                                                                        -1




                                                                                                                                                                         +
                        Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                         Quarters Relative to Manager Switch                                        Quarters Relative to Manager Switch
   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 94,728   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 94,728   All coefficients were estimated from a single regression including 94,728
46




   observations of 2,907 employees (966 Smoking & 1,941 Non-Smoking). 912 observations of 2,907 employees (966 Smoking & 1,941 Non-Smoking). 464observations of 2,907 employees (966 Smoking & 1,941 Non-Smoking). 1,226
        Notes:
   employees         See Section
               (275 Smoking             2 for details
                              & 637 Non-Smoking)             about
                                                                events:the
                                                     experience         287 regression     specification.
                                                                               employees (198   Smoking & 266 Non-Smoking)       experience are
                                                                                                                  All coefficients          events:estimated
                                                                                                                                                    296         from
                                                                                                                                                           employees     the
                                                                                                                                                                       (414    same
                                                                                                                                                                            Smoking     regression
                                                                                                                                                                                      & 812  Non-Smoking) that
                                                                                                                                                                                                             experience events: 94,750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 includes       287
   transitions from a non-smoking manager to a smoking manager and 939 from transitions from a smoking manager to a non-smoking manager and 276 from       transitions from a non-smoking manager to a smoking manager (N2S): 939
        observations          of 2,907      employees         (966     Smoking
   a non-smoking manager to another non-smoking manager. The within-employee      &   1,941     Non-Smoking).             The     dependent
                                                                               a smoking manager to another smoking manager. The within-employee    variable  is   the  pay    grade    of   the  employee.          The
                                                                                                                                                           N2N, 296 S2N, 276 S2S. The within-employee standard deviation    estimates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of the
   standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.517. 95 CI are trimmed    standard deviation of the dependent variable is 0.517. 95 CI are trimmed    dependent variable is 0.517.
   at -1shown
         and 1.     in the graph are based on the coefficients                         of
                                                                               at -1 and 1. the event-study variables. The green triangles correspond to the difference between the
            coefficient for smoking employees and non-smoking employees. Panel (a) corresponds to the difference between transitions from a non-smoker
            manager to a smoker manager and transitions from a non-smoker manager to another non-smoker manager (as in panel (a) of Figure 9). The
                                                                               S -  S ) - ( N -  N ). Panel (b) corresponds to the difference between
            estimates shown in Panel (a) are the double-differences estimates (N 2S     N 2N    N 2S   N 2N
            transitions from a smoker manager to a non-smoker manager and transitions from a smoker manager to another smoker manager (as in panel
            (b) of Figure 9). The estimates shown in Panel (b) are the double-differences estimates (S   S -  S ) - ( N -  N ). Panel (c) corresponds
                                                                                                          2N     S2S    S2N     S2S
            to the average between the coefficients from panel (a) and the (negative value of) the coefficients from panel (b). The dual-double-differences
                                            1     S -  S ) - ( N -  N ) - [( S -  S ) - ( N -  N )]}. The 95% confidence intervals are presented
            estimates shown in (c) are then 2 {(N  2S   N 2N      N 2S   N 2N       S2N     S2S    S2N     S2S
            in brackets, with two-way clustering by manager and employee.
