                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CHINA'S UNCONVENTIONAL NATIONWIDE CO2 EMISSIONS TRADING SYSTEM: THE
         WIDE-RANGING IMPACTS OF AN IMPLICIT OUTPUT SUBSIDY

                                      Lawrence H. Goulder
                                         Xianling Long
                                            Jieyi Lu
                                     Richard D. Morgenstern

                                       Working Paper 26537
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26537


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




The authors are grateful to Richard Carson, Carolyn Fischer, Charles Kolstad, Mun Ho, Valerie
Karplus, Ian Parry, Billy Pizer, Jeremy Schreifels, Rob Williams, Da Zhang, Junjie Zhang, and
Xiliang Zhang for helpful advice. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Energy
Foundation-China and the China Program of the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26537.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lawrence H. Goulder, Xianling Long, Jieyi Lu, and Richard D. Morgenstern. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
China's Unconventional Nationwide CO2 Emissions Trading System: The Wide-Ranging
Impacts of an Implicit Output Subsidy
Lawrence H. Goulder, Xianling Long, Jieyi Lu, and Richard D. Morgenstern
NBER Working Paper No. 26537
December 2019
JEL No. H23,Q43,Q48,Q5,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

China is planning to implement the largest CO2 emissions trading system in the world. To
reduce emissions, the system will be a tradable performance standard (TPS), an emissions pricing
mechanism that differs significantly from the emissions pricing instruments used in other
countries, such as cap and trade (C&T) and a carbon tax. We employ matching analytically and
numerically solved models to assess the cost-effectiveness and distributional impacts of China's
forthcoming TPS for achieving CO2 emissions reductions from the power sector.

We find that the TPS's implicit subsidy to electricity output has wide-ranging consequences for
both cost-effectiveness and distribution. In terms of cost-effectiveness, the subsidy disadvantages
the TPS relative to C&T by causing power plants to make less efficient use of output-reduction as
a way of reducing emissions (indeed, it induces some generators to increase output) and by
limiting the cost-reducing potential of allowance trading. In our central case simulations, TPS's
overall costs are about 47 percent higher than under C&T. At the same time, the TPS has
distribution-related attractions. Through the use of multiple benchmarks (maximal emission-
output ratios consistent with compliance), it can serve distributional objectives. And because it
yields smaller increases in electricity prices than a comparable C&T system, it implies less
international emissions leakage.

Lawrence H. Goulder                              Jieyi Lu
Department of Economics                          Yale School of Forestry &
Landau Economics Building 328                    Environmental Studies
Stanford University                              195 Prospect St.
Stanford, CA 94305                               New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER                                         jieyi.lu@yale.edu
goulder@stanford.edu
                                                 Richard D. Morgenstern
Xianling Long                                    Resources for the Future
Department of Management Science                 1616 P Street, NW
& Engineering                                    Washington, DC 20036
Stanford University                              morgenstern@rff.org
Stanford, CA 94305
xianling@stanford.edu


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26537
1. Introduction

        China has embarked on what promises to be the world's largest carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions trading system (ETS). When fully implemented, this nationwide system will more than
double the amount of CO2 emissions covered worldwide by some form of emissions pricing.
        China will rely on a tradable performance standard (TPS) as its emissions pricing
instrument for reducing emissions. This mechanism differs in important ways from the emissions
pricing instruments used in other countries, such as cap and trade and a carbon tax. A TPS is a
rate-based instrument: the number of emissions allowances granted to a facility depends on the
ratio of its emissions to output over the compliance period. Since compliance depends on a ratio,
covered facilities can influence their allowance allocations by changing their output levels during
the compliance period. In contrast, under cap and trade (C&T), a covered facility's allocation of
allowances is not influenced by within-period production changes. The dependence under the TPS
of the allowance allocation on within-period output decisions has important implications for
incentives and associated system performance. It significantly affects production levels, overall
emissions abatement, and the levels and distribution of costs.
        This paper employs matching analytically and numerically solved models to evaluate
China's new TPS, focusing on the impact on the nation's power (electricity) sector, the first sector
to be covered by the TPS.1 The power sector includes more than 2,000 coal-fired power plants and
is critical to China's climate policy effort, as it currently accounts for over 40 percent of the
country's total CO2 emissions (Yang and Lin, 2016). The sector has been undergoing virtually
continuous reform since 1985, when the state monopoly ended (Ho et al., 2017). While electricity
prices were set by the government a decade ago, recent reforms allow for market-determined
prices of production. The electricity output sold at market prices has grown steadily over the last
decade and is now almost one third of the total.
        We apply the two models to assess the TPS's impact on the production costs and CO2
emissions of power plants of differing technologies, as well as its implications for aggregate costs
(lost producer and consumer surplus) and aggregate emissions reductions. We also examine how


1
  Ultimately, the TPS will cover nine major sectors. The cement and aluminum sectors are next in line to be covered,
to be followed by iron & steel, nonferrous metals, petroleum refining, chemicals, pulp and paper, and aviation.
China's TPS design calls for emissions trading across all facilities and all covered sectors.
costs are distributed across different types of power plants and regions of the country. Throughout,
we compare the TPS's impacts with those of a C&T program with similar coverage and achieving
the same economy-wide emissions reductions.
         The TPS's rate-based approach, according to which compliance requires avoiding
exceeding a given ratio of emissions to output, contrasts with the mass-based approach of C&T,
under which compliance requires avoiding exceeding a given level (mass) of emissions. Under a
TPS, the number of emissions allowances the regulator offers to a facility in each compliance
period is the product of the maximum emissions-output ratio (or benchmark) assigned to the
facility and the facility's level of output in that period.2 Fischer (2001) and Fischer and Newell
(2008) have shown that a rate-based system like the TPS implicitly subsidizes output, since
additional output increases the number of (valuable) allowances a facility will receive from the
regulator. These authors point out that because of this implicit output subsidy, a TPS tends to be
less cost-effective than an equivalent C&T system.3
         Our analytical model builds on this earlier theoretical work by identifying three channels of
impact that do not apply under C&T. All three channels stem from the implicit output subsidy
under the TPS. First, we explore the implications of multiple (i.e., varying) benchmarks ­ an
important feature of China's planned TPS. Differing benchmarks can help serve distributional
goals, since higher (that is, less stringent) benchmarks can be assigned to facilities that otherwise
would face especially high compliance costs. Our theoretical model shows that greater variation of
benchmarks, while addressing distributional goals, reduces cost-effectiveness (that is, raises the
cost of achieving any given aggregate emissions-reduction target), other things equal. Greater



2
  More precisely, a rate-based system's benchmarks are the assigned emissions-output ratios that covered facilities
must not exceed, after adjusting for any emissions credits purchased on the allowance trading market.
3
  In keeping with its rate-based nature, the TPS is sometimes referred to as an example of an intensity-based standard.
It is equivalent to a subsidy to output and tax on emissions. Other examples of intensity standards include clean fuel
standards and clean energy standards. In contrast with the TPS, which is an output-oriented intensity standard (since it
focuses on the emissions intensity of output), clean fuel standards and clean energy standards are input-oriented. In
these cases the tax component of the tax-subsidy combination applies to the fuel or energy input rather than pollution
emissions. Studies by Kerr and Newell (2003), Fischer and Newell (2008), Holland et al. (2009), Parry and Krupnick
(2011), Goulder, Hafstead, and Williams (2016), and several others address the efficiency properties of fuel and
energy intensity standards. A feebate is another intensity-based standard, in which the subsidy applies to facilities
with performance better than (below) the standard, and the tax applies to facilities with emission intensities above the
standard. In contrast with the TPS, in which both the tax and subsidy apply to all covered facilities, a feebate involves
no output subsidy to facilities that fail to meet the standard, and no tax on facilities that exceed the standard. Parry and
Krupnick (2011) assess the economic properties and potential political attractions of this instrument. Fullerton and
Metcalf (2001), Goulder and Parry (2008), Parry et al. 2016), and Metcalf (2019) compare the incentive effects and
efficiency implications of a range of instruments, including intensity standards and cap and trade.

                                                             2
benchmark variation increases costs because it alters the relative magnitudes of the implicit output
subsidies across covered facilities and thereby distorts the relative outputs of these facilities. Cap
and trade also can employ multiple benchmarks for determining the initial allocations of emissions
allowances across covered facilities and thereby affect the distribution of policy costs. But in
contrast with the TPS, the use of multiple benchmarks under C&T does not reduce cost-
effectiveness. Because a typical C&T program does not include the output subsidy,4 the extent of
benchmark variation across facilities (holding total number of allocated allowances fixed) does not
affect decisions at the margin; it only has distributional consequences.
         A second contribution of the theoretical model is to reveal that the implicit subsidy reduces
gains from allowance trading. Under C&T, covered facilities minimize their costs by trading
allowances until their marginal abatement costs equal the common allowance price. This
maximizes the cost-savings from trading, as it implies equality of marginal abatement costs across
facilities. Under the TPS, in contrast, a facility will minimize its costs by trading until its marginal
abatement costs equal the net-of-subsidy allowance price. In Section 4 below we show that the
net-of-subsidy price generally differs across facilities, as it depends on technologies that differ
across facilities. Thus, allowance trading does not achieve equality of marginal abatement costs
across facilities, and gains from trades are compromised. As Section 4's analysis indicates, this
compromise occurs even in the case where the TPS applies the same benchmark to all covered
facilities.
         In addition, the analytical model reveals that, compared with C&T, the TPS makes less
efficient use of electricity output-reduction as a way of reducing emissions. This is a critical factor
underlying the lower cost-effectiveness of the TPS. Under the TPS, covered facilities with
relatively low emissions-output ratios will tend to increase both electricity output and emissions
relative to their business-as-usual levels. This contrasts with C&T, which generally motivates all
covered facilities to reduce both output and emissions.5 The differences between the TPS and
C&T in cost-effectiveness are greater, the wider the differences across power plants in their initial
emissions-output ratios.


4
  In Section 3 we address the case where C&T offers output-based allocation for certain covered facilities. In that
case, the magnitude of a benchmark influences cost-effectiveness.
5
  As discussed in Section 4, C&T generally leads to increases in electricity prices, and this exerts a positive influence
on facilities' output and emissions. We show analytically that for some facilities, it is possible for this effect to be
large enough to cause them to increase output and emissions. However, our numerical simulations indicate that this
price effect is second-order and that nearly all facilities reduce output and emissions under C&T.

                                                            3
         Our numerical model yields results consistent with the analytical model's predictions,
supplementing the qualitative results of the theoretical model with a unique quantitative
assessment closely geared to China's power sector.6 Key findings of the numerical model are as
follows.
         First, this model finds that the TPS involves higher economy-wide costs than a C&T
program of the same stringency and scope, a reflection of the TPS's implicit output subsidy.7
Consistent with the analytical findings, in the numerical model the TPS causes some generating
units to expand output, while C&T induces most or all units to reduce output. The less efficient
use of the output-reduction channel contributes to the TPS's higher costs. In our central case
simulation, under a 3-benchmark TPS (an option under consideration by Chinese policy planners)
the TPS would yield a 3.1 percent reduction in aggregate CO2 emissions. This reduction could be
achieved at 47 percent lower private cost under a C&T program with similar allowance allocations.
         Second, the TPS's economy-wide costs rise substantially with the number and variability of
benchmarks. A 3-benchmark TPS has 18 percent higher private cost per ton of reduced emissions,
compared to a single-benchmark TPS with the same number of allowances initially allocated.
Greater variation of benchmarks implies higher costs both by distorting the relative contributions
of different facilities to emissions reductions and by reducing the potential gains from allowance
trading.
         Third, the distributional impacts of the TPS differ significantly from those under C&T. As
discussed, reductions in electricity output contribute a much smaller share to overall emissions
reductions under the TPS than under C&T. The less extensive reductions in output imply smaller
increases in electricity prices8 than under C&T. As a result, electricity producers (consumers) bear
a larger (smaller) share of the overall economic burden under the TPS than under C&T.
         Fourth, the TPS has very different cost-impacts across the Chinese provinces, reflecting
differences in technologies and emissions intensities of the generators and the associated



6
  This quantitative analysis complements a number of recent empirical studies of China's efforts to reduce CO2
emissions through emissions trading. See, for example, Duan and Zhou (2017), Ho, Wang, and Yu (2017), Teng,
Jotzo, and Wang (2017), Karplus and Zhang (2017), and Zhang, Wang, and Du (2017). Our numerical model is
unique in its sharp focus on the incentive effects of the TPS and its ability to yield a close comparison of the impacts
of the TPS and C&T.
7
  Other factors can mitigate the potential disadvantages of rate-based approaches such as the TPS. Goulder, Hafstead,
and Williams (2016) show that pre-existing distortionary taxes can reduce and sometimes eliminate the potential cost-
disadvantage of a clean energy standard relative to cap and trade or an emissions tax.
8
  As noted earlier and discussed further in Section 4, a considerable share of China's electricity prices is now market-
determined. Our models account for both government-controlled and market-determined prices.
                                                           4
differences in compliance costs. Under the 3-benchmark central case specification for the TPS,
among the generating units that experience the largest percentage losses in profit are those in
provinces in the northern and northeastern regions of the country. We consider an alternative, 4-
benchmark policy specification designed to avoid the large cost-impacts in these provinces. In this
case, the technologies on which these regions disproportionately rely, and which involve especially
high emissions intensities, are given less stringent benchmarks. We find that achieving the
distributional objective lowers profits in other regions of the country and increases aggregate
policy costs.
        Although the TPS is less cost-effective than C&T, it has important offsetting attractions.
One is that the TPS's rate-based structure causes policy stringency to adjust automatically in
response to current macroeconomic conditions. When the economy is booming, and demand for
electricity is relatively high, the expanded output of electricity entitles generators to a larger
number of allowances, since allowance allocations are a function of output. Cap-and-trade
programs do not have this attribute.
        A second potential attraction is that the TPS implies smaller electricity price increases than
would occur under an equally stringent C&T program. Smaller price increases suggest less
"emissions leakage" ­ offsetting increases in emissions stemming from shifts in production across
jurisdications. To the extent that regulation of China's pollution raises the prices of China's goods
relative to foreign goods, consumers could shift toward imports, potentially offsetting the
pollution-reduction goals of the domestic regulation. Thus, to the extent that the TPS yields
smaller price increases than C&T, emissions leakage can be reduced.9 Smaller price increases
might also have some political attractions.
        A third attraction is familiarity. The TPS's rate-based structure matches that of several of
the previous provincial- and regional-level pilot programs for reducing CO2 emisions. The
structure also is in line with other rate-based regulations with which China is familiar.
        Despite its higher overall economic costs, the TPS can generate significant aggregate gains
once environmental benefits are accounted for. In our central case, the environmental benefits

9
  In China, relatively little electricity is imported. In 2016, imports represented about 0.1 percent of electricity
consumed. Hence the smaller price increases from the TPS relative to the increases under C&T would not likely make
much difference in terms of imports of electricity. However, the TPS would also lead to smaller price increases of
downstream goods and services, and this could imply less leakage in the form of shifts to imported downstream goods.
The issue of leakage is likely to be more important in the later phase of China's TPS program, when coverage is
extended eight industrial sectors, including sectors in which domestic production faces more competition from
imports. Fowlie and Reguant (2018) address theoretical and empirical challenges associated with the measurement of
leakage.
                                                         5
from the TPS exceed the policy costs by nearly a factor of three when emissions reductions are
valued at 290 RMB (or about 44 U.S. dollars) per ton.
        These issues have significance in other contexts. In many countries, policy makers are
making critical choices about whether to adopt a rate-based or a mass-based approach to pollution
control. The results shown here for China are highly relevant to their choices.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly describes key
features of the power sector. Section 3 then presents the basic structure of China's TPS program.
Subsequent sections examine analytically and numerically the potential impacts of the program.
Section 4 develops and applies an analytical model to assess qualitatively the overall cost and
distributional impacts of the TPS, and compares these impacts with those under C&T. Section 5
lays out the structure, inputs, and solution method of the numerical model. Section 6 then applies
the numerical model to assess the cost-effectiveness and distributional impacts of the TPS and
C&T. Section 7 offers conclusions.



2.    Key Features of the Electricity Sector


        Almost 72 percent of electricity produced in China's power sector comes from its fossil-
based plants.10 The sector contained 2,392 coal-fired, circulating fluidized bed, and natural-gas-
fired generating units in 2016. Table 1 groups the the units into three main technology categories ­
coal-fired units other than circulating fluidized be units, circulating fluidized bed units, and gas-
fired units ­ and into 11 more specific technology classifications. The table also provides
information on outputs, costs and CO2 emissions intensities for the different technologies.
        Among these units, the 300 MW subcritical coal units account for the largest share of
electricity production and CO2 emissions. The 600 MW supercritical coal units, which operate at a
slightly lower emissions intensity, are the second largest producers of electricity and CO2
emissions. As one might expect, the quite limited gas-fired capacity has much lower emissions per
mWh.



10
  About 20 percent, 4 percent, 4 percent, and 1 percent of electricity production is hydropower, nuclear power, wind
power, and solar power, respectively ("Annual Statistics of China Power Industry 2016," China Electricity Council,
March 21, 2018, http://www.cec.org.cn/guihuayutongji/tongjxinxi/niandushuju/2018-03-21/178791.html).


                                                          6
         Regulations imposed by the central government affect electricity output decisions and
pricing. For almost every generating unit, the pattern in recent years is that some of the unit's
electricity output is sold at prices fixed by the government while some is sold at market prices.
Generating units can choose levels of production, but a three-tiered system determines the prices at
which the production can be sold.11 The first tier applies to electricity output up to the amount
associated with a government-assigned number of "guaranteed annual utilization hours" of
operation. The second tier applies to production in excess of the guaranteed-hours (GH) level and
up to another level set by the government. Electricity production within the first tier is sold locally
at an administered price, while electricity production within the second tier is sold within a larger
production zone, also at an administered price. The administered prices for the two tiers of
production differ.
         We refer to third-tier production as electricity output beyond the second-tier level. This
output is sold at market prices. The principal markets are a "residual local market," to which the
generators in the unit's province are the main suppliers, and a "zonal" market, to which units in the
several provinces in a given zone contribute. The main purchasers in the zonal market are grid
companies.12 As discussed further in Section 6, the market prices generally are below the fixed
prices. Forward markets exist for both the residual local and the zonal markets.
         A decade ago, nearly all production was in the first or second tier and therefore faced fixed
prices. However, the situation has changed in recent years. In 2018, almost one-third of the
electricity consumed in China was sold at market-clearing prices.13 The increased importance of
market prices reflects the gradual narrowing of the first and second tiers as well as the significant
growth in total electricity demand. These developments are consistent with the central
government's efforts to expand the role of market-driven prices in the power sector.
         Thus, the nature of China's regulation of the power sector implies that individual
generators may choose endogenously their production levels, while their ability to sell output at
market prices depends on their production levels. These aspects are captured in our models.




11
   See Kayrl et al. (2016) and Ho et al. (2017).
12
   Starting in 2017, some provinces allow private power retailers and large electricity consumers to enter the residual
local markets and zonal markets. And as of 2018, consumers from coal, steel, non-ferrous, and building material
sectors can purchase all of their electricity in the markets.
13
   Department of Industrial Development and Natural Resources, "An Analysis of National Electricity Trading in
2018", China Electricity Council, March 4, 2018, http://www.cec.org.cn/guihuayutongji/dianligaige/2019-03-
04/189190.html (accessed November 16, 2019).
                                                            7
3. Structure of the TPS


         Allowance trading, a central feature of both tradable performance standards and cap and
trade programs, promotes a reallocation of abatement activity, leading to greater effort by facilities
that can reduce emissions at lower cost. This helps reduce the economy-wide cost of achieving
aggregate emissions reductions. China's system allows for trading across regions in the power
sector. It is expected that the system will allow for intersectoral trading once it is broadened to is
extended beyond the power sector.
         In the first two trading periods of the EUETS, which spanned the period 2005-2012, free
allowances were given to individual facilities on the basis of their historical emissions. More
recently, the trading programs in California and Quebec, as well as the revised third-period
program in the EUETS, have relied on benchmarking, according to which the number of
allowances received by a facility is based on a technology- or industry-specific emissions-output
ratio rather than on historical levels of emissions.
         A key difference between C&T and China's TPS relates to the allocation of emissions
allowances. Under C&T, in most cases each covered facility's allowance allocation at a given
point in time is exogenous to the firm. The number of allowances a firm receives is the product of
the pre-established benchmark emissions-output ratio and some fixed reference quantity (usually
an historical level of production). To achieve compliance, a facility's emissions, minus any
allowances it purchases from other facilities, must not exceed this product.14
         There are some exceptional cases where the allocation under C&T is endogenous. This
occurs where C&T offers "output-based allocation" to certain facilities. Under output-based
allocation, a facility's allocation in a given period is the product of the benchmark and the
facility's output in the previous period. In this case, a firm's output choice in a given period
affects its allocation in the next period, and thus the allocation is endogenous to the firm, although
the impact on the allowance allocation comes with a one-period lag. In the EU-ETS, California's
C&T, and some other C&T systems, output-based allocation has been applied to certain firms in


14
   Some ETSs include provisions that allow entities to borrow the allowances that it has been promised for future
compliance periods, or bank some of its current allowances for use in future periods. In this case, aggregate emissions
can exceed (if there is net borrowing) or must fall short of (if there is net banking) the sum of currently issued
allowances. When there are provisions for intertemporal borrowing or banking of allowances, the effective cap is on
cumulative emissions, and this cap is equal to the sum of the allowances introduced over time.

                                                           8
the manufacturing sector that are designated as the most "emissions-intensive trade-exposed" and
thus the most vulnerable to import-competition. Output-based allocation is a way of helping these
firms compete internationally: it effectively subsidizes output, since additional output leads to
larger allocations of allowances.15 In practice, output-based allocation tends to be applied only to a
small subset of covered firms and generally not to the power sector.16
         In contrast with C&T, under China's nationwide TPS the allocation of allowances to each
covered facility is endogenous within each compliance period; it depends on the product of the
benchmark i assigned to each generator i and the level of electricity output qi chosen by the
generator in that period. Because the number of allowances allocated to each generator is
endogenous, the aggregate emissions associated with the government-chosen benchmarks is
endogenous as well. Thus, unlike C&T, under the TPS the regulator will not know the total
number of allowances to be issued and the aggregate level of emissions until the end of the
compliance period, after firms' production decisions over the period have been made.17 Reflecting
the differences in structure, C&T systems are categorized as mass-based, since in each period the
regulator sets the aggregate level (or total mass) of emissions, while the TPS is categorized as rate-
based, since the regulator sets emissions intensities but not total emissions.
         China plans to allocate allowances through a two-step process. At the start of the
compliance period, a covered facility receives a number of allowances equal to the product of its
designated benchmark emissions-output ratio, , an "initial allocation factor," , and some
measure of output, q0 (e.g., a recent level of production).18 The second step in the process comes



15
   Haites (2003), Fowlie (2012), Fischer and Fox (2012), and Fowlie et al. (2016) offer excellent discussions of output-
based allocation.
16
   Californis's ETS does not apply output-based allocation to the power sector. The EU ETS applies such allocation to
the power sector only in a few exceptional cases.
17
   In C&T systems that include some output-based allocation, the total number of allowances to be issued ­ the
aggregate cap ­ is set in advance and remains exogenous. Although firms enjoying output-based allocations can affect
their allocations through changes in output, these changes do not alter each period's total allocations. Increased
allocations to firms enjoying output-based allocation correspond to reductions in allocations to other firms. Thus, the
aggregate cap does not change.
18
   At the time of this writing, China has not yet specified the value it will employ for although a 0.6 value has been
widely discussed. With a value of 0.6 for , the facility would initially receive 60 percent of the allowances it would
need to justify the emissions-output ratio  if its level of output did not change from q0. It is theoretically possible for
a facility to receive more allowances at the beginning of the period than the amount it is will be entitled to have
received by the period's end. This happens when end-of-period output is lower than q0. This could put the
government in an awkward position at the end of the compliance period of needing to take away from the facility some
of the allowances it had given out at the beginning of the period. It appears that the program will utilize a value for 
sufficiently below 1 to make it unlikely that the government would encounter this problem with any facility that

                                                            9
at the end of the compliance period, at which time a covered entity receives the quantity of
additional allowances needed to bring its total allocation into conformity with the sector-specific
benchmark emissions-output ratio.19
         The extent to which China's program will reduce CO2 emissions depends crucially on the
choice of benchmarks. Currently, Chinese planners are considering employing three benchmarks
for the power sector. These benchmarks apply to three technology categories: coal-fired,
circulating fluidized bed (CFB), and gas-fired units.20 We use the term "technology class" to refer
to more specific technology types. The Ministry of Ecology and Environment distinguishes the 11
technology classes and the three technology categories shown in Table 1. We use the same
groupings in applying benchmarks in the numerical simulations below.
         This section emphasizes three key aspects of the structure of China's forthcoming
nationwide ETS. First, the program will authorize trading of emissions allowances across regions
and (once it expands beyond the power sector) across sectors. Second, in contrast with a C&T
system, under the TPS the number of allowances allocated to a covered facility depends on the
facility's chosen production level over the compliance period. Thus, the number of allowances
allocated is endogenous to firms' production decisions and the aggregate number of allowances
introduced in any given compliance period ­ the aggregate cap ­ is endogenous as well. Third, the
planners seem to be centering on employing three benchmarks in the first (power-sector) phase of
the program, one for each of three main technology categories. Differential benchmarking offers a
channel for achieving distributional goals. At the same time, as indicated below, it can
compromise cost-effectiveness.
         The next section develops an analytical model to examine the impacts of the TPS in the
power sector and to contrast these impacts with those of C&T. The subsequent two sections
present the structure of and results from the corresponding numerical model.




remains in operation. As discussed below, any facility that shuts down during the compliance period must relinquish
its allowances.
19
   In fact, each province has the option of reducing the allocation of allowances to facilities within the province if it
wishes to make the program more stringent locally. The Ministry of Ecology and Environment sets national
benchmark emissions-output ratios, but the provincial government can reduce them. It is also our understanding that
the central government will also offer "reserve allowances" to governments in some low-income provinces, additional
allowances that these governments can allocate according to their own chosen criteria.
20
   Historically, benchmarks have reflected technological, economic and institutional factors. In California's cap-and-
trade system, uniform benchmarks are set for all facilities in an industry at the emissions rate corresponding to the best
(i.e., lowest) decile emissions-output ratio experienced historically among facilities in the industry.

                                                           10
4. Impacts of the TPS: An Analytical Treatment

         In the presence of the TPS, managers of a generating unit need to make several
interconnected decisions. One is whether to remain in operation or shut down. Generators that
remain in operation need also to decide how much electricity to produce and how much to reduce
the emissions intensity of production. These decisions depend on the stringency of the benchmark
applied to the generating unit, the price of emissions allowances, and the administered and market
prices of electricity. The analytical model considers these elements. For transparency, this model
assumes does not separate the tier 1 and tier 2 administered prices (we refer to this simply as the
"tier 1 price") and does not separate the residual and zonal electricity markets. The key insights
from this model are preserved in the results from the more disaggregated numerical model.



a. Net Revenue, Conditional on Remaining in Operation


         Let:

          qij      total end-of-period electricity output of generator i in technology class j
          qij      guaranteed-hour electricity output of generator i in technology class j
          eij          CO2 emissions by generator i in technology class j
          C ij         total cost of production by generator i in technology class j
                       admininistered wholesale price applying to first-tier production of electricity by
           p ij        generator i in technology class j
           p ij        market  equilibrium wholesale price applying to electricity output by generator i
                       in technology class j in excess of first-tier production
          j            benchmark emissions-output ratio assigned to generators in technology class j
          t            market price of emissions allowances

         Consider first the choices of a generating unit conditional on its remaining in operation.
The generator's21 choice variables are q and e. Net revenue  for operating generator ij is given
by:

                              ij  pij qij  pij  qij  qij   C  qij , eij   t  eij   j qij                         (1)


21
  For brevity, we will let "generator" refer to both the physical unit and the unit's decision-maker (manager). The
intended reference will be clear from the context.
                                                          11
The first right-hand term in (1) is the revenue from production of electricity up to q ij , the highest

level of output subject to the administered tier 1 price pij . The second right-hand term is the

revenue from electricity output in excess of q ij . The third and fourth terms refer to total

production cost and the expense or revenue associated with allowance purchases or sales. We
assume Cij / qij  0 and Cij / eij  0 . We also assume that each generator's objective is to

maximize net revenue.22 For simplicity of exposition, equation (1) and subsequent equations in
this section reflect the assumption that qij  qij . This is the most frequent case in our data. In the

infrequent cases where qij  qij , pij replaces pij throughout.23

         The endogeneity of qij in the far-right term in (1) is critical to the impact of the TPS. To be
in compliance, the generating unit's ultimate (end-of period) allocation of allowances qij , plus
(minus) any allowances it purchases (sells) on the trading market, must be at least enough to justify
it emissions during the period. The far-right term in (1) represents the additional needed purchases
(or potential sales) of allowances consistent with compliance.
         Let u ij (  eij / qij ) represent the generator's end-of-period emissions-output ratio.24 Then we

can rewrite the far-right term as t (u ij   j ) q ij . In the absence of purchases of additional

allowances, a unit that produces output q will be in or out of compliance depending on whether its
emissions-output ratio is less than or greater than j.
         Let uij0 represent the generator's beginning-of-period emissions-output ratio. A generator
with uij0 > j can come into compliance by purchasing additional allowances, reducing its
emissions rate, or both. A generator with uij0 < j will not need to purchase allowances25 and will
benefit from the sale of its excess allowances. Indeed, once a generator with an initial emissions
ratio less than j has achieved its optimal emissions ratio, its best option is to sell its excess



22
   See Ho et al. (2017). This assumption seems reasonable for the approximately 50 percent of the generators that are
privately owned.
23
   Thus, when q ij  q ij , the equation for net revenue reduces to  ij  pij qij  C  qij , eij   t  eij   j qij  . This squares
with the fact that in this case p , not the endogenous price, is the price that applies to each unit of electricity sold.
24
   By "end-of-period" emissions-output ratio we mean the ratio of cumulative emissions to cumulative output over the
compliance period. This is the ratio relevant to ascertaining compliance.
25
   This assumes the generator does not increase its emissions-output ratio during the compliance period enough to
cause its ratio to exceed . There is no reason to expect this to occur, since the TPS gives all generators incentives to
reduce their emissions-output ratios, as discussed below.

                                                              12
allowances, since such allowances have no other beneficial use for the facility; selling them
involves no opportunity cost.26
         This suggests some of the potential distributional implications of the TPS. Generators in
the u <  category can benefit from the TPS by selling their excess allowances, while generators in
the u >  category face compliance costs, as they will need to reduce emissions intensity and/or
purchase additional allowances to come into compliance.27 Below we explore further the
distributional impacts and consider the cost-effectiveness dimension.


b. The Shutdown Decision


         In considering whether to shut down, the generator will compare the revenue from
continued operation with the revenue associated with shutting down. In the case of shutting down,
the revenue consists solely of the liquidation value28 of the abandoned capital. Note that the
generator's owners cannot earn additional revenue by selling any of the allowances it was
allocated at the beginning of the compliance period; the program requires that such allowances be
returned to the government.
         It is useful to rewrite (1) as:

                              ij  p ij qij  ( pij  pij ) qij  C ( qij , eij )  t ( eij   j qij )                  (2)

This expression divides the gross revenue from electricity production into pijqij, a component that
depends on qij, the level of production, and  pij  pij  qij , a fixed component.29 The fixed

component is the revenue associated with output up to the maximal level to which the administered

26
   The National Development and Reform Commission 2017 document, Guidelines of National Carbon Emissions
Trading System (Power Generation Sector), did not include provisions for intertemporal banking or borrowing of
emissions allowances. Correspondingly, the model assumes no such provisions. As a result, the allowances available
to generators needing additional allowances are restricted to the excess allowances offered by the generators with
uij<j. In China's pilot trading programs, intertemporal borrowing was not permitted, although intertemporal banking
was an option.
27
   Although China's TPS does not cover renewable sources of electricity such as wind and solar, it will encourage
production from these sources by increasing the cost of supplying fossil-based generated electricity. A further boost to
renewables production would occur if the TPS were to cover these sources, since presumably these sources would
have emissions-output ratios well below the benchmarks and thus could benefit significantly by selling excess
allowances.
28
   In discussions with the ETS planers, we have learned that the market for abandoned electricity generation capital is
quite limited, so that the liquidation value is very low. Also, it should be noted that in this one-period model, the
relevant "liquidation value" is the avoided one-period rental on the capital that is no longer employed.
29
   Note that pij as well as pij and qij are exogenous to the individual generator.
                                                              13
first tier price applies. This revenue is inframarginal. It affects the level of profit and the
shutdown decision, but because it is inframarginal it does not affect the optimal level of production
for firms that do not shut down. Recall that the equations in this section assume qij  qij . When

qij  qij , the corresponding profit equation is  ij  pij qij  C ( qij , eij )  t ( eij   j qij ) and pij is the price

at the margin.
           From (2), a generator will remain in operation if and only if

                                       pq   p  p  q  C  q, e   t  e   q   L                                            (3)

where L represents the liquidation value (subscripts have been suppressed for convenience).
           We can rewrite (3) as

                                        pq   p  p  q  C  q, e   L  te  t q                                             (4)

       ^ as the allowance price t that equates the left-hand and right-hand sides of (4):
Define t

                                                  pq   p  p  q  C  q, e   L
                                            t^                                                                         (5)
                                                             e  q

^ is a critical value of t: the generator will shut down or remain in operation depending on whether
t
                                                                      ^ will be lower for
the allowance price is above or below this value. Other things equal, t
generators facing a lower (more stringent) : they will shut down first.30


c. Equilibrium Conditions


            1. The Allowance Price


            Let RPj refer to the set of generators in technology class j that remain in operation and
purchase allowances ­ the generators in technology class j with uij > j (or equivalently, eij > j qij)



30
     Under cap and trade, the expression for profit is   pq  C  t ( e  a0 ) , where a0 represents the facility's allocation
of (free) allowances. From this it follows that under cap and trade, t^ is equal to ( pq  C  L) / (e  a0 ). A larger initial
allocation of free allowances raises t^ .

                                                              14
for which condition (3) above is satisfied. Then the total market demand for allowances, D(t), is
expressed by:

                                          D(t )    (uij   j ) qij                                             (6)
                                                    j iRPj



Demand is a function of the allowance price t because this price influences the number of
                                                                     ^ ). The allowance price also
generators that remain in operation (the number for which t is below t
affects demand through its influence on the output levels and emissions intensities of the
generators that remain in operation.
        The supply of allowances on the trading market comes from generators that remain in
operation and have excess allowances to sell. Let RSj represent the set of generators in technology
group j that remain in operation and sell allowances ­ the generators in technology group j for
which uij < j.31 The total supply of allowances into the emissions trading market is:

                                          S (t )    (  j  uij )qij                                            (7)
                                                   j iRS j



The allowance price affects allowance supply by influencing the electricity production levels of the
generators with u <  : this affects the number of excess allowances they have to sell. This price
also affects supply by influencing the emissions intensities of these generators.
        The market equilibrium price of allowances is the price t that satisfies D(t) = S(t).


        2. Electricity Prices


        Generators whose production does not exceed q face only the administered electricity
price p , while generators that produce more than q face both the administered price and the
market price p for production beyond q . In each province, the total demand for electricity is
assumed to be a negative function of total supply. The equilibrium market price equates total
supply with the total demand.


d. Cost-Effectiveness Considerations


31
  Recall that uij is endogenous. We assume that generating units in the group RSj undertake expenditure on process
change to the extent that this will increase net revenue (by increasing the number of excess allowances).
                                                        15
         1. TPS and C&T electricity outputs relative to the cost-minimizing output level


         Consider the profit-maximizing choices made by an individual generating unit under the
TPS. As indicated in expression (2) above, the profit function for a generating unit is
  pq  ( p  p )q  C ( q, e)  t ( e   q ) , where subscripts are suppressed for simplicity. This
function yields the following first-order conditions for the profit-maximizing levels of q and e,
given the allowance price t and applicable benchmark  :

                                               / q : p  Cq    t                                                   (8)

                                                     / e : Ce  t                                                  (9)

where Cq  C / q and Ce  C / e . The left-hand side of (8) is the marginal net revenue from

output, excluding any change in costs of needed allowances. The right-hand side is the marginal
cost of output in terms of the additional allowance costs associated with that increment to output
since each unit of output raises allowance payments by t (holding fixed the emissions-output
ratio). Expression (8) states that a generator maximizes profit by equating the marginal net
revenue with the marginal allowance cost.
         To assess the cost-effectiveness of the TPS, we compare these first-order conditions with
those from the following optimization problem:

                                 max      pq   p  p  q  C  q , e 
                                                      i             i       i   i
                                                                                                                  (10)
                                                i


                                                     s.t.   e  Ei
                                                            i



where  represents the net surplus produced by the generators in the aggregate32 and E is a
given aggregate emissions target. The solution to (10) is the maximal surplus that can be obtained
when emissions are kept within the given target or, equivalently, the minimum cost of reducing
emission to the amount indicated by the target. The Lagrangean expression associated with (10) is




32
  This implicitly assumes no externalities or taxes, and pure competition. Under these conditions, social surplus (the
sum of producer and consumer surplus) is maximized when the sum of net revenues to firms is maximized.
                                                            16
                                                                                                  
                              :      pq   p  p  q  C  q , e    
                                           i             i
                                                               
                                                                e  E 
                                                                   i
                                                                     
                                                                       i                      i
                                                                                                                       (11)
                                     i                                            i

The first-order conditions associated with this expression are
                                                  / qi : p  Cq  0                                                      (12)
                                                                       i



                                                   / ei : Ce                                                           (13)
                                                                   i



                                                   /  :      e  E  i                                                   (14)
                                                               i

         Equation (12) indicates that social costs are minimized when generators' production levels
equate the marginal revenue (p) and the marginal private cost Cq of production. This condition
                                                                                      i


differs from expression (8), the condition determining generators' choices of q under the TPS.
The difference reflects the implicit subsidy to output under the TPS. From equation (2), other
things equal33 each unit of q under the TPS reduces by t the cost of additional allowances
needed for compliance. Thus, condition (8) means that the TPS leads generators to produce more
output, for given output prices p, than would be the case if equation (12) applied.34
         Equation (13) is the first-order condition associated with the choice of emissions levels
consistent with minimizing the cost of achieving a given emissions-reduction target. The
Lagrangean multiplier  is the shadow value of the constraint on emissions; in an emissions
trading market, this is the market price of allowances. Thus, we can interpret  as equal to t. This
means that the first-order condition (13) for cost-minimization matches equation (9), the first-order
condition regarding emissions under the TPS. Both equations express the condition that the
marginal benefit from emissions (or the negative of the marginal cost) should be equated to t.
Note that the similarity of conditions (9) and (13) does not mean that the level of emissions under
the TPS will match the first-best level. This is because Ce depends on the level of output, and
                                                                           i


output under the TPS differs from first-best output. For a given value of t , the level of emissions
under the TPS will exceed (fall short of) the first-best level if C e / qi is negative (positive).
                                                                                          i



         Consider now the impacts under cap and trade. The expression for profit under C&T is:


33
   In keeping with the fact that (8) is a partial derivative, this condition is calculated holding e constant. In fact, the
TPS affects both q and e. The connections between q and e are important for explaining the impacts of the TPS on
levels of electricity supply and emissions relative to the business-as-usual case. We address these connections below.
34
   Generators with u0 >  will reduce output relative to the business-as-usual level, but the reduction will fall short of
the optimal amount.
                                                             17
                                  ij
                                  C &T
                                        pq  ( p  p ) q  C ( q , e )  t (e  a0 )                               (15)

where a0 is the initial allocation of (free) allowances and the superscript "C&T" designates the
case of C&T. It is straightforward to show that the associated first-order conditions for a
generator's optimal choice of q and e match expressions (12) and (13) for the planner's cost-
minimization problem above. This implies that the output and emissions levels under C&T are
such as to minimize the cost of achieving the specified aggregate emissions limit.35 The cost-
effectiveness advantage of C&T over the TPS reflects the absence of the output subsidy: the level
of output does not appear in the far-right term in the C&T profit expression.
        The difference in the impacts of the TPS and C&T become smaller, the lower is the price
elasticity of output supply. One way to see this is to compare the TPS first-order condition for
optimal output, given by equation (8) with the corresponding condition for C&T (which, as noted
above, is the same as (12)). The former can be rewritten as Cq  p   t , while the latter can be

rewritten as C q  p . The difference between these two conditions is t, which does not depend

on an individual facilty's q. Note that Cq is inversely related to the supply elasticity, implying that
as Cq approaches infinity the supply elasticity approaches 0. Suppose that q satisfies the TPS first-
order condition. Since t is a constant, as Cq approaches infinity (or as the supply elasticity
approaches zero) the change in q needed to satisfy the C&T first-order condition becomes
infinitely small. In the limiting case of a zero supply elasticity, optimal q is in the same for the
TPS and C&T, and since the first-order conditions for optimal emissions are also the same, both
policies are the same in terms of cost-effectiveness. A comparison of equations (2) (for the TPS)
and (15) (for C&T) indicates that with a zero supply elasticity the two policies will also have
identical distributional conseqences so long as the initial allowance allocations jqij (for the TPS)
and a0 (for C&T) are the same.


        2. TPS and C&T electricity outputs relative to business-as-usual levels


        Here we consider how outputs of the TPS and C&T differ from their baseline (business-as-
usual) values. We will see that while C&T often induces all generators to reduce production


35
  Of course, this assumes the absence of transactions costs and other possible impediments to trading. Such
limitations might well exist, but they could apply under the TPS as well.

                                                         18
relative to the baseline level, the TPS typically causes some generators to increase output relative
to the baseline. We start with a focus on the TPS. To determine the relationship with baseline
output, we examine the total derivative36 of the TPS profit expression (2):

                                                   C     C
                                    d  pdq           de    dq  tde  t  dq                                          (16)
                                                   e     q

Dividing the above expression by dq yields:

                                         d     C de C de
                                             p        t  t                                                         (17)
                                         dq    e dq q dq

Setting d / dq equal to 0 and rearranging give:

                                                C C de   de
                                           p           t     t                                                     (18)
                                                q e dq   dq

The left-hand side is marginal revenue from output, while the right-hand side is the marginal cost,
which includes the marginal emissions-related complicance cost. More specifically, the first two
right-hand-side terms are the direct cost of an increase in output and the indirect cost via the
output's impact on emissions, while the third and fourth right-hand-side terms represent the change
in compliance costs associated with a marginal increase in emissions, net of the implicit subsidy
t. Expression (18) states that, to maximize profit, q must be chosen so that the "overall marginal
cost of q" (first two terms) plus the marginal compliance cost (second two terms) equals marginal
revenue (the electricity price).
         It is convenient to rewrite (18) as:

                                                              de 
                                           pTPS  A(qTPS )  t                                                       (19)
                                                              dq 

         TPS        C      C de
where A(q )                       , and the superscript TPS is employed to make clear that this condition
                    q      e dq
applies under the TPS policy.
         Under business as usual, the allowance price t is zero, so the above optimality condition
reduces to p BAU  A(q) , where pBAU is the business-as-usual electricity price. Assume for the


36
  In contrast with the partial derivative condition shown in expression (8), the total derivative considers at one time
the impact of changes in both q and e on profit.
                                                           19
moment (and counter to fact) that the TPS does not affect electricity prices, so that pTPS  p BAU .
Under the TPS, satisfying (19) requires that the overall marginal cost A(q) differ from its business-
as-usual value, to offset the value introduced by the extra term t(de / dq - )). The extra term is
either positive or negative depending on whether de / dq is greater or lower than . For an interior
solution, overall marginal cost must increase with q37. Satisfying the profit-maximization
condition (19) then requires the facility's electricity output to decline or increase, depending on the
           de
sign of           . Since de / dq is the generator's emissions rate at the margin, a generator's
           dq
electricity supply under the TPS is either below or above its baseline level of output, depending on
whether its emissions rate at the margin is greater or less than 
          These results refer to a facility's marginal emissions rate; but compliance under the TPS
depends on the facility's average rate. It is reasonable to expect significant correlation between
marginal and average rates ­ that facilities with relatively high (low) marginal emissions rates will
tend to have relatively high (low) average emissions rates. To the extent that this correlation
applies, the TPS will tend to cause output reductions for the facilities that are out of compliance
initially (because of their relatively high average emissions rates) and tend to cause output
increases for the facilities that are in compliance initially (because of their relatively low average
emissions rates).
           The results are slightly different once account is taken of policy-induced changes in the
electricity price that the facility faces. Define TPS as pTPS  p BAU . Applying equation (19) and the

definition of TPS , we can write:
                                                             de 
                                         p BAU  A(qTPS )  t      TPS                                                   (20)
                                                             dq 

Thus the impact of the TPS on output is modified by the change in electricity prices. If the TPS
causes an increase in electricity prices (as it usually does), TPS is positive and expression (20) is
satisfied with a higher value of q (and higher overall marginal cost) than would be the case if the
electricity price did not increase. It indicates that if  TPS is sufficiently large, even the generators


37
  If d ( A( q )) / dq were negative throughout the relevant range, a facility with u <  would forever increase its output,
 thereby augmenting without limit the excess allowances that it can sell. It is plausible to assume that at some point,
 an increase in q raises total marginal costs (that is, d ( A( q )) / dq becomes positive), implying a limit to the extent that
 a facility will increase its output.
                                                             20
with initial emissions-output ratios above their benchmarks would maximize profits by expanding
output. In our simulations, we find that the price increase under the TPS generally is not large
enough to produce this result. Over the range of simulations we have performed, the TPS causes
nearly every generator with initial emissions-intensity above its benchmark to reduce output.
       Under C&T, the equation corresponding to (20) is:
                                                                 de
                                          p BAU  A(q C &T )  t        C &T                            (21)
                                                                 dq

where 
         C&T
               is the increase in the electricity price relative to the business-as-usual price. In
contrast with equation (20) for the TPS,  does not appear in (21). As a result, the middle right-
hand-side term is always positive. In the (counterfactual) case where C&T does not increase in
electricity prices, in contrast with the TPS, C&T will induce all generators to reduce output
relative to the business-as-usual levels. In the more realistic case where C&T leads to a higher
electricity price, the higher electricity price counters the effect exerted by the allowance price
(middle term), raising the possibility that some u < generators will increase output under C&T.
As was the case under the TPS, our numerical simulations of C&T indicate that the electricity
price effect is fairly small. Over the range of simulations performed, C&T causes nearly all
generators to reduce output relative to the baseline levels, and in many simulations it causes every
generator to reduce output.


       3. Gains from allowance trading


       With a perfectly fluid market for allowance trading, managers of generating units will
reduce emissions to the point where the private marginal costs of abatement equal the private
marginal benefits. The two elements can be obtained from the total derivative of profit shown in
equation (16) above. Dividing both sides by de yields:

                               d     dq  C  C dq       dq
                                   p              t  t                                                 (22)
                               de    de  e  q de       de

Setting d / de to 0 and rearranging yields:




                                                     21
                                         dq  C  C dq        dq
                                     p                t (1   )                                           (23)
                                         de  e  q de        de


                                                MBepvt                      MC epvt
           The left-hand side, MBepvt , is the marginal private benefit from emissions (or marginal

private cost of abatement), while the right-hand side, MCepvt , is the marginal private cost of
emissions (or marginal private benefit from abatement). Importantly, the right side of (23) will
generally vary across generators, since  (dq / de) is specific to individual generators. Hence, even
if trading is perfectly fluid, it will not result in the equalization of marginal benefits and marginal
abatement costs. Other things equal, the right-hand side of (23) will be higher for generators
facing a lower (more stringent)  ; hence after trading they will have higher marginal abatement
costs than generators facing a higher This limits the cost-effectiveness of trading: the total
private cost of achieving the same aggregate emissions reduction would be lower if the lower-
generators undertook less abatement and the higher- generators undertook more. Thus, even
though generators will face a common allowance price, their marginal abatement costs after trades
will generally differ, even if trading is perfectly fluid.38 This limits the achievable cost-reductions
from allowance trading. These limits are a symptom of the presence of the  in equation (23),
which leads to differences across generators in the marginal private benefit from abatement. Note
that even when all facilities face the same , the benefits from allowance trading will often be be
compromised, since dq/de will often differ across generators.
           Thus, the TPS's implicit subsidy to output reduces the gains from allowance trading. The
compromising of the gains is greater, the larger the variation in the benchmarks, other things equal,
since such variation expands the differences across facilities in their marginal benefits from
emissions abatement. Correspondingly, the cost-effectiveness gains from trade are likely to be
greatest when a single benchmark is employed instead of multiple benchmarks. In the presence of
the output subsidy, variation across generators in the value of dq/de also works to limit the gains
from allowance trading.
           C&T has an advantage over the TPS in terms of the cost-effectiveness gains from
allowance trading. This is because under C&T with fluid trading, the right-hand side element in
the MB=MC expression (23) is simply t, which implies that all units equate their marginal private

38
     This result parallels a result in the simpler analytical model in Goulder and Morgenstern (2018).
                                                             22
benefits from emissions (marginal private costs of abatement) to the same value. This leads to the
maximal reduction in aggregate costs of meeting a given emissions-reduction target.


e. Distributional and Other Considerations


         Although the use of multiple (i.e., differing) benchmarks in a TPS compromises cost-
effectiveness, it can serve distributional goals. Higher (less stringent) benchmarks can be applied
to generators that otherwise would suffer especially high costs of compliance or be forced to shut
down. This suggests trade-offs between cost-effectiveness and the achievement of certain
distributional goals.39
         Some attractions of the TPS relative to C&T deserve mention. As noted in the
introduction, the TPS has an advantage in terms of adaptability to changes in macroeconomic
conditions. In boom times, when electricity demand and production are high, the allowance
allocations increase automatically. This prevents what otherwise could be very high abatement
costs in a cap-and-trade program with a fixed cap on allowances. Likewise, the TPS's allowance
allocation is lower in slack times, when electricity demand is likely to be lower and a fixed cap
could have yielded excessive allowances.
         Also, as our numerical simulations will show, because of the TPS's implicit subsidy to
output, the TPS leads to smaller increases in electricity prices than does a comparably stringent
C&T system. This can help reduce emissions leakage.40
         A possible additional attraction is that Chinese planners are more familiar with intensity-
based regulations, of which the TPS is an example. This suggests that the administration of the
TPS could be less costly and more effective than administration of a C&T program ­ at least in the
nearer term.




39
   Note that the use of multiple benchmarks in a C&T system does not compromise cost-effectiveness because C&T
does not involve an output subsidy.
40
   This issue is particularly significant to industries that are especially import-competing and/or carbon-intensive. It is
not a major issue for producers in China's power sector, since relatively little domestically produced electricity is sold
internationally. The issue will be more important once the TPS expands to major industries in China's manufacturing
sector.

                                                            23
f. Summary and Challenges


       Key findings from this analysis are:

       A TPS generally is less cost-effective than an equivalently scaled C&T program. The
       difference in cost-effectiveness reflects the implicit subsidy to output under the TPS, which
       causes generators' electricity output levels to exceed the levels consistent with minimizing
       the costs of achieving a given aggregate emissions limit. This distortion gains importance
       the higher the price elasticity of electricity supply.

       The TPS induces some covered facilities ­ in general, those with emissions-output ratios
       below their required benchmarks ­ to increase supply beyond their business-as-usual
       levels. This contrasts with C&T, which tends to cause all facilities to reduce production
       relative to their BAU levels.

       The TPS usually does not lead to equality in marginal abatement costs across facilities that
       continue to operate, even when trading is perfectly fluid. This limits the aggregate cost-
       reductions from allowance trades.

       The most cost-effective TPS is one involving a single benchmark. Economy-wide costs
       increase with the number (variation) of benchmarks, other things equal. However,
       multiple benchmakrs can help achieve distributional objectives. Thus, there is a trade-off
       between cost-effectiveness and distributional goals.


       The results from our numerical model reinforce these analytically derived findings. They
also provide estimates of the magnitudes of the analytical model's predicted qualitative impacts.


5. A Numerical Model

a. Overview


       The model considers the 2,392 generating units and 11 technology classes of Table 1
Within each technology class, the model allows for heterogeneity in the cost functions and thus
considers a large number of generation units in each class.
       The numerical model's basic structure matches that of the previously described analytical
model. We calibrate the numerical model so that its solution under baseline (status quo)
conditions matches the data in terms of costs, production levels and electricity prices.
       We compare the baseline outcomes with the results under TPS and C&T policies. TPS
policies are defined by the stringency and distribution of the assumed benchmark emissions-output
                                                 24
ratios applying to different generators, while C&T policies are defined by assumed initial
allocations of allowances to the different generators. All generators within a given technology
class receive the same benchmarks under the TPS and the same initial allowance allocations under
C&T.
         Under each policy, profit-maximizing managers of generating units determine whether to
shut down or remain in operation and, conditional on continuing to operate, the optimal level of
production, the extent of effort to reduce emissions intensity of production, and the number of
allowances to purchase or sell. Under each policy, the model solves for the equilibrium allowance
price and for the equilibrium prices of electricity in each provincial and zonal (regional) market.
The equilibrium allowance price equates the aggregate supply of allowances with the aggregate
demand. The equilibrium electricity prices pertain to the electricity produced in excess of the
quantities facing administered prices. Such excess electricity is sold either to residual local
electricity markets or to regional grid companies.41
         The data show that a given generating unit will often sell its electricity in the local market
and zonal market at different prices. Transactions costs help explain the difference in equilibrium
prices of electricity, a homogenous product. As indicated in subsection 5b below, we model
transaction costs as increasing in the quantity of electricity that a given generator sells to the zonal
market. We calibrate the parameters of the transactions cost function so that sales to the zonal
market in the baseline simulation match the observed data. In both baseline and policy
simulations, the equilibrium market price of electricity in the local market equals the price in the
relevant zonal market net of the marginal transactions cost.


b. Costs and Supply


         For each generator, we employ the following specification for total production cost:

                                                                  
                                            C ( q, h)  (0  1q 2 )  h( z , pz , t )                                    (24)




41
  In a few unusual cases, the overall demand for electricity at the administered price is less than the GH level of
 output. In this case, the equilibrium quantity produced is less than the GH output level and all electricity is sold at the
 administered price.

                                                            25
where q is the supply of output, , 0, 1, and 2 are parameters, and the function h(z, pz, t) captures
the direct42 cost of compliance. (Subscripts have been suppressed for simplicity.) In the
compliance cost function, z is an index of real resources devoted to reducing emissions intensity, pz
is the price of a unit of z according to that index, and t is the allowance price. Specifically, under
the TPS,

                                         h( z, t )  pz z  t[u( z, q)   ] q                                      (25)
and under C & T,
                                         h( z , t )  pz z  t[u( z , q )q  a0 ]                                  (26)

As in the previous section's analysis, equations (25) and (26), respectively, indicate that the
expenditure on the additional allowances needed for compliance depends on the gap between uq
and q (under the TPS) and the gap between uq and a0 (under C&T). In (25) and (26), the
emissions-output ratio u depends on z. In determining how much to spend on emissons abatement,
cost-minimizing producers consider the benefits (reduced u) and costs (pz) of z.
         The following function connects z with the emissions-output ratio:

                                           u ( z , q )  u0 / [1  ( z / q ) ]                                    (27)

We employ values above 1 for  , which implies a diminishing marginal effect of z on the
emissions-output ratio and associated increasing marginal abatement costs. Equation (27) has the
property that u(z) is u0 when z is 0. Under business-as-usual, t is 0 and producers will choose z =

0. In this case the h(z, pz ,t) function is zero and the production cost function reduces to 0  1q2 .
         As was noted, transactions costs explain the observed differences in the market prices of
electricity between the local (provincial) market and the zonal market to which the province
                                                                  
contributes. The transaction cost function has the form, 1qi ,zone 2 , where qi,zone is the quantity of

electricity sold by generator i to the zonal market and 1 and  2 are parameters calibrated from

market data.




42
  The qualifier "direct" is included since the costs of compliance also include the impact that policy-induced changes
in q have on production apart from abatement effort. This other cost is captured by the first term in (24).
                                                           26
c. Producer Heterogeneity


        Our data on production costs consist of average total costs for each of the 11 technology
classes shown in Table 1. We allow for cost heterogeneity within technology classes by assuming
that the parameter 0 in the cost function differs across the units within a class according to a beta
distribution. Since 0 is a constant in that function, it does not affect generators' output supplies or
abatement expenditures at the margin. However, it does affect the level of profits and thus, under
any given policy scenario, it influences whether profits for a given unit are positive and whether
the unit shuts down. Because the values of 0 are distributed according to the (continuous) beta
distribution, the number of units that shut down is a continuous function of policy parameters and
the allowance price.43


d. Optimal Output and Emissions Choices


        After substituting equation (27) and into (25) and (26) for the TPS and C&T cases,
respectively, substituting the results into (24), and recognizing from equation (2) that profit is
p q  ( p  p )q minus overall cost, we have

                      pq  ( p  p )q  0  1q  pz z  t [u0 / (1  ( z / q ) )   ]
                                                       2               
                                                                             q                                 (28)

and

                  C &T  p q  ( p  p)q  0  1q  pz z  t                    
                                                      [u0 / (1  ( z / q ) )] q  a0 
                                                           2                                                   (29)

As was noted, p is the market price ­ the price that applies at the margin. Throughout, p should be
interpreted as the price net of any applicable transactions costs. Thus, p is the same for electricity
sold to the local market and the zonal market.
        Differentiating these functions with respect to the choice variables q and z yields:

                                    2 1
                / q : p  12 q              t[u0 / (1  ( z / q ) )   ]  t u0 ( z / q ) (1  ( z / q ) ) 2        (30)

                /  z : pz  t  u0 ( z / q ) 1 (1  ( z / q ) )2                                                  (31)

43
  Using a continuous probability distribution function to incorporate heterogeneity within broad technology classes
causes the model's aggregate demand functions for allowances to be continuous. This facilitates solving the model.

                                                               27
                                          1
                C &T / q : p  12 q 2  t[u0 / (1  ( z / q ) )]  t u0 ( z / q) (1  ( z / q ) )2                     (32)

                C &T /  z : pz  t u0 ( z / q ) 1 (1  ( z / q ) )2                                                 (33)

Expressions (30) and (32) equate the marginal benefit from q (left side) with its marginal
compliance cost. Expressions (31) and (33) equate the cost of z (left side) with the implied
marginal benefit in terms of compliance cost reductions. Under each of the two policies, we solve
simultaneously the two relevant first-order conditions to obtain the optimal values for q and z.44
The optimal responses to changes in prices or other relevant parameters of both output supply and
abatement effort are consistent with the analytical model. Under the TPS, optimal q may increase
or decrease with  and t. Under C&T, the optimal q declines with t and is not affected by a0 for
interior (non-shutdown) solutions. Optimal z declines with pz under both policies.


e. Equilibrium Conditions


         A given TPS policy is defined by a set of benchmarks applying to each generating unit,
while a given C&T policy is defined by a set of initial (exogenous) allowance allocations. The
solution approach under a given policy is as follows: Let V represent a vector consisting of an
allowance price and a set of province-level and zonal electricity prices. For any given V, the
model calculates each generator's revenue-maximizing quantity of output and the optimal
emissions intensity of each generating unit, conditional on remaining in operation. For some units
­ particularly those with emissions-output ratios above the applicable benchmark ­ production
costs can be sufficiently high to imply negative profits. These are the units with exceptionally high
values of 0 within the distribution of this parameter for the technology class in question. These
units will shut down.
         The production decisions of individual generators determine the aggregate demand and
supply of allowances and they affect the supply and demand for electricity in both the residual
local market and the seven zonal markets. The model continually alters both the allowance price
and the electricity prices in V until three sets of equilibrium conditions are satisfied: (1) the

44
  The numerical model obtains the solution by the following iterative procedure. It first posits a value of q and uses
equation (31) (or (33)) to solve for the optimal z conditional on the posited value. It then uses equation (30) (or (32))
to obtain a value for q that is optimal conditional on the derived value of z . If the derived q and original posited q do
not match, the model posits another value for q and repeats the procedure. This iterative procedure continues until the
posited and derived values of q match, at which point both of the applicable first-order conditions are satisfied.

                                                           28
aggregate allowance supply equals the aggregate allowance demand; (2) for each province, the
supply of electricity to the residual local market equals the demand in that market; and (3) for each
zonal market, the sum of provinces' supplies to that market equals the electricity demand in that
market. The equilibrium allowance and electricity prices are closely connected, since electricity
prices affect allowance supply and demand through their impact on electricity production, and the
allowance price affects electricity supplies through its impact on compliance costs.45


f. Data and Calibration


         The data for the model are for the year 2016. Table 1 above organized key data by
technology class. Table 2 displays baseline administered and market prices and outputs by
province. Data were collected from National Development and Reform Commision, China
Electric Council, and the Electric Power Development Research Institute. Details on the sources
and organization of the information on electricity prices are provided in Appendix A.
         Overall, 42.8% of coal-fired electricity and 6.3% of gas-fired electricity is sold in local
market. The average administered price of guaranteed-hour electricity is 0.367 RMB or 7.9
percent higher than market price of electricity sold locally. Because of limited data availability,
we assume that, for a given technology class, the average total production costs and emission
intensity are the same across provinces.
         For each technology class in each province, we identify the parameters 1, and 2 of the
cost function, along with 0mean, the mean value of the cost function's constant term 0, through a
calibration procedure that imposes three requirements on the average generator in each technology
class. The requirements are that, in the business-as-usual simulation: (1) net revenue equals the
net revenue from the data, (2) the net-revenue-maximizing level of output (that is, the level at
which marginal production cost equals the electricity price) matches q0, and (3) the implied price
elasticity of supply  equals 0.22, our central case value for this elasticity. Details on the
calibration method are provided in Appendix B.




45
   The solution method obtains equilibrium electricity prices for 29 province-level residual electricity markets,
equilibrium electricity prices for seven zonal markets, and one equilibrium price for the national allowance market.
We solve for the 36 equilibrium prices by minimizing the differences between supply and demand in each market
through gradient descent.

                                                          29
       A further step is to specify the distribution of the constant term 0 in the cost function of
each technology class. As mentioned, we employ a beta distribution, which involves finite bounds
for the parameter, and we assume the distribution is symmetric. We impose two conditions to
identify the parameters of this distribution. First, the distribution of 0 must imply that under
baseline conditions the mean total cost C for the technology class equals the average total cost
from the data. Second, the largest value for 0 in the distribution, 0max, must imply a value for C
in the baseline that makes profit just equal to zero for the generator with that value. This means
that the highest cost generator in each technology class is marginal in the sense that it makes
exactly zero economic profit. It would be the first to shut down when costs rise for its generator
class. Details of the procedure for establishing the distribution of 0 are in Appendix B.
                                                  
       For the transaction cost function 1qi ,zone 2 , we set the 2 curvature parameter equal to 2.

Then, for each generator, we identify the 1 that applies to the zonal market to which the generator
contributes, based on the requirement that in the baseline simulation, the amount of electricity sold
to the zonal market must equal the amount from the data, given the baseline electricity prices in the
local market and the applicable zonal market. Note that 1 differs according to the generator's
technology class and the province in which the generator is located..


6. Numerical Results


       We consider a range of TPS and C&T policies. Our central case TPS policy involves three
benchmarks: GF = .374, CF = .864, and CFB =1.006, where the subscripts refer to the three
technology categories indicated in Table 1 ­ gas-fired generators, coal-fired (other than circulating
fluidized bed) generators, and circulating fluidized bed generators. We selected the benchmarks
by first calculating the output-weighted average emissions-output ratio under the baseline for the
entire population of generators. We then set the three benchmarks. In each category the
benchmark is a given percentge below the output-weighted emissions-output ratio for all
generators in that category. We choose the percentage reduction so that the resulting baseline-
output-weighted average benchmark for the entire population of generators corresponds to the 65th




                                                 30
percentile emissions rate among all of the generators.46 In discussions with individuals involved in
the planning of the TPS, the 65th percentile ratio was often mentioned as a possible basis for
determining the overall benchmark stringency.
         We also consider alternative benchmark specifications that differ in terms of the number of
benchmarks, their variation, and their stringency. We offer the specifics below.
         For comparability with the TPS policies, we distribute the initial C&T allowances in a way
that matches the initial distribution under the TPS and leads to the same aggregate emissions (total
number of allowances in circulation) as under the TPS.47


a. Central Case Results


         -- Prices, Costs, Emissions, and Outputs


         Table 3 displays the results in our central case. With the central-case benchmarks, the TPS
prompts a reduction in emissions of 84.65 million tons, or 3.1 percent. An allowance price of 226
RMB (or about 32 U.S. dollars) brings the supply of excess allowances by the u <  generators
into balance with the demand for allowances by the u >  generators. In the allowance market,
the u >  generators purchase 56.91 million tons of allowances from the u <  generators.
         The shutdown of some units accounts for an emisions-reduction of about 21 million tons,
or about 25 percent of the overall reduction. The generators that remain in operation contribute to
emissions-reductions through lowered emissions intensities and (for the u >  units) through
reduced electricity production. Even the units that increase electricity output contribute to the
overall emission reductrions by virtue of their reduced emissions intensities.
         The TPS causes aggregate electricity supply to decline by about 0.6 percent although, as
expected, the u < units increase their output. The aggregate reduction in supply reflects the fact
that the TPS raises production costs at the margin: each additional unit of electricity produced
either requires the purchase of additional allowances or reductions in the number of allowances the

46
  Specifically, it is the emissions rate that corresponds to the generator at the 60th percentile in the distribution of
emissions-output ratios across generators ordered by emissions rates, starting with the highest-rate generator.
47
  The TPS and C&T policies lead to different adjustments in output, including different choices as to whether to shut
down, in response to the policy implementation. As a result, the end-of-period distribution of allowances across units
differs, although by construction the total number of allowances held at the end of the complicance period (which
determines total emissions) is the same.
                                                             31
unit can sell. Thus, the reduction in supply by u > units ­ those that shut down and those that
remain in operation ­ exceeds the increase by u < units. The reduction in aggregate supply
gives rise to an increase of 0.5 percent in the output-weighted-average price of electricity. This
increase reflects the higher market-clearing prices of electricity sold in the local residual and zonal
markets. Administered electricity prices are constant.
          The private cost of this central case TPS policy, measured as the negative of the change in
producer and consumer surplus, is about 8.4 trillion RMB, or 99 RMB per ton. Seventy-two
percent of this cost is borne by consumers, a reflection of the policy-induced increase in electricity
prices.
          Although assessing the climate-related environmental benefits from emissions reductions
involves great uncertainties, it is worth considering how climate-related benefits from the TPS
might compare with these estimated costs. The Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of
Carbon (2016) arrived at a central value of about $44 (2016$) (or 290 RMB) per ton for the social
cost of carbon. Applying this value to the estimated 84.65 million ton reduction in CO2 emissions
yields a climate-related benefit of 25 trillion RMB, approximately 2.9 times the estimated costs.


          -- Comparison with Cap and Trade


          Although both the TPS and C&T are examples of emissions trading policies, their impacts
differ in important ways. As was noted, under the C&T policy (free) allowances are allocated to
all of the generators in proportion to their initial allocations under the TPS. The allocations are
scaled so that the total number of allowances allocated matches the total end-of-period allocations
under the TPS. This assures that the aggregate emissions reduction is the same (84.65 million
tons) under both policies. At the same time, end-of-period allocations differ from initial
allocations because of changes in output and shutdowns.
          Table 3 includes results under C&T. Although the C&T allocations parallel those under
the TPS, the responses by generators under C&T are quite different. In contrast with the results
under the TPS, no units increase electricity supply; none have an incentive to increase supply
because the allowance allocation is exogenous and there is no implicit subsidy to increased
electricity output. As a result, under C&T emissions changes from generators that remain in
operation and reduce output account for 96 percent of the emissions reductions, while they account
for only 29 percent under the TPS.
                                                   32
         The two pie charts in Figure 1 further illustrate the significant differences between the TPS
and C&T in terms of their reliance on the different channels for emissions reductions.48 The charts
decompose the overall reductions into those due to changes in electricity production, changes in
the relative outputs among generating units, and changes in emissions intensity. Holding industry
composition and emissions intensity fixed, changed electricity output contributes about 22 percent
of the emissions reductions, as compared with about 60 percent under C&T. Because the TPS
does not exploit the output channel as efficiently as C&T does, to achieve comparable emissions
reductions this policy must rely more on reduced emissions intensities. Such reductions account
for about 75 percent of the reductions under the TPS, as compared with about 37 percent under
C&T. Under both policies, the changes in industry composition contribute to a relatively small
fraction of the overall emissions reductions.
         The greater reduction in electricity output under C&T yields larger increases in electricity
prices than under the TPS: the national average electricity price (output-weighted, and
encompassing all local and zonal prices) rises to .379 RMB/kWh, as opposed to .374 under the
TPS. The higher electricity prices under C&T moderate the profit losses. They also account for
the lower rate of shutdowns under C&T. Shutdowns account for about 3.75 billion kWh reduction
in electricity supply under C&T, as compared with 20.90 billion kWh under the TPS. Table 4
shows that under both policies, the units that shut down are in technology classes C5, C6, and C7
(within the coal-fired category) and classes C9 and C11 (within the circulating fluidized bed and
natural-gas categories, respectively). These are the units with original emissions intensities above
the benchmarks for their categories. As we described in subsection 5f above, there is
heterogeneity within each technology class in the costs of production, and it is only the highest-
cost units within each class that shut down.
         The equilibrium allowance price under C&T is 41 percent lower than under the TPS, a
reflection of the signfiicantly lower electricity output and allowance demand associated with any
given allowance price.
         These differences between the TPS and C&T prices and outputs imply differences in
overall costs as well as in the distribution of those costs between producers and consumers. The

48
   The decomposition in the pie charts was accomplished as follows. The contribution from reduced electricity output
is the emissions reduction that would occur from the differences between output in the policy case and the baseline, if
emissions intensities and sector composition remained the same as in the baseline. The contribution from lowered
emissions intensities is the reduction that would occur if the emissions intensities changed but industry production
levels remained at baseline levels. The contribution from changed sector composition is the reduction that would
occur if the only change from the policy were in the shares of production from the different technology classes.
                                                          33
overall private cost (measured as the sum of the losses in producer and consumer surplus) is 47
percent lower under C&T than under the TPS. As indicated in the analytical model, this reflects
the absence of the implicit output subsidy under C&T and the associated more efficient
exploitation under C&T of reductions in electricity output as a mechanism for reducing emissions.
         The distribution of the costs between producers and consumers is quite different as well.
Because electricity prices rise more under C&T, consumers experience a much larger share of the
burden under this policy. Indeed, they bear over 100 percent of the burden, as the change in
producer surplus is positive. This result is in keeping with earlier studies that show how 100
percent free allocation of emissions allowances can create large rents or windfalls for producers.49
The basic mechanism is that the limited supply of allowances compels producers to reduce output
as one channel for achieving compliance; this boosts electricity prices and creates economic rents
for competitive producers in the same way that a cartel's restriction in output would do so.


         -- Regional Impacts


         The numerical model incorporates data on the geographical locations and electricity
production levels of each technology class under business as usual. Using this information, the
model calculates how the policy costs experienced by each technology class are distibuted across
provinces and regions. While the available data include differences in costs across technology
classes, we do not have information on how, within a given technology class, the costs might differ
across regions. As a result, within a given technology class the model-generated differences in
profit impacts are mainly due to regional differences in impacts on electricity prices rather than
regional differences in production costs.50
         Table 5 indicates how the costs to producers under the TPS are distributed across provinces
and regions of the country. One key result is that four of the seven regional provincial categories


49
   See Bovenberg and Goulder (2001), Parry (2003), Burtaw et al., (2007), Fullerton and Karney (2009), Goulder,
Hafstead, and Dworsky (2010), and Stavins (2019). In the present study, 100 percent of the allowances under C&T
are given out free. Previous studies indicate that freely allocating a significantly smaller share of the allowances
would be sufficient to prevent a loss of profit. See, for example, Goulder, Hafstead and Dworsky (2010). Note also
that if the government were to auction off rather than freely allocate the allowances, what otherwise would be rents to
producers take the form of revenues to the government. The recognition that 100 percent free allocation is not needed
to preserve profits partly explains the increased reliance on auctioning under the European Union's Emissions Trading
System and California's cap-and-trade program over the past decade.
50
   For units in a given technology class, the calibration procedure described in Appendix B introduces very slight
differences in production parameters across units in different regions, reflecting regional differences in benchmark
prices. Hence the qualifier "mainly" above.
                                                          34
in the table experience overall increases in producer surplus from the TPS. This reflects the rents
stemming from the free allocation of allowances under the TPS. It is the North, Southwest and
Northeast provinces that experience overall losses of producer surplus, with the largest losses in
percentage terms applying to Shandong Province in the North and Heilongjian Province in the
Northeast. These provinces are especially reliant on coal-fired generation, and our results indicate
that (under the benchmarks we have chosen) coal-fired generators experience the largest cost
increases under the TPS.
           To some, these results might come as a surprise ­ some might expect the TPS to impose
more widespread losses of profit. We do find that the TPS reduces profits of some generating
units ­ indeed, it causes some units to shut down ­ but the scope of the profit-losses is much
smaller than might have been expected. These results attest to the importance of free allowances
to the distribution of impacts between producers and consumers.


b. Impacts under Alternative Benchmark Scenarios


           Here we explore the sensitivity of policy impacts to alternative benchmark specifications.
We first consider how the the benchmark "spread" ­ the range between the high and low
benchmarks ­ affects the results. Figure 2 displays the overall costs under different specifications
for the spreads. The one-benchmark case, where the same benchmark applies to all 11 technology
classes, is the limiting case of zero spread. The single benchmark is scaled so that the number of
allowances initially allocated matches the initial allowance total from the 3-benchmark case.51 In
the other benchmark cases, the same three benchmark categories apply as in the central case, but
the benchmark values are different. To obtain these values, we expand or shrink the spread across
the three benchmarks while preserving the total number of initially allocated allowances.52 This
preserves overall stringency because it does not alter the total number of initially allocated
allowances; however, because of different number of shutdowns, the end-of-period emissions are
not equal. Figure 2 shows that greater spread implies higher costs per ton of reduced emissions.

51
     This benchmark is also the output-weighted average of the three central-case benchmarks.
52
  More specifically, for each of the three central-case benchmarks, we calculate the difference between the central-
case benchmark and the benchmark in the 1-benchmark case. Let dj denote the difference for technology category j.
The new category-j benchmark is the value in the uniform-benchmark case plus the product of dj and a scaling factor.
We employ scaling factors of .5 and 1.5 to produce benchmarks with less and more spread. Note that applying a
scaling factor of 0 recreates the 1-benchmark case, and applying a scaling factor of 1 reproduces the central-case
benchmarks.
                                                           35
       The analytical model indicated that the use of multiple benchmarks under the TPS limits
the ability of allowance trading to lower costs. To test this prediction, we performed
counterfactual simulations in which the TPS did not include provisions for trading. Consistent
with the analytical model's findings, the cost-reduction from trades is considerably smaller in the
3-benchmark (central) case than in the equivalently stringent one-benchmark case. Specifically, in
the 3-benchmark case, trading reduced overall costs by 75.1 percent, from 33.8 billion RMB to 8.4
billion RMB. In the one-benchmark case, trading reduced costs by 83.7 percent, from 48.1 billion
RMB to 7.8 billion RMB.
       We also consider how the overall stringency of the benchmarks alters policy costs. Here
we scale up or down each of the three central-case benchmarks by a common factor. This alters
stringency while maintaining the relative sizes of the benchmarks. In the central case, the sum of
the initial allocations is 2.5 percent below the aggregate level of emissions under BAU. In the two
alternative stringency scenarios displayed in Figure 3, the overall stringency, as measured by
policy-induced emissions reductions, is 60%, and 140% percent of the overall stringency in the
central case. Costs increase with the stringency of the TPS, at an increasing rate.
       Another important policy consideration is the number of benchmarks. Trade-offs apply
here. A larger number of benchmarks can help meet distributional objectives, although cost-
effectiveness is sacrificed. As noted, the Heilongjian and Shandong provinces experience the
largest percentage losses of producer surplus in the central case. These losses reflect the heavy
reliance on coal-fired generation, along with the fact that the emissions-output ratios of the coal-
fired generators in these provinces were significantly above the benchmark for that generation
category.
       In an alternative sensitivity analysis, we introduce a TPS policy involving four
benchmarks, with the extra benchmark designed to reduce the cost-burden on these provinces.
Here we split the coal fired generation category into two sub-categories, with technology classes 1-
5 in one and classes 6 and 7 in the other. In the Heilongjian and Shandong provinces, an especially
large share of production is by class 6 and 7 generators. In this alternative benchmark scenario, we
increase (i.e., loosen) by a common factor the benchmark that applies to technology classes 6 and
7, and reduce (i.e., tighten) by a common factor the benchmark applicable to technology classes 1-
5. These changes are defined by the following two conditions: (1) the baseline-emissions-
weighted average benchmark for the coal-fired generation category is unchanged, and (2) the
increase in the benchmark for the class 6 and 7 sub-category is just large enough to limit profit
                                                  36
losses to all provinces to no more than 5 percent. As noted, the central case benchmark for the
coal-fired generators is .864 tCO2/mWh. Meeting the two conditions requires changing the
benchmarks for technology classes 1-5 and 6-7 to 0.820 and 0.925 respectively.
       The right-hand pair of columns in Table 5 displays the results in this alternative
"subcategorization" case. In this case, the percentage reduction in profit in Heilongjiang is five
percent (the maximum allowed under this scenario), as compared with 9.3 percent in the central
case. The percentage reduction in profits in Shandong Province is also reduced considerably.
Several provinces that would experience profit increases in the central case have lower profits
under this alternative TPS policy, a consequence of the tighter benchmarks applied to technology
classes 1-5. As indicated in the final row of the table, the overall loss of profit is larger by about
about 3,013 million RMB, or 0.6 percentage points, under the alternative benchmarking. Also, the
overall economic cost (not shown in the table) is 8,804 million RMB, as compared with 8,387
million RMB in the central case (Table 3) .


c. Further Sensitivity Analysis


       Table 6 indicates how alternative parameter values for generators' supply or demand
elasticities affect the results. Consider first the impact of alternative values for the supply
elasticity. The analytical results from Section 4 indicate that the cost-effectiveness disadvantage of
the TPS relative to C&T depends on the extent to which producers respond to the TPS's implicit
subsidy to output. This disadvantage is muted, the lower the value of the supply elasticity. Table
6 shows that in the limiting case of zero for this elasticity, the results under the TPS match those of
C&T, while the differences across policies in the high-elasticity case are greater than in the central
or zero-elasticity cases. With a lower supply elasticity, the TPS's implicit subsidy to output has
less force and does less to counteract the tendency of the regulation-induced higher production
costs to cause a reduction in output. As a result, a lower supply elasticity causes the TPS to
function more and more like C&T, occasioning larger reductions in electricity output, prompting
larger increases in electricity prices, and shifting more of the policy burden to consumers.
       A higher absolute value for the demand elasticity moderates the differences in the price
impacts of both the TPS and C&T. Specifically, the difference between the policies in terms of the
percentage increase in the average electricity price is 2.47 percentage points when the demand
elasticity is -0.15, versus 0.97 percentage points when this elasticity is -0.45. Correspondingly, the
                                                   37
larger elasticity narrows the differences in the impacts across the two policies. In particular, the
ratio of the overall economic cost of the TPS and to that of C&T is about 2 in the low elasticity
case, as compared with 1.8 in the high elasticity case.
       Although the alternative parameter values affect the magnitudes of impacts, the
fundamental differences between the policies in terms of their relative price impacts, their relative
costs, and their distributional impacts are robust across these scenarios.


7. Conclusions


       China's forthcoming nationwide CO2 emissions trading system has the potential to make a
very substantial contribution to the world's efforts to confront global climate change. The system
will take the form of a tradable performance standard and will focus on the power sector in its first
phase. This paper assesses the cost-effectiveness and distributional consequences of alternative
designs of this TPS, using matching analytically and numerically solved models. It also compares
the TPS's impacts with those of cap-and-trade program with the same coverage and stringency.
       A key property of the TPS ­ one that is inherent in its rate-based approach ­ is its implicit
subsidy to production. We show that the important differences in the impacts of the TPS and C&T
stem from this implicit subsidy. The subsidy's impacts are wide-ranging and apply to both cost-
effectiveness and distribution.
       The subsidy limits cost-effectiveness through several channels. First, it implies that the
TPS makes less efficient use of electricity output reduction as a way of reducing emissions. While
C&T induces all covered power-generation facilities to reduce electricity output, the TPS causes
covered facilities with relatively low emissions intensities to increase both electricity output and
emissions relative to their levels under business as usual. Second, the implicit subsidy reduces the
extent to which emissions allowance trading can reduce costs. This reflects the fact that under the
TPS, a cost-minimizing firm will aim to equate its marginal abatement costs with the net-of-
subsidy allowance price applicable to that facility. Since the net-of-subsidy price generally differs
across facilities, allowance trading will not bring about equality of marginal abatement costs across
facilities; hence gains from trades are compromised. This limitation to the gains from trade does
not occur under C&T. Third, the subsidy further compromises cost-effectiveness when multiple
benchmarks are employed. Multiple benchmarks add to costs by affecting the relative strength of

                                                  38
the subsidy across different covered facilities, thereby distorting the relative contributions of
different facilities to emissions abatement. The TPS's costs are about 18 percent higher in our
central case's 3-benchmark system than in an equally stringent single-benchmark system.
       These multiple impacts combine to produce the higher overall costs of the TPS. In our
central-case numerical simulation, the costs of the TPS are 47 percent higher than under C&T. To
our knowledge, this study is the first to identify these three channels and quantify their impact.
       In addition to yielding different overall cost impacts, the TPS and C&T produce quite
different distributional consequences. Because producers make less use of the output-reduction
channel under the TPS, aggregate output is reduced less under the TPS than under C&T and
electricity prices rise by a smaller amount. Hence electricity producers shift less of their
compliance costs to consumers, and the share of the overall economic burden borne by consumers
is smaller under the TPS than under C&T.
       To address distributional concerns, China's TPS will apply different benchmarks to
different power plants. The especially emissions-intensive coal-fired power plants will receive
higher (less stringent) benchmarks in order to avoid what would be exceptionally high compliance
costs if they faced the same benchmarks as other generators. The planners have been giving
serious consideration to a 3-benchmark system. We find that although this system would reduce
the TPS's cost-disparities significantly relative to a 1-benchmark system, it would still produce
quite different cost-impacts across the Chinese provinces, reflecting regional differences in the
composition of generation technologies. Provinces in the northern and northeastern regions of the
country would face the largest percentage reductions in profits. An alternative, 4-benchmark
system that "customizes" the benchmarks successfully avoids exceptional cost-impacts in some
areas. However, achieving this distributional objective lowers profits in other regions of the
country and involves higher aggregate policy costs. Under central case parameter values, the
increase in aggregate cost is five percent.
       Economists have reason to applaud China's decision to reduce CO2 through an emissions
pricing instrument as well as its plan to move from a group of provincial or municipal pilot
programs to an integrated nationwide program. The TPS may not be as cost-effective as C&T, but
its reliance on emissions pricing and its wide geographical scope can help achieve emissions
reductions on a broad scale at relatively low cost. Also, the TPS has certain attractions relative to
C&T. Its rate-based structure implies that policy stringency adjusts automatically in response to
changes in macroeconomic conditions. And the fact that it brings about smaller increases in
                                                  39
electricity prices implies that it would cause less emissions leakage. The smaller price increase
could also be an attraction in terms of fairness and political feasibility. Another potential attraction
­ at least to some interested parties -- is the fact that Chinese planners are more familiar with
intensity-based regulation.
       It is important to note that despite the fact that its costs are higher than those of C&T, the
TPS can generate significant net gains once environmental benefits are counted. If CO2 emissions
reductions are valued at 290 RMB (or about 44 U.S. dollars) per ton, our central case results
indicate that the environmental benefits from the TPS would exceed the policy costs by a factor of
about 3. In addition to reducing CO2 emisions, the TPS would also reduce several air pollutants
whose emissions are correlated with CO2 emissions. Accounting for the reductions in air pollution
and associated health benefits would raise the benefit-cost ratio considerably.
       Some caveats area in order. First, although we have been fortunate to gain access to
important data through our contacts in China, we still faced some limitations in available data, and
we have needed to calibrate or borrow others' estimates of important parameters rather than
estimate them econometrically. Yet the robustness of our results leads us to believe that the key
insights from this study would not change significantly with better data. Second, ours is a one-
period model. Hence it does not capture investment decisions and associated changes to capital
stocks, though it accounts for shutdowns. We would expect that in a multi-period model, the
results would show a similar pattern but be amplified. Specifically, we would expect that the use
of multiple benchmarks would imply larger sacrifices of cost-effectiveness, as multiple
benchmarks would distort investment decisions in addition to the output decisions captured in the
current model. We would also expect that the differences between the costs of the TPS and C&T
would be widened in a model with investment decisons, as the implicit output subsidy of the TPS
would cause investment decisions to be less efficient than those under C&T.
       We believe this study's findings can significantly help Chinese planners arrive at designs
for the TPS that achieve distributional goals with the least additional aggregate cost. They bring
out hitherto unrecognized channels of impact of the TPS, and they offer unique quantitative
estimates of the wide-ranging impacts of China's planned TPS system and the magnitude of these
impacts relative to those of C&T.
       The findings should be of value to the broader policy community as well. They reveal the
key channels that cause the impacts of a TPS to differ from those of C&T, in terms of both cost-
effectiveness and distribution. These results should be useful to the many regional and national
                                                  40
jurisdictions that are considering rate-based, mass-based, and other ways to achieve reductions in
emissions of CO2 and other pollutants.




                                                41
References

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2001. "Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts
of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?" in C. Carraro and G. Metcalf, eds., Behavioral and
Distributional Effects of Environmental Policies, University of Chicago Press.

Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, Ranjit Bharvirkar, and Anthony Paul, 2002. "The Effect on Asset
Values of the Allocation of Carbon Dioxide Emission Allowances." Discussion Paper 02-15,
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.

Burtraw, Dallas, and Karen Palmer, 2007. Compensation Rules for Climate Policy in the
Electricity Sector. Discussion Paper 07-41, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.

Duan, Maosheng and Li Zhou, 2017. "Key Issues in Designing China's National Carbon
Emissions Trading System." Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy 6(2).

Fischer, Carolyn, 2001."Rebating Environmental Policy Revenues: Output-Based Allocations and
Tradable Performance Standards." RFF Discussion Paper 01­22.

Fischer, Carolyn, Biao Mao, and Daniel Shawhan, 2018. "Trade between Mass- and Rate-based
Regulatory Regimes: Bad for Emissions?" Energy Economics, vol. 73, pp. 326-336.

Fischer, Carolyn, and Richard G. Newell, 2008. "Environmental and Technology Policies for
Climate Mitigation." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55:142-162.

Fischer, Carolyn, and A. K. Fox, 2012. "Comparing Policies to Combat Emissions Leakage:
Border Tax Adjustments versus Rebates." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
64(2): 199-216.

Fowlie, Meredith, 2012. "Updating the Allocation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Permits in a
Federal Cap-and-Trade Program. In Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram, eds., The Design and
Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy. University of Chicago Press.

Fowlie, Meredith, Mar Reguant, and Sesphen P. Ryan, 2016. "Market-based Emisisons
Regulation and Industry Dynamics." Journal of Political Economy 124(1); 249-302.

Fowlie, Meredith, and Mar Reguant, 2018. " Challenges in the Measurement of Leakage Risk."
AEA Papers and Proceedings 108:124-129.

Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert Metcalf, 2001. "Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and Pre-
Existing Distortions." Journal of Public Economics 80(2):249-267.

Fullerton, Don, and Daniel H. Karney, 2009. "The Allocation of Permits in U.S. Climate Change
Legislation." The Economists' Voice 6(12), January.




                                                       42
Goulder, Lawrence H., Marc A.C. Hafstead, and Michael Dworsky, 2010. "Impacts of Alternative
Emissions Allowance Allocation Methods under a Federal Cap-and-Trade Program." Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 60, pp. 161-181.

Goulder, Lawrence H., and Ian W.H. Parry, 2008. "Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy,"
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 2(2), Summer 2008, pp. 152­174.

Goulder, Lawrence H., Marc A. C. Hafstead, and Roberton C. Williams III, 2016. "General
Equilibrium Impacts of a Federal Clean Energy Standard." American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 8(2):186-218.

Goulder, Lawrence H. and Richard D. Morgenstern, 2018. "China's Rate-Based Approach to
Reducing CO2 Emissions: Attractions, Limitations, and Alternatives, AEA Papers and
Proceedings, May 2018 vol. 108, pp. 458-62.

Haites, Erik, 2003. "Output-Based Allocation as a Form of Protection for Internationally
Competitive Industries." Climate Policy 3:S29-S41.

Ho, Mun S., Zhongmin Wang, and Zichao Yu, 2017. "China's Power Generation Dispatch." RFF
Report, April.

Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel, 2009. "Greenhouse Gas
Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
1(1).

Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon, 2016. "Technical Update of the Social
Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis under Executive Order 12866." Technical Support
Document, Environmental Protection Agency, Washington DC.

Kahrl, Friedrich, Max Dupuy, and Xuan Wang, 2016. "Issues in China Power Sector Reform:
Generator Dispatch." Regulatory Assistance Project Discussion Paper, July.

Karplus, Valerie and Xiliang Zhang, 2017. "Incentivizing Firm Compliance with China's National
Emissions Trading System." Economics of Energy and Environmental Policy 6(2).

Kerr, Suzi, and Richard G. Newell, 2003. "Policy-Induced Technology Adoption: Evidence from
the US Lead Phasedown." RFF Discussion Paper 01-14, May.

Metcalf, Gilbert E., 2019. "On the Economics of a Carbon Tax for the United States." In Janice
Eberly and James Stock, eds., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 405-58.

Parry, Ian W. H., 2003. "Fiscal Interactions and the Case for Carbon Taxes over Grandfathered
Carbon Permits," Oxford Review of Economic Policy 19, pp. 385-399.

Parry, Ian, Baoping Shang, Philippe Wingender, Nate Vermon, and Tarun Narasimhan, 2016.
"Climate Mitigation in China: Which Policies Are Most Effective?" IMF Working Paper
WP/16/148, International Monetary Fund.

                                               43
Parry, Ian W.H., and Alan J. Krupnick, 2011. "Is a Clean Energy Standard a Good Way to Move
U.S. Climate Policy Forward?" Resources for the Future Issues Brief, 11-04, April.

Pizer, William A. and Xiliang Zhang, 2018. "China's New National Carbon Market," AEA Papers
and Proceedings 108:463-67.

Stavins, Robert N., 2019. "The Future of U.S. Carbon-Pricing Policy." In Matthew Kotchen,
James H. Stock, and Catherine Wolfram, eds., Environmental and Energy Policy and the Economy
1, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Teng, Fei, Frank Jotzo, and Xin Wang, 2017. "Interactions between Market Reform and a Carbon
Price in China's Power Sector." Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy (2).

Yang, L.; Lin, B., 2016. "Carbon Dioxide Emission in China's Power Industry: Evidence and
Policy Implications." Energy Rev. 60, pp. 258­267.

Zhang, Junjie, Zhenxuzn Wang, and Xinming Du, 2017. "Lessons Learned from China's Regional
Carbon Market Pilots." Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy (2).




                                             44
Table 1: Production Levels, Production Costs, Emissions Intensities and Emissions




                                              45
  Table 2: Baseline Production and Prices by Province, 2016*


                                            Administered-Priced Production                           Market-Priced Production

                              Guaranteed-                                                Direct        Direct       Production      Grid      Total
                   Number                      Guaranteed    Production Administered                                                        Production
    Province                     Hour                                                  Contracting   Contracting   Sold to Grid   Company
                   of Units                    Hour Price   Sold to Zone   Price
                              Production                                               Production      Price       Companies        Price

Anhui                  62            85.5          0.369          21.2        0.448          30.8        0.347            8.3       0.426       145.9

Beijing                16            10.3          0.352           2.6        0.411           1.0        0.329            0.3       0.388        14.1

Chongqing              24            27.0          0.380           6.7        0.456          10.0        0.368            2.7       0.434        46.3

Fujian                 59            68.4          0.374          17.0        0.448          23.8        0.369            6.4       0.426       115.6

Gansu                  44            20.1          0.298           5.0        0.372          30.7        0.276            8.3       0.350        64.1

Guangdong             214           156.8          0.451          38.9        0.458          85.4        0.357           23.0       0.435       304.1

Guangxi                24             2.1          0.414           0.5        0.458          33.4        0.369            9.0       0.435        45.0

Guizhou                46            51.7          0.336          12.8        0.458          22.9        0.335            6.2       0.435        93.5

Hainan                 14            10.7          0.420           2.7        0.458           3.5        0.398            0.9       0.435        17.8

Hebei                 134            91.9          0.357          22.8        0.411          33.1        0.348            8.9       0.388       156.7

Heilongjiang           77            28.2          0.372           7.0        0.423          10.2        0.345            2.7       0.401        48.1

Henan                 120            91.4          0.355          22.7        0.456          46.4        0.338           12.5       0.434       173.0

Hubei                  28            29.1          0.398           7.2        0.456          10.3        0.381            2.8       0.434        49.4

Inner Mongolia        191           126.7          0.290          31.4        0.423          72.3        0.268           19.4       0.401       249.9

Jiangsu               243           140.9          0.378          34.9        0.448          86.4        0.369           23.2       0.426       285.4

Jiangxi                28            33.2          0.399           8.2        0.456          12.0        0.396            3.2       0.434        56.7

Jilin                  44            33.6          0.372           8.3        0.423          12.1        0.363            3.3       0.401        57.4

Liaoning               78            49.3          0.369          12.2        0.423          26.0        0.352            7.0       0.401        94.5

Ningxia                38            39.7          0.260           9.8        0.372          14.3        0.237            3.8       0.350        67.7

Qinghai                 4             2.0          0.325           0.5        0.372           1.3        0.303            0.3       0.350         4.1

Shaanxi                75            50.1          0.335          12.4        0.372          24.7        0.312            6.6       0.350        93.9

Shandong              312           146.6          0.373          36.4        0.411          52.9        0.351           14.2       0.388       250.1

Shanghai               42            52.7          0.405          13.1        0.448          15.9        0.383            4.3       0.426        85.9

Shanxi                111            76.6          0.321          19.0        0.411          26.9        0.306            7.2       0.388       129.8

Sichuan                39            32.0          0.401           7.9        0.456          11.5        0.379            3.1       0.434        54.6

Tianjin                26            23.1          0.351           5.7        0.411           7.8        0.329            2.1       0.388        38.7

Xinjiang               72            46.0          0.262          11.4        0.372          16.4        0.240            4.4       0.350        78.2

Yunnan                 33            31.2          0.336           7.7        0.458          11.3        0.314            3.0       0.435        53.2

Zhejiang              194           156.7          0.415          38.9        0.448          48.8        0.389           13.1       0.426       257.5

Total               2392          1713.8          0.367          425.0        0.433        782.1         0.340          210.2       0.411     3131.1


* Units for production data are millions of mWh. Units for price data are RMB/kWh




                                                                             46
Table 3: Impacts of Tradable Performance Standard and Cap & Trade ­ The Central Case

                                                              Baseline   TPS          C&T
Benchmarks (tCO 2/mWh)
  -- Coal-fired (technology classes 1-7)                                   0.864    Allowance
                                                                                    Allocations
  -- CFB (technology classes 8 and 9)                                      1.006
                                                                                   Matching TPS
  -- Gas-fired (technology classes 10 and 11)                              0.374    Allocations


Emissions (million tCO2 )                                      2732.88   2648.22      2648.22
  -- change from baseline                                                 -84.65        -84.65
       -- change from units that shut down                                -20.98         -3.76
       -- change from units that remain and increase supply               -38.91            0
       -- change from units that remain and reduce supply                 -24.76        -80.89
  -- percentage change from baseline                                        -3.1          -3.1


Allowance Price (RMB)                                                     225.89       133.39
Allowances Traded (million tCO2)                                           56.91        56.88


Aggregate Electricity Supply (million kWh)                    3131149    3112288      3073229
  -- change from baseline                                                 -18860       -57919
       -- change from units that shut down                                -20897        -3747
       -- change from units that remain and increase supply                3578             0
       -- change from units that remain and reduce supply                  -1540       -54172
  -- percentage change from baseline                                       -0.60         -1.85


Electricity Price (RMB/kWh)
  -- average electricity price                                   0.372     0.374        0.379
     -- marketed electricity in intraprovincial market           0.340     0.346        0.363
     -- administered electricity in intraprovincial market       0.367     0.367        0.367
     -- marketed electricity in interprovincial market           0.411     0.417        0.432
     -- administered electricity in interprovincial market       0.433     0.433        0.433


Private Cost (million RMB)                                                 8387          4445
  -- change in Consumer Surplus                                            -6062       -20465
  -- change in Producer Surplus                                            -2325        16019
Private Cost per Ton of Reduced Emissions (RMB/tCO2 )                      99.07        52.52


Environmental Benefit (million RMB)                                      24548.5      24548.5
       Table 4: Impacts on Generators' Market Status



 Technology    Technology
                                                            Market Status, TPS                                               Market Status, C&T
  Category        Class

                                         Initially in                  Policy Response                    Initially in                  Policy Response
                                        Compliance?      ( percentage of generators in each category)    Compliance?      ( percentage of generators in each category)

                                                                        Operate         Operate                                          Operate         Operate
                                                                        and Purchase    and Sell                                         and Purchase    and Sell
                                                        Shut Down       Allowances      Allowances                       Shut Down       Allowances      Allowances
Coal-Fired Units
                   C1                        Y                      0              0             100              Y                  0              0             100
                   C2                        Y                      0              0             100              Y                  0              0             100
                   C3                        Y                      0              0             100              N                  0              0             100
                   C4                        Y                      0              0             100              N                  0              0             100
                   C5                        N                 0.07           99.93                  0            N                  0           100                  0
                   C6                        N                 0.02           99.98                  0            N                  0          92.99             7.01
                   C7                        N                 5.62           94.38                  0            N             1.05            98.95                 0
Circulating Fluidized Bed (CFB) Units
                   C8                        Y                      0              0             100              Y                  0              0             100
                   C9                        N                 0.60           99.40                  0            N             0.01            99.99                 0
Gas-Fired Units
                   C10                       Y                      0              0             100              N                  0              0             100
                   C11                       N                 0.18           99.82                  0            N             0.05            99.95                 0
Table 5: TPS Cost Impacts by Region and Province


Region/Province            3-Benchmark (Central) Case                      4-Benchmark (Subcategorization) Case


                       Change in Profit          Change as Pct of           Change in Profit          Change as Pct of
                        (million RMB)             Baseline Profit            (million RMB)             Baseline Profit


East                                  1273                      0.78                      -1257                     -0.77
   Anhui                                  590                       2.29                       -277                  -1.07
   Shanghai                               343                       1.87                       203                       1.11
   Jiangsu                                 26                       0.05                       -472                  -0.91
   Jiangxi                                258                       2.40                        -94                  -0.88
   Zhejiang                                54                       0.10                       -616                  -1.10


North                                -3615                     -3.32                      -2436                     -2.24
   Beijing                              -46                     -2.40                        -27                     -1.42
   Tianjin                               33                      0.53                        -89                     -1.39
   Shanxi                              -430                     -2.85                       -239                     -1.59
   Shandong                           -1889                     -4.98                       -856                     -2.26
   Hebei                               -683                     -2.99                       -118                     -0.52
   Inner Mongolia                      -599                     -2.42                      -1105                     -4.45


Central                                    45                   0.12                           -36                  -0.10
   Hubei                                   34                       0.35                        -15                  -0.16
   Henan                                   11                       0.04                        -21                  -0.08


South                                     489                   0.49                       -482                     -0.49
   Guangdong                              190                    0.28                          -240                  -0.36
   Guangxi                                  2                    0.04                           -42                  -0.54
   Fujian                                 325                    1.61                          -170                  -0.85
   Hainan                                 -29                   -0.73                           -29                  -0.73


Southwest                             -581                     -1.39                      -1143                     -2.73
   Chongqing                                67                   0.75                           -31                  -0.35
   Sichuan                                -269                  -2.53                          -284                  -2.67
   Guizhou                                -240                  -1.70                          -447                  -3.16
   Yunnan                                 -138                  -1.70                          -380                  -4.67


Northwest                                 863                   3.22                           402                   1.50
   Shaanxi                                -12                   -0.10                          -466                  -4.02
   Gansu                                  364                    7.55                           520                  10.80
   Ningxia                                232                    4.73                           104                   2.13
   Qinghai                                 -8                   -2.13                            32                   8.50
   Xinjiang                               286                    5.62                           211                   4.14


Northeast                             -801                     -2.62                       -383                     -1.25
   Heilongjiang                           -653                  -9.32                          -351                  -5.00
   Jilin                                  -107                  -1.17                             7                   0.08
   Liaoning                                -40                  -0.28                           -39                  -0.27


 Total                             -2325.0                     -0.46                    -5338.0                     -1.05


                                                     49
 Table 6: Impacts under Alternative Supply and Demand Elasticities


                                                           Supply Elasticity                  Demand Elasticity

                                                                   .22                                 -0.3
                                                       0         (central      0.44       -0.15      (central    -0.45
                                                                  case)                               case)

TPS
      Percent Reduction in Emissions                    -3.15         -3.1        -3.06      -2.95        -3.1      -3.18
         share from reduced emissions intensities (%     74.2        74.9          75.2       79.2       74.9        72.8
         share from compositional changes (%)             3.1          3.5          3.8        3.2         3.5        3.6
         share from reduced output (%)                   22.7        21.7          21.0       17.7       21.7        23.6
      Percent Increase in Average Electricity Price      0.67        0.01          0.56       0.91       0.62        0.48
      Private Cost                                      8389         8387         8374       8459        8387       8360
          change in Consumer Surplus                   -6635        -6062        -5645      -9674       -6062      -4399
          change in Producer Surplus                   -1754        -2325        -2728       1215       -2325      -3961

C&T
      Percent Reduction in Emissions                    -3.15         -3.1       -3.06       -2.95        -3.1      -3.18
         share from reduced emissions intensities (%     74.2        37.3         27.3        43.4       37.3        35.0
         share from compositional changes (%)             3.1          2.4         2.5         2.0         2.4        2.5
         share from reduced output (%)                   22.7        60.3         70.2        54.6       60.3        62.5
      Percent Increase in Average Electricity Price      0.67        1.99         2.29        3.39       1.99        1.45
      Private Cost                                      8389         4452        2560        4070        4452       4658
          change in Consumer Surplus                   -6637       -20465      -23528      -36482      -20465     -14286
          change in Producer Surplus                   -1751        16019       20967       32411       16019       9628




                                                            50
Figure 1: Sources of Emissions Reductions under the TPS and C&T


                                                    TPS
                                Total Reduction: 84.65 million tCO2




                             Changed Electricity 
                                  Output
                             18.35 million tCO2 
          Changed Sector         (21.67%)
           Composition
         2.93 million tCO2
              (3.46%)


                                                      Lowered Emissions 
                                                          Intensities
                                                      63.37 million tCO2
                                                           (74.87%)




                                                    C&T
                                Total Reduction: 84.65 million tCO2




                                                          Lowered Emissions 
                                                              Intensities
                                                          31.59 million tCO2
                               Changed Electricity             (37.32%)
                                    Output
                               51.06 million tCO2 
                                   (60.32%)
                                                                            Changed Sector 
                                                                             Composition
                                                                           2.00 million tCO2
                                                                                (2.36%)



                                                    51
52
