                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE EFFECTS OF IMMIGRATION ON THE ECONOMY:
                     LESSONS FROM THE 1920S BORDER CLOSURE

                                          Ran Abramitzky
                                           Philipp Ager
                                         Leah Platt Boustan
                                            Elior Cohen
                                         Casper W. Hansen

                                        Working Paper 26536
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26536


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2019


We received valuable feedback from Jaime Arellano-Bover, Chris Becker, Hoyt Bleakley, Brian
Cadena, Alvaro Calderon, Michael Clemens, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, Dave Donaldson, James
Fenske, Paola Giuliano, Walker Hanlon, Stephan Heblich, Jeanne Lafortune, Ethan Lewis, Robert
Margo, Melanie Morten, Petra Moser, Nathan Nunn, Nancy Qian, Paul Rhode, Isaac Sorkin,
Sandra Sequeira, Daniel Sturm, José Tessada, Marco Tabellini, Marianne Wanamaker, Zach
Ward, Jeff Williamson, Asger Moll Wingender, Niko Wolf, Ariell Zimran, and various seminar
and workshop participants at the American Economic Association, the Economic Demography
Workshop in Denver, Fordham, Groningen, Humboldt University, Lund, London School of
Economics, Northwestern, NYU, Oxford, Princeton, Queens College, UCLA, University of
Copenhagen, Urban Economics Association, and Wharton. Philipp Ager and Casper Worm
Hansen gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Danish Research Council grant No.
DFF ­ 4182-00043. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ran Abramitzky, Philipp Ager, Leah Platt Boustan, Elior Cohen, and Casper W. Hansen.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Immigration on the Economy: Lessons from the 1920s Border Closure
Ran Abramitzky, Philipp Ager, Leah Platt Boustan, Elior Cohen, and Casper W. Hansen
NBER Working Paper No. 26536
December 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. J6,J61,N21

                                        ABSTRACT

In the 1920s, the United States substantially reduced immigrant entry by imposing country-
specific quotas. We compare local labor markets with more or less exposure to the national
quotas due to differences in initial immigrant settlement. A puzzle emerges: the earnings of
existing US-born workers declined after the border closure, despite the loss of immigrant labor
supply. We find that more skilled US-born workers ­ along with unrestricted immigrants from
Mexico and Canada ­ moved into affected urban areas, completely replacing European
immigrants. By contrast, the loss of immigrant workers encouraged farmers to shift toward
capital-intensive agriculture and discouraged entry from unrestricted workers.

Ran Abramitzky                                 Elior Cohen
Department of Economics                        University of California, Los Angeles
Stanford University                            3210 Sawtelle Blvd Apt 207
579 Jane Stanford Way                          Los Angeles, CA 90066
Stanford, CA 94305                             eliorc@ucla.edu
and NBER
ranabr@stanford.edu                            Casper W. Hansen
                                               University of Copenhagen
Philipp Ager                                   Øster Farimagsgade 5
Department of Business and Economics           Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark                 casper.worm.hansen@econ.ku.dk
Campusvej 55
5230 Odense M, Denmark
and CEPR
phag@sam.sdu.dk

Leah Platt Boustan
Princeton University
Industrial Relations Section
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
lboustan@princeton.edu
I. Introduction

       This paper studies the economic effects of the 1920s border closure, one of the most
fundamental changes to United States immigration policy in the past century. In the early twentieth
century, European immigrants faced few restrictions for entry into the US, and roughly 1 million
immigrants arrived on the nation's shores each year, relative to the US population of 92 million in
1910. This era of open immigration ended in the 1920s with a series of increasingly restrictive
immigration quotas, eventually limiting entry from affected countries to 150,000 a year.1 As a
result, the foreign-born share of the population fell from 14 percent in 1920 to 5 percent in 1970
(see Figure 1). Because there have been few such drastic changes in immigration policy in US
history, this episode offers a rare window into how the economy might adapt to policies that aim
to reduce immigrant flows substantially, including a number of recently proposed restrictions in
the United States and the European Union.
       The public debate on the economic impact of immigration typically focuses on the effect
of immigrant arrivals on employment and wages of the native born. Like today, contemporary
observers in the early twentieth century debated the likely effect of immigration restrictions on the
existing workforce. Jeremiah Jenks, an economist at Cornell and member of the Dillingham
Commission convened by Congress to study immigration, argued that immigrants displaced the
US-born from the manufacturing and mining sectors and lowered wages, writing that "it is
undoubtedly true that the availability of the large supply of recent immigrant labor has prevented
an increase in wages which otherwise would have resulted during recent years from the increased
demand for labor" (Jenks and Lauck, 1912, p. 195). Others disagreed, suggesting that low-skilled
immigrants were complements to the higher-skilled US-born workforce. Edward Steiner, professor
at Grinnell College, asserted that "not many have been crowded out [by immigration]... the [US
born] do not care to go back to the track, the pickax and the shovel" (Steiner, 1909, p. 190-91).
The agricultural sector also lobbied against immigration quotas, asserting that immigrant workers
were willing to perform farm labor tasks that the US-born workforce refused to do (Wang, 1975).
       We begin our analysis by comparing the economic status of US-born workers in labor
markets that were more or less exposed to the quota policy. A simple version of neo-classical
economic theory would predict that a decline in immigrant labor supply would result in better

1
 The US quotas were part of a global movement away from open immigration, mirrored by
Canada, Argentina and other New World economies (Timmer and Williamson, 1998).
                                                 1
economic opportunities for existing workers. However, as has been found in many historical and
contemporary studies, we see no evidence here that US-born workers benefitted from the border
closure. The Census did not collect data on wages and salary until 1940. Using a new proxy for
individual income, we find that, if anything, US-born workers experienced falling income
primarily due to occupational downgrading (see also: Tabellini, 2019 and Price, vom Lehn and
Wilson, 2020).
         The main goal of the paper is then to explain why restricting immigration did not benefit
the average US-born worker living in exposed labor markets. We find that local economies adapted
to this dramatic policy by substituting toward other sources of labor and capital. Urban areas
adjusted to the loss of immigrant labor by attracting new workers, including some US-born
workers and some immigrants who were not covered by the policy (primarily Mexicans and
Canadians), leaving the manufacturing sector relatively unaffected in terms of total employment,
capital investment and wages. By contrast, in rural areas, the loss of immigrant workers
encouraged landowners to invest in more farm capital and to shift away from labor-intensive crops,
which deterred US-born workers from moving into affected rural areas. The mining industry,
which had been highly dependent on immigrant labor and which did not have adequate forms of
substitutable capital until the 1940s, contracted after the border closure, both in workforce and in
capital stock. Our findings are consistent with modern evidence that firms engage in a series of
adaptions to the loss of immigrant labor, such as substituting into capital-intensive production
(Lewis, 2011) or attracting internal migration to the area (Dustmann, Schönberg and Stuhler,
2017).
         Our research strategy relies on classifying labor markets as more or less exposed to the
national immigration quota based on the historical country-of-origin composition of their
immigrant population. The 1920s quota laws restricted immigration from some sending countries
more than others. Most of the slots were reserved for entrants from the United Kingdom, Ireland,
and Germany, leaving only a small proportion of the overall quotas available for immigrants from
Southern and Eastern Europe, such as Russia and Italy. Immigrants from the Western Hemisphere,
including Mexico and Canada, were entirely exempted from the quota laws.2


2
 Although Mexican immigrants were not subjected to a restrictive quota, the cost of entry through
official entry ports rose in 1921. Mexican entrants were required to pay a ten dollar visa fee and
were subjected to "a degrading procedure of bathing, delousing, medical line inspection, and
                                                 2
       It is natural to think of our variation in the context of a simple difference-in-differences
design. Controlling for the initial foreign-born share of an area, labor markets that had larger
clusters of Russians or Italians, for example, were more affected by the policy than areas with
clusters of Irish and Germans because immigrants tend to settle in areas with already established
networks from their home country (Bartel, 1989). At the extreme, a labor market that had
exclusively Italian immigrants would have been treated by the quota policy, while a labor market
that had exclusively German immigrants would not. In reality, labor markets will vary more
continuously in the share of the population hailing from affected countries. Conceptually, our
approach is similar to Clemens, Lewis and Postel (2018), who studied the ending of the Bracero
guest worker program for Mexican immigrants in 1965, as well as to studies of trade liberalization
on local economies (e.g., Kovak, 2013 and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak, 2017).
       Our estimation relies on the identifying assumption that local labor markets with a greater
or lesser share of their foreign-born population from quota-restricted countries would not have
diverged in the 1920s if not for the border closure. We provide evidence in support of this parallel
trends assumption in a few ways. First, we use a Lasso procedure to assess whether our measure
of quota exposure is correlated with any other initial characteristics (beyond Census division and
initial foreign born share of the population) that might generate differential trends across
locations.3 Second, we assess pre-trends by considering a placebo policy date for the border
closure: what if the border closure movement, which passed a literacy test in both the House and
the Senate in 1896 (vetoed by President Cleveland), had been successful in restricting immigration
circa 1900, rather than in the 1920s? Yet, we find that exposed labor markets did not experience
declining immigration after this placebo policy, nor did they attract internal migration.
       Our analysis shares some features with shift-share instruments because it relies on initial
immigrant settlements to determine labor market exposure to the national quota policy (Bartik,
1991, Card, 2001). Jaeger, Ruist and Stuhler (2018) encourage caution in applying shift-share
methods to the study of immigration, documenting high rates of serial correlation across decades
in the areas that receive large immigration flows. However, the sharp change in immigration policy


interrogation" (Ngai, 2003, p. 85; Markel and Stern, 2002; Escamilla-Guerrero, 2019). ) Many
Mexican entrants bypassed official entry ports as a result.
3
  We find only one such covariate ­ the share of the labor force employed in agriculture, and then
only for the urban sample (many urban labor markets at the time were close to farmland). Results
are robust to controlling for trends by shared employed in agriculture.
                                                 3
between the 1900s and 1920s lessens concerns about serial correlation in our context (correlations
between immigration flows to a location over time are above 0.96 from 1980-2010, but are -0.16
in our setting).
        Our paper contributes to a growing consensus that a loss of immigrant labor may not
generate employment opportunities for native-born workers, as immigrants can be readily replaced
with mechanization or automation in some industries. LaFortune, Tessada and González-Velosa
(2015) and Lew and Cater (2018) show that the slowing of immigration in the early twentieth
century hastened mechanization on American farms. Similarly, Hornbeck and Naidu (2014) find
that southern planters responded to black out-migration by investing in farm capital, and Clemens,
Lewis and Postel (2018) document the same following restrictions against Bracero farm workers.
In an urban setting, Lewis (2011) estimates that areas that received more low-skilled labor in the
early 1990s were slower to adopt numerically controlled machines and other forms of factory
automation.
        We also add to the discussion of whether immigrant arrivals encourage native-born
workers to leave certain labor markets, suggesting a degree of "displacement." There is a large
body of work that comes to mixed conclusions about whether and to what extent immigrants
displace US-born workers from local labor markets (Filer, 1992; Wright, Ellis and Reibel, 1997;
Card and DiNardo, 2000; Card, 2001; Borjas, 2006; Peri and Sparber, 2011; Wozniak and Murray,
2012). Most recently, Dustmann, Schönberg and Stuhler (2017) document net declines in internal
migration in German labor markets in response to Czech arrivals. We find a one-for-one
replacement of lost immigrant workers in urban settings, particularly in manufacturing, but, if
anything, a displacement of US-born workers from rural areas following immigrant losses, as
farmers shifted to capital-intensive production and prospective farm workers moved away.
        A policy as all-encompassing as closing the border to new immigration had a complex set
of welfare effects on US-born workers. Some workers gained (e.g., those who moved into urban
areas to take manufacturing jobs) and other workers lost out (e.g., those who remained in rural
areas). Our paper complements recent work documenting the wide-ranging effects of the 1920s
border closure on the US economy and society.4 These studies show that the immigration quotas


4
  Our paper subsumes Ager and Hansen's working papers (2016, 2017), which were the earliest
studies to analyze the effect of the immigration quotas on economic outcomes. Greenwood and
Ward (2015), Massey (2016), and Ward (2017) examine how the quotas of the 1920s changed the
                                                4
reduced scientific discovery and patentable ideas (Doran and Yoon, 2018; Moser and San, 2019),
but also had a small (but detectable) effect on dampening the spread of communicable disease
(Ager, Feigenbaum, Hansen and Tan, 2019). Areas that experienced falling immigration after the
border closure also became more receptive to redistribution (Tabellini, 2019).5
       Together, this work adds to the broader literature about the economics of the Age of Mass
Migration from Europe reviewed by Abramitzky and Boustan (2017). This work has spanned
many topics, including migrant selection and assimilation (Ferrie, 1999; Abramitzky, Boustan and
Eriksson, 2012, 2013, 2014, Forthcoming; Spitzer and Zimran, 2018; Alexander and Ward, 2018;
Ward, Forthcoming; Eriksson, Forthcoming); return migration to Europe (Bandiera, et al., 2013;
Ward, 2017; Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2019); and the long-run effects of immigrant
settlement on local areas (Ager and Brueckner, 2013, 2018; Burchardi, et al. 2016; Sequeira, et al.,
Forthcoming).

II. Immigration policy in the early twentieth century

       America had an open immigration policy toward European immigrants in the 150 years
after its founding, punctuated by periodic outbreaks of anti-immigrant sentiment (Hutchinson,
1981; Higham, 2002).6 The first national attempt at broad immigration restriction was a bill
requiring a literacy test for entry to the US, which was proposed (but not adopted) in 1891
(Fairchild, 1917). The Dillingham Commission, which was convened by Congress in 1906 to study


skill selection and probability of return migration for European migrants. Collins (1997) and Xie
(2017) have studied the relationship between the border closure and the advent of the Great Black
Migration. Both Tabellini (2019) and Price, vom Lehn and Wilson (2020) analyze occupation-
based earnings of US-born workers in cities.
5
  Other immigration policies that have been studied by economists are the Chinese Exclusion Act
of 1882 (Chen, 2015), and contemporary legislation to address undocumented migration, including
the Immigration Reform and Control Act (Philipps and Massey, 1999; Freedman, Owens and
Bohn, 2018) and Secure Communities (Miles and Cox, 2014). In a related modern paper, Allen,
Dobbin, and Morten (2019) study the expansion of border fencing to deter illegal entry from
Mexico.
6
  The arrival of poor Irish immigrants escaping the Great Famine of the 1840s gave rise to the
(short-lived) nativist Know-Nothing party and a series of state-level regulations ­ particularly in
Massachusetts and New York ­ allowing for aliens "likely to become a public charge" to be barred
from entry or deported after arrival (Hirota, 2017; Alsan, Eriksson and Niemesh, 2018; Collins
and Zimran, 2019). At the national level, the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 was followed by a
series of incremental restrictions on contract labor and the entry of criminals, paupers, and other
`undesirable' groups (Daniels, 2004; Lew-Williams, 2018; Okrent, 2019).
                                                 5
immigration, recommended applying literacy and wealth tests for immigrant entry, alongside
numerical limits on immigration. A literacy test was eventually adopted in 1917, but, by then, was
deemed ineffective, both because it was poorly enforced and because literacy rates in Europe had
risen rapidly.
       After a series of unsuccessful attempts to close the border, the era of open immigration
ended in the 1920s. In 1921, Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act, which set an annual quota
of 360,000 for immigrants from Europe (compare to around 800,000 entrants per year in the early
1910s). Entry slots were allocated by country-of-origin and were set to 3 percent of the foreign-
born stock from each nationality living in the US as of 1910. The Immigration Act of 1924 (also
known as the Johnson-Reed Act) made the quota system permanent and enacted two consequential
changes to the allocation scheme: shifting the base year for measuring the immigrant stock from
1910 to 1890, and lowering the inflow from 3 percent to 2 percent of that stock per year. Setting
the base year to 1890 further disadvantaged Southern and Eastern Europeans, whose numbers in
the US were smaller in that year. The annual quota for affected countries was set at 150,000 in
1929 and remained largely unchanged until the 1965 Immigration and Naturalization Act (for
details on the policy debates, see King, 2000; Tichenor, 2001).7 Immigration from the Americas,
including Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean, was not regulated by these acts.8
       The country-of-origin formula differentially affected immigration from each European
country. Immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe was severely restricted because the
immigrant stock from these countries was small in 1890, whereas the quotas assigned to
immigrants from Northern and Western Europe were still relatively generous. Figure 2 illustrates
that roughly one third of the 1921 quota (based on the 1910 stock) and 10 percent of the 1924
quota (based on the 1890 stock) would have been assigned to countries from Southern and Eastern



7
  After July 1, 1927, the allocation of quota slots was shifted again to a `national origins' formula
based on Census estimates of the national origins of the white population of the US in 1790. This
rule further restricted immigration from Southern and Eastern European countries and favored
immigration from the United Kingdom and Ireland over Germany and Scandinavia (King, 2000).
8
  Many Caribbean islands may have fallen under the quota of their colonial power (Putnam, 2013).
However, we classify the Caribbean as unrestricted here because their population grew rapidly in
the 1920s, increasing by 70 percent (compare to a 29 percent increase for Mexico). Changing the
classification of the Caribbean does not appreciably affect our quota exposure measure because
only two local labor markets had a sizeable share of the population from these locations in 1900
(Fort Lauderdale and Miami, FL).
                                                 6
Europe. According to Figure 3, immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe ("high
restriction") fell from 70 percent of the total immigrant flow in the 1910s to 15 percent of the flow
after 1924, and immigrant entry was almost an order of magnitude lower. Immigration from the
Western Hemisphere ("no restriction") was the only category to increase during this period.
Appendix Table 1 contains a list of countries included in each restriction category.
       Figure 4 aggregates the immigration flows to the decadal level to display the variation
used in our empirical strategy. Nearly six million immigrants from high restriction countries
entered the US from 1902-10. After the passage of the quotas, this sum fell to less than one million.
Immigration from low restriction countries also fell during this period but to a lesser degree, and
some of the available quota slots went unfilled, suggesting that some of this decline may not have
been legislated, but instead may have been driven by changes in the underlying demand to
immigrate to the US. By contrast, immigration from unrestricted countries in the Western
Hemisphere (Canada, the Caribbean, and Mexico) increased, quadrupling from the 1900s to the
1920s.9 Economists at the time argued that these two trends were connected (Abbott, 1927). The
qualitative history also emphasizes that Mexican arrivals increased in the 1920s in response to the
border closure.10

III. Research design and estimation

A. Measuring local exposure to the immigration quotas
       Our goal is to measure exposure of each local labor market to the national immigration
quotas. We start by delineating local labor markets according to the 460 State Economic Areas
(SEA).11 SEAs are groups of counties that were deemed to be economically integrated as of 1950

9
  Around 500,000 Mexican immigrants entered the US from 1920 to 1930; Lee, Peri and Yasenov
(2017) document that more than 400,000 individuals of Mexican descent, some of them US
citizens, were deported to Mexico during the Great Depression.
10
    In Chicago, immigrants were replaced with "blacks and Mexicans... [contributing to] the
increasing presence of these two groups within Chicago's factories during the decade [1920-29]"
(Cohen, 1990, p. 165; see Moralez, 2018 on recruiting efforts to bring Mexican workers to
Indiana). Mexican immigrants also pursued opportunities in rural areas. Luebke (1977, p. 421)
documents that "after World War I, Chicanos or Mexican-Americans gradually replaced Russian
Germans in the sugar beet fields as migrant workers" (see also Wang, 1975, p. 649).
11
   We exclude SEAs located in Hawaii, Alaska and Oklahoma, which were not part of the US in a
consistent manner throughout this period. One downside of SEAs as a local labor market definition
is that they are nested entirely within states, which may mis-measure economic activity that crosses
state lines (e.g, Kansas City, KS-MO; greater New York City, NY-NJ).
                                                 7
(Bogue, 1951). SEAs are the historical equivalent of Commuting Zones used today to define local
labor markets (e.g., Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2013).12
       Our identification strategy relies on variation across SEAs in the settlement patterns of
immigrants by country of origin in the pre-quota period. The following example illustrates the
quota-based "experiment" we have in mind: Consider two SEAs, A and B. Both SEAs have the
same foreign-born share in 1900, but in SEA A all foreign-borns are Italians (a more restricted
country) while in SEA B the foreign-born stock consists only of Germans (a less restricted
country). After the quota system is introduced, we would expect the immigrant inflow into highly
affected SEA A to be lower relative to the less affected SEA B.
       Operationalizing this thought experiment requires two pieces of information for each SEA:
(1) the initial population share of the SEA from each country of origin (as calculated from the
complete-count Census of 1900), and (2) the intensity of quota restriction for each country of
origin. In our simplest exposure measure, we classify quota intensity as an indicator, I(Restricted)c,
equal to one for countries c with near complete restrictions (Southern and Eastern European
countries) and equal to zero for those with non-binding restrictions (all other countries). Although
stylized, this approach fits the data well because the quota limits that were technically set for
Northern and Western European countries were rarely filled (see Figure 4), with the law instead
targeted at immigrants from the "new" sending countries of Southern and Eastern Europe (King
2000, Tichenor, 2001, Daniels, 2004). The resulting simple measure of quota exposure for SEA j
(QE1) is thus:


                                   FBcj1900
                       QE j =  c               1Restricted c                                   (1)
                                   Pop j1900



where FBcj1900 is the count of residents living in SEA j in 1900 who were born in country c and
Popj1900 is total population of the SEA in 1900. In other words, local exposure to the national
immigration quotas simply scales with the share of an area's population that was born in Southern



12
   Commuting Zones are less appropriate for our setting because they were defined in 1990, nearly
a century after our period of interest. We demonstrate robustness to using county as a labor market
definition.
                                                    8
or Eastern Europe. This approach resembles the identification strategy that Clemens, Lewis and
Postel (2018) use to study the ending of the Bracero guest worker program.
        We construct two alternative measures of quota exposure (QE2 and QE3) that incorporate
variation in quota severity across sending countries. These measures require knowing (or making
some assumptions) about the share of desired immigration by sending country that was barred by
the quotas. We cannot observe what the counterfactual immigration flows would have been in the
1920s in the absence of the restrictive quotas. Thus, we construct two measures based on different
assumptions. QE2 assumes that unrestricted immigration from 1922-30 would have been identical
to unrestricted immigration from 1902-10 (we do not use the years 1912-1920 as a benchmark for
open immigration because immigration was temporarily banned during World War I). This
assumption is not likely valid because mass migrations tend to peak after some time and then trend
downward, a pattern that can be seen in the data for countries like Germany and Great Britain
(Hatton and Williamson, 1998). QE3 is instead based on a simple prediction for what immigration
would have been in the 1920s based on historical time series.13 For QE2 and QE3, we then replace
the treatment indicator I(Restricted)c in equation (1) with a quota intensity ratio that varies from
zero to one as follows:


                                    
                                                                                                  (2)
                              1900
                           =       ×  
                                       1900




where   is defined as the difference between unrestricted flows (absent the
policy) and quota slots in the 1920s, normalized by unrestricted flows. This ratio will be zero if
the quota allocated slots are greater than or equal to the number of unrestricted flows, and it will
be one if the quota is set equal to zero.
        Appendix Table 1 (columns 1-3) reports the quota intensity measures for each country
group. By definition, quota intensity is equal to one for the highly restricted southern and eastern

13
   We use nearly 100 years of unrestricted immigration for 18 country groups to predict what
immigration would have been in the 1920s absent quota restrictions (see note to Appendix Table
1 for a list of country groups). In particular, we predict the number of entrants to the US every year
as a quadratic function of time, where the mass migration is said to begin (t = 1) when migration
first crosses the threshold of 2,000 arrivals. The model also includes an indicator for recession
years as declared by the NBER, which are known to substantially reduce immigration inflows
(Spitzer, 2015).
                                                  9
European countries under QE1 and equal to zero for the less restricted northern and western
European countries, and for the unrestricted countries in the Western Hemisphere. Quota intensity
values for QE3 are remarkably similar to the stylized zeroes and ones, with an average value of
0.925 for highly restricted countries and 0.07 for less restricted countries (and zero by definition
for quota-exempted countries/regions). Our main results are based on the more comprehensive
measure QE3 but we show results for QE1 and QE2 in a robustness section.
       Exposure to the national quota varies substantially across regions in the US. Figure 5a
presents a heat map of quota exposure at the SEA level (based on QE3) with darker shading
reflecting higher exposure to the national quota. The map reflects the low concentration of
immigrants in the South and the well-known immigration clusters throughout the Northeast, the
Midwest and the West. Figure 5b shows the variation in quota exposure net of Census division
indicators and our control for 1900 foreign born population share. There is variation in quota
exposure across cities, even within the same state (e.g., Pittsburgh versus Erie, PA or Toledo vs.
Dayton, OH). There are also some rural SEAs that have very high quota exposure (e.g., northern
Minnesota or the Pacific Northwest).
       We present all results for the full sample and separately for subsamples of urban, rural and
mining areas. The Census classifies as "urban" any town with 2,500 or more residents. We consider
an SEA to be urban if it had an above-median share of its population living in an urban area. The
median urban share at the SEA level was around 20 percent in 1900, with SEAs near the threshold
including the iron range in northern Minnesota and areas in upstate New York. We also extract a
subsample of "mining areas" because the mining industry had a high concentration of immigrant
workers (41 percent of mining workers were foreign born in 1900, compared to 12 percent in
agriculture and 19 percent in the rest of the economy), and because the mining industry was very
geographically concentrated. We define mining areas as any SEA that had at least one percent of
its workforce employed in the mining industry in 1900.14 Our final sample has 177 urban (non-
mining) SEAs, 168 rural (non-mining) SEAs, and 115 mining SEAs.




14
  The share of labor force in the mining sector was bimodal at the SEA level. Conditional on
having at least one percent of the workforce in mining, the average SEA had 4.1 percent in mining.
                                                10
B. Estimating the effects of quota exposure
       Our empirical analysis addresses three questions. We start by confirming that local labor
markets with higher quota exposure lost more immigrant inflow after the border closure. We then
ask how the drop in immigration affected an income proxy for US-born workers. Finally, we
investigate how local economies adapted to the loss of immigrant labor by estimating responsive
worker inflows and capital investments by sector.
       We stack data from three Census decades: 1900 and 1910 before the policy and 1930 after
the policy. For each outcome, we estimate the following equation:


                y jt =  j +  ct +  ( QE j  postt ) +  ( FB j1900  postt ) +  jt              (3)



where yjt can include: the foreign-born share of the prime-age male workforce (16-65 years old), a
proxy for income of US-born workers, a proxy for net inflows of immigrants or US-born workers,
and measures of wages, prices, and capital investments in the manufacturing, agricultural and
mining sectors.15 For migration outcomes (net inflows), we use one pre-period observation (flows
from 1900-10) and one post-period observation (flows from 1920-30). The prime variable of
interest is the interaction between exposure to the quota policy (QE) and the indicator (postt)
representing the period after the policy change (= 1930). The main effect of quota exposure is
absorbed into SEA fixed effects (j) and the main effect of postt is included in decade-by-census
division fixed effects (ct). The coefficient of interest  is identified by comparing labor markets
with different shares of residents from restricted countries before and after the policy change. Note
that we exclude 1920 from our main analysis because it falls immediately after World War I (1914-
18), which led to a temporary moratorium on immigration, but we reconsider results that include
1920 and control for World War I exposure in the robustness section.
       Local areas can be more exposed to the quota policy because they have a higher foreign-
born share of the population (scale) or a larger share of their foreign-born population drawn from
restricted countries (composition). In our preferred specification, we interact the initial (1900)
foreign-born share of the SEA population with the post-policy indicator (FBj1900 x postt) to control


15
  In 1920, 80 percent of individuals between 16-65 reporting a gainful occupation were male. We
investigate the effect of the border closure on the female labor force participation rate below.
                                                    11
for differential trends by initial foreign-born share, thereby identifying the effect of quota exposure
solely from differences in composition of the immigrant population. We present results that omit
the control for initial foreign-born share or that allow for alternative geographic trends in the
appendix.
        Our identifying assumption is that, conditional on controls for census division and initial
foreign-born share of the population, areas with more southern and eastern Europeans would have
followed similar economic trends absent the border closure policy. We provide two pieces of
evidence to support this assumption. First, we use a Lasso procedure to search for other correlates
of our quota exposure measure (after controlling for division and foreign-born share). If our
measure is correlated with demographics or industrial composition, for example, we might expect
that exposed areas would have faced different paths even absent the policy change. Second, we
conduct a placebo analysis that asks what the estimates would look like if the border had closed
earlier. In this case, the decade 1890-1900 is the pre-period and the decade 1900-10 is the
(counterfactual) post-period.

IV. The effect of the quota policy on the economic status of US-born workers

        The immigration quotas of the 1920s were intended to substantially reduce immigration to
the US. We start in Table 1 by documenting that local labor markets that were more exposed to
the quota policy experienced declines in the foreign-born share among prime-age men (column 1).
In particular, we estimate a version of equation (3) that uses the foreign-born share as a dependent
variable. In all locations, a 1 percentage point difference in quota exposure is associated with a 1
percentage point decline in the foreign-born share after the border closure.16
     Yet, despite declines in the foreign-born workforce, there is no evidence that US-born workers
experienced an increase in occupation-based income following immigration restriction. Because
there is no national dataset with individual wage data during this period, we create a proxy for
income using occupation and other attributes of an individual. In particular, following Abramitzky,
et al. (2019b), we estimate a statistical model that predicts log income from covariates in the 1940
Census (the first year with income data), and then to use this model to assign income for men in

16
  Peri and Sparber (2011) demonstrate that this specification is subject to bias because the
denominator of the foreign-born share (total population) is itself endogenously related to
immigration as other residents may be attracted to or leave an area. We use the specification that
Peri and Sparber recommend below (Table 2).
                                                  12
earlier years. The covariates we use are fixed effects for 3-digit occupation, age and current state
of residence, as well as all interactions.17 The 1940 Census does not record income from self-
employment, so we compute income for farmers (the vast majority of which are self-employed)
following an approach outlined by Collins and Wanamaker (2017).18 We also report results using
the standard "occupation score," which is based on income from the 1950 Census.
       We create two linked samples ­ one that follows men aged 15-55 from 1900 to 1910 and
the other following men aged 15-55 from 1920 to 1930 ­ using the Abramitzky, Boustan and
Eriksson algorithm (Abramitzky, Boustan, Eriksson, 2012; Abramitzky, et al. 2019a). Links are
established by first and last name, age and place of birth. We then collapse earnings for US-born
workers by SEA, starting with a full sample of men who were living in the SEA at either the
beginning or the end of the decade (akin to the sample that would underlie a repeated cross-
sectional analysis). We then focus on men who were living in an SEA at the beginning of a census
period, even if they moved out of the area during the decade (see Foged and Peri, 2016; Price, vom
Lehn and Wilson, 2020). In this case, our results will not be driven by potentially selective in- or
out-migration in response to immigrant arrivals.
       Table 1, columns 2-4 shows that, in all areas, border closure is associated with either no
change in income score for US-born workers, or in occupational income downgrading. We then
divide the sample into "stayers" who remained in an area during a census decade, and "movers"
who moved elsewhere by decade's end (columns 3 and 4). Men who remained in rural and mining
areas experienced significant occupational income downgrading, which is consistent with data on
farm wages and on contraction in the mining industry analyzed below. Otherwise, we do not find
significant effects on our income proxy.19 Appendix Table 2 reproduces these results using the
1950 occupation score, both with and without the foreign-born share control, to compare with


17
   In all interaction terms, we interact covariates with Census region, instead of state. This method
is similar to the machine-learning approach for computing income scores proposed by Saavedra
and Twinam (2018).
18
   Specifically, we make use of the fact that the 1940 Census records the incomes of farm laborers,
and that later Censuses record how much farmers earn relative to farm laborers. We thus compute
farmer incomes by multiplying the income of farm laborers in 1940 with the ratio of earnings for
farmers versus farm laborers in the 1960 Census, by region and immigration status.
19
   Men who move out of urban areas after the border closure seem to do particularly poorly, but
this effect is only marginally significant. At the time, urban areas exposed to the quotas were
attracting many internal migrants (more on this below), and so we speculate that men who were
leaving were particularly negatively selected.
                                                 13
Tabellini (2019). Without the foreign born control, we find a 0.5-0.6 percent decline in occupation-
based earnings for every 1 percentage point difference in quota exposure, consistent with Tabellini
(2019).20 Adding the foreign born control weakens this relationship, recovering the null results
that we see for most categories when using our preferred income score.

V. The effect of the quota policy on labor flows

       We find that restricting the border to new immigration did not improve the income proxy
of US-born workers in more exposed labor markets. Why were incumbent workers not helped by
a reduction in new labor supply from abroad? The answer depends on the sector. We document
that, in urban areas, the loss of immigrant labor in cities was replaced on a nearly one-for-one basis
by new inflows of internal US migrants, as well as immigration from unrestricted countries. In
rural areas, farmers instead substituted away from labor-intensive crops into capital-based
cultivation. The mining sector, which had been heavily dependent on immigrant workers,
contracted after the border closure, shedding both labor and capital.
       To study the various economic adaptations to the border closure, we start here with labor
flows and consider capital investments in the next section. We proxy for net in-migration to an
area with change in population of prime-age men over a census decade, normalized by initial
population in the base year.21 These changes cannot be driven by fertility and, as we will see, are
far too large to reflect mortality alone.22 We use the complete-count historical Censuses (100%



20
   Note that our analysis differs from Tabellini (2019) in a number of ways. He focuses on the 180
largest cities, while we look at the whole country; he includes only the decades of the 1910s and
1920s (both of which had immigration slowdowns or restrictions), while we also contrast these
decades with the open immigration of the 1900s; he uses a shift-share instrument, rather than a
measure of policy exposure; and he does not use linked data and so may be picking up selective
migration. Despite these differences, we do find a similar pattern when we approximate his
specification.
21
   Here, we follow Peri and Sparber (2011) in dividing by initial population because final
population can itself be an outcome.
22
   Ager, Feigenbaum, Hansen and Tan (2019) show that the border closure reduced mortality rates
from infectious diseases in affected cities, but find no substantial mortality differences in rural
counties. Since the implied decline in mortality from Ager, et al.'s estimate is rather small, the
equivalent of 0.05 deaths per 100 in the population, it can only account for 5 percent of our net in-
migration estimates (see Table 2). Furthermore, Table 4 documents that most of the net in-
migration is driven by young men, ages 15-39, who tended to have low mortality rates even in this
period.
                                                 14
sample) to count prime-age men by State Economic Area, overall and by demographic or
occupation group.
       Table 2 begins by confirming that areas with greater exposure to the quota policy
experienced larger net losses of recently-arrived foreign-born men from restricted countries. We
focus in column 1 on men who had been in the US for less than 10 years by the census date. 23 In
all areas, we find that a 1 percentage point increase in quota exposure is associated with the entry
of 1.1-1.5 fewer working-age immigrant men per 100 initial residents, or around 650 fewer
immigrants for a typical city of 50,000 residents.
       We next ask how workers who were unrestricted by the quota policy responded to the
reduction in immigrant flow. The loss of immigrants due to the border closure attracted other
workers to urban and mining areas, but discouraged workers from settling in rural areas. In urban
areas, this decline in immigrant inflow is associated with almost 3 new entrants per 100 in the
population, most of whom were US-born white internal migrants. We find a similar inflow in
mining areas, but the demographic composition is shifted to non-white US-born men as well as
immigrants from the Western Hemisphere (Canada, Mexico, and the Caribbean). By contrast, in
rural areas, we find a net outflow of nearly 5 residents per 100, evenly split between US-born
whites and long-standing European immigrants.24
       Table 3 subdivides these workers by sector, focusing on the three main sectors of
manufacturing, mining and agriculture, and then grouping the remainder into "other industries"
and "no industry reported" categories (we display results using more industry detail in Appendix
Table 3). For brevity, we consolidate workers into restricted workers (= recent European
immigrants) and all other unrestricted workers (= US-born, long-standing European immigrants
and all immigrants from the Western Hemisphere). We find that the majority of immigrant losses
were experienced by the major industry of each area. In particular, 59 percent of immigrant losses
in urban areas were from the manufacturing sector (= 0.8/1.4); 79 percent of immigrant losses in


23
   Note that, even in 1930, the latest date in our sample, immigrants who arrived more than 10
years before the census date (= 1920) would not have been subjected to the border restriction policy
and so we do not expect their numbers to fall in exposed areas.
24
   Mechanically, it cannot be the case that all US-born entrants to urban areas with higher quota
exposure are the same migrants deterred from entering affected rural areas. Although our estimated
migration responses, denominated as new arrivals (or departures) per 100 in the population, are
similar in magnitude (but of opposite sign) in the two subsamples, the urban population is much
larger and so the implied inflows are larger in magnitude.
                                                15
mining areas were from the mining industry; and 62 percent of immigrant losses in rural areas
were from the agricultural sector. The responses to immigrant losses varied by area. Nearly all
losses from manufacturing were replaced, but declines in the immigrant workforce were not
replaced in mining or in agriculture. Agriculture, in particular, shed additional unrestricted workers
for every immigrant worker lost. In addition, rural areas lost workers in construction,
transportation, wholesale and retail trade and other services (details are in Appendix Table 3),
suggesting a large, across-the-board contraction of the rural economy in exposed areas with
immigration restriction.
       Table 4 instead subdivides workers by age category, separating young workers (15-39)
and older workers (40-65). Both immigration and internal migration are more common activities
among the young than the old. Correspondingly, we find that 84-90 percent of immigrant losses
and 65-78 percent of the responsive worker flows were concentrated among young workers. This
pattern holds in all areas, lending credence to the assumption that our estimates are picking up the
effect of the border closure policy on exposed areas. Other correlated attributes of local areas
would likely affect both young and older workers.
       We explore the possibility of pre-trends before the policy change, whereby areas exposed
to the quota policy may have already been losing immigrants or attracting the US-born by
considering a placebo policy: what if the border had closed in the 1900s, instead of the 1920s?
Table 5 conducts a similar difference-in-differences exercise where the pre-period is 1890-1900
and the (counterfactual) post-period is 1900-10. Because the micro-data from the 1890 Census was
destroyed in a fire, we rely on aggregate tables to calculate changes in all foreign-born men, ages
18-44 (rather than men from restricted countries, aged 16-65, who arrived in the past ten years,
which is our preferred measure). The first panel reproduce results from our actual policy
experiment dates using this alternate dependent variable; coefficients look similar to the main
results in Table 2 but the estimated decline in immigration is larger.
       The second panel of Table 5 then considers the placebo experiment dates. We see no pre-
trend in immigration declines in areas exposed to the quota policy in the decades before the policy
was enacted (column 3). In terms of responsive labor flows (column 4), we find that, if anything,
US-born workers were leaving urban areas with greater exposure to the quota policy between the
1890s and 1900s, suggesting that the arrivals observed after the border closure was a reversal of



                                                 16
trend. We do see some pre-trend departures from exposed rural areas, but the coefficient is half as
large and not statistically significant.

VI. The effect of the quota policy on capital investment

        Thus far, we have documented that there was nearly one-for-one replacement of the
immigrant workers lost after border closure in urban areas, with new workers primarily moving
into the manufacturing sector. By contrast, following immigration restriction, mining and rural
areas lost both immigrant workers and other unrestricted workers from their primary sectors. In
this section, we use data from the Censuses of Manufactures, Mining Industries, and Agriculture
to study how these net worker flows affected industry output and capital expenditure.25
Manufacturing did not have a net decline in labor supply after the quota policy (see Table 3), and
so we do not expect to find many changes to output or to the capital-labor ratio in manufacturing.
By contrast, both agriculture and mining lost workers and we explore the responses of these sectors
to this falling labor supply.
        As expected, we find no evidence of higher output or capital deepening in manufacturing
after the border closure, which is consistent with the lack of a net change in labor supply.26 Table
6 reports results for a balanced panel of 246 cities with more than 10,000 inhabitants in 1909. We
find no association between quota exposure and horsepower per manufacturing worker, our
measure of the capital stock.27 If anything, the border closure seemed to increase wages per worker
(total wage bill divided by the number of workers), perhaps because the manufacturing sector
shifted away from immigrant workers toward employing US-born workers who commanded a
higher wage. A one percentage point difference in quota exposure is associated with a 0.5 to 0.9


25
   These economic censuses were collected at regular intervals. Our pre-policy observations are
from 1909 and 1914 (manufacturing), 1902 and 1909 (mining) and 1899 and 1909 (agriculture).
Our post-policy periods are 1924 and 1929 (manufacturing, agriculture) and 1929 alone (mining).
The censuses of manufacturing and agriculture were conducted at the county level, which we
aggregate to the SEA, whereas we only have state-level data for the mining sector.
26
   Speaking at the American Economic Association meeting in 1927, economist Harry Jerome
reported that, "after examining several hundred plants, he felt that it could not be said with certainty
that immigration restriction had been responsible for any marked change [to the manufacturing
sector]." He argued that "mechanical improvements had started during the post-war boom," not
after the border closure (Abbott, 1927, p. 129).
27
   Note that the horsepower measure is not available in 1925 and so 1929 is our only post-policy
observation for this outcome.
                                                  17
percent increase in wages, although this association is not statistically significant.28 We also note
that the (weak) rise in wages within manufacturing is not inconsistent with a null effect on our
income proxy because: (1) our proxy covers the full economy, rather than only the manufacturing
sector, (2) we measure earnings for the US-born only, whereas the Census of Manufactures
includes all workers (including immigrants), and (3) our proxy will only capture wage gains due
to occupational switching, rather than potential wage gains within occupations.
       In contrast to urban areas, we find that mining areas and rural areas lost workers from their
major industries after the border closure. Here, we document suggestive evidence of different
underlying responses to the loss in workforce. The agricultural sector seemed to respond to the
loss of farm labor by shifting into capital intensive production, whereas the mining sector
contracted, reducing capital expenditures and, ultimately, output. The different paths observed for
these two sectors is consistent with the availability of substitutable capital in the 1920s. The
gasoline-powered tractor was newly commercially viable and diffused in the 1920s, offering
landowners a labor-saving technology in the cultivation of grains (Lew and Cater, 2018). By
contrast, many mining operations ­ including drilling, blasting and loading ­ were still conducted
by hand in 1920, with mechanization arriving only in the 1940s (Dix, 1988).29
       Table 7 documents that farmers adapted to the loss of immigrant farm labor by shifting
into more capital-intensive production. We measure the share of cultivated land planted in labor-
intensive (hay and corn) versus capital-intensive (wheat) cereals, following LaFortune, Tessada
and Gonzalez-Velosa (2015).30 We find that rural areas with more quota exposure were more likely
to plant capital-intensive wheat and less likely to plant labor-intensive cereals after the policy.
Farmers also shift away from the use of draft animals (horses and mules), which are direct




28
   This pattern is consistent with Goldin's (1994) finding that manufacturing wages fell in areas
with a growing immigrant population.
29
   Capital expenditure per production worker in mineral operations industries increased by 24
percent from 1919 to 1939, and then by a staggering 800 percent from 1939 to 1954 (Wright,
2006). For this calculation, we proxy for capital expenditure with "cost of supplies and purchased
machinery installed," because the capital expenditure series begins only in 1954.
30
   We exclude cotton, the other labor-intensive crop in the LaFortune classification, because the
ability to grow cotton is strongly tied to environmental conditions, but results look similar if we
include it or if we focus only on the Northeast and Midwest.
                                                 18
substitutes for new gasoline-powered tractor technology.31 We also find that farm wages declined
by around 3 percent after the border closure for a one percentage point shift in quota exposure,
which suggests that low-skilled farm labor and capital were substitutes at this time.32 However, we
see no effect of the shift toward capital-intensive production on average farm values indicating
that the quota system did not impede the profitability of farming.
       Table 8 considers the available state-level evidence from the Census of Mining
Industries.33 We find suggestive evidence that the mining industry contracted after the border
closure in states that had greater exposure to the quota policy. Both the number of mines and output
per worker fell in these locations (although these coefficients are not statistically significant). As
the industry contracted, the number of workers declined (see Table 3), and here we see that capital
per worker also fell. The fact that the mining industry did not substitute into more capital-intensive
forms of production as it lost immigrant workers is consistent with a lack of substitutable capital
or available mechanization in the mining industry at the time.
       Overall, each sector adapted to the loss of immigrant labor in different ways:
manufacturing sites in urban areas attracted new workers, both internal migrants from the US and
unrestricted migrants from Mexico and Canada. Rather than attracting in new workers, farms in
rural areas substituted the lost immigrant farm labor with more capital-intensive methods. And the
mining industry, which had been particularly dependent on immigrant labor, did not substitute
toward capital and instead experienced a contraction in production.




31
   The Census of Agriculture only collected data on tractor usage starting in 1925. We regress the
change in tractors in a rural SEA on the change in horses and mules from 1925 to 1930 and find a
coefficient of -0.078 (s.e. = 0.009).
32
   In a Cobb-Douglas production function, capital deepening raises labor productivity and thus
wages. But if capital and labor are substitutes, wages could fall as farmers shift toward capital-
intensive production. Our finding is consistent with the sentiment at the time that tractors
substituted for farm labor. For example, John Steinbeck famously wrote in The Grapes of Wrath:
"The tractors which throw men out of work, the belt lines which carry loads, the machines which
produce, all were increased; and more and more families scampered on the highways, looking for
crumbs from the great holdings, lusting after the land beside the roads."
33
   Some data on mining activity exists at the county level (see, e.g., Matheis, 2016) but this series
does not contain information on capital expenditure.
                                                 19
VII. Robustness to alternative approaches

       In this section, we return to the main results on inflows of restricted and unrestricted
workers from Table 2 and consider sensitivity to various measurement and specification choices.
Appendix Table 4 presents results without the initial foreign-born share control, and with trends
by state rather than census division. Patterns look similar with one major exception: the inflow of
US-born white workers to urban areas is smaller and not significant after controlling for trends by
state. Note that the average state has only 5 urban SEAs and so adding state trends is a demanding
specification for the urban subsample.
       We then conduct a Lasso procedure to determine whether there are any additional
covariates, beyond an area's initial foreign-born share that are correlated with our quota exposure
measure. In particular, Appendix Table 5 considers the relationship between our quota exposure
measure and a series of available economic and demographic controls, including: log total
population, share urban, share black, share literate, share of the labor force in manufacturing sector,
share of the labor force in agriculture, share of the labor force holding a white collar position, log
mean wages in manufacturing, log mean farm value, log mean farm output per acre, share of farms
owner-operated, share of farm land under cultivation, share of cultivated farm land planted in
wheat, share of farm land planted in cotton and share of farm land planted in hay/corn. None of
these controls are selected by the Lasso procedure with the exception of the share of the labor force
in agriculture, which is selected only in the urban subsample. Recall that we define urban areas as
SEAs with above median share of population in a city or town; many of these areas were adjacent
to and integrated with more agricultural land, and these appear to have lower quota exposure. We
add the interaction between the 1900 share of labor force in agriculture and the post-policy
indicator as an additional control in Appendix Table 6. The relationship between quota exposure
and lost immigration declines by 25 percent in urban areas, but the qualitative pattern is unchanged.
       Appendix Table 7 replaces our preferred measure of quota exposure (QE3) with our two
alternate measures (QE1 and QE2). Results are nearly unchanged when using QE1, which considers
Southern and Eastern European countries to be treated by the policy (and to an equal degree) and
Northern and Western European countries to be untreated. Results are weaker when using QE2,
particularly for unrestricted population in urban areas. However, as we described above, QE2 is
unlikely to reflect true migration patterns, which were trending downward for the older sending
countries during this period.

                                                  20
       Our primary labor market definition is based on SEAs, which are groupings of
economically integrated counties (around 3.5 counties in urban areas and 8.5 counties in rural
areas). Appendix Table 8 instead uses counties themselves to define a labor market. We caution
that, particularly in urban areas, counties are too small to be considered labor markets on their own
and will likely be influenced by immigration into neighboring counties (hence researchers use
geographic concepts like commuting zones today). We continue to find falling in-migration to
counties exposed to the quota policy, although the coefficients are half as large in urban and rural
areas as for SEAs. We do not find responsive inflows to urban counties exposed to the quota policy,
suggesting that new arrivals may have settled in adjacent counties (e.g., the suburbs of a central
city). Appendix Table 9 reports results that are weighted by an area's baseline population. Results
look similar for urban and rural areas, but lose significance in mining areas which are highly
variable in population size. Appendix Table 10 considers sensitivity to our urban definition,
instead defining urban areas as SEAs with at least 30 percent of the population residing in an urban
location. Results are similar.
       Appendix Table 11 re-estimates our main specification after dropping three sets of
outliers: highest/lowest 2.5 percent of the data by quota exposure measure; by population change
for recent European immigrants; and by population change for unrestricted workers. Results are
similar for urban and mining areas, but the loss of unrestricted population from rural areas is
apparent only in one of these three specifications. Given that our finding about net out-migration
from rural areas is sensitive to the exclusion of outliers, we think that a more circumspect
conclusion is warranted: namely, we conclude that there is no evidence that US-born workers and
other unrestricted groups are attracted to rural areas after the border closure. This finding is
consistent with concerns of contemporary farmers who worried that US-born workers would not
replace their farm labor force primarily composed of the foreign-born.
       Our main analyses exclude the World War I decade because a temporary moratorium on
immigration was imposed during the war (1914-1918). As an alternative, we create a direct
measure of a local area's exposure to the wartime immigration embargo by multiplying the
population share from each country-of-origin by the share of immigration flow halted by wartime
activities (listed in Appendix Table 1, column 4). The correlation between exposure to wartime
restrictions and exposure to the 1920s quota policy is 0.81 at the SEA level. Appendix Table 12
stacks data from three decades (1900-10, 1910-20, 1920-30). We interact the 1910-20 decade with

                                                 21
an area's exposure to war-related immigration declines and, as before, we interact the 1920-30
decade with an area's exposure to the quota policy. We find similar results during the quota decade.
We also document sensible effects of war exposure, which halted immigration for half of the
decade, and, by our estimates, reduced in-migration by around half as much as quota exposure. As
during the quota period, immigration losses during World War I attracted in-migrants to urban
areas, and deterred entry to rural areas (although the later effect is not statistically significant).
        Another possible margin of economic adjustment to the loss of immigrant workers is the
entry of women into the labor force. We see no evidence of this channel in action. Appendix Table
13 documents that the quota policy did lead to the entry of fewer immigrant women, some of whom
may have moved with spouses or family and some may have moved alone. Consistent with
responsive internal migration for men, we see some entry of unrestricted women into urban areas
and some departures from rural areas. However, Appendix Table 14 finds no association between
quota exposure and the share of women in the labor force in any area.

VIII. Conclusions

        The era of open European immigration to the United States ended abruptly in the 1920s. A
series of restrictive federal acts introduced immigration quotas that were particularly targeted at
immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe. The quotas effectively limited the annual number
of immigrants admitted to the United States by more than 75 percent.
        Given the substantial reduction of immigrant labor, a simple model would predict
improvements in economic opportunities for the existing workforce. Yet, we find that, if anything,
US-born workers in labor markets exposed to the quota policy experienced a loss in occupation-
based earnings after the border closure. We then document that local economies adapted to this
dramatic change in immigration policy by substituting toward other sources of labor and capital.
Urban areas replaced lost immigrant labor with US-born workers and unrestricted immigrants from
Mexico and Canada on a nearly one-to-one basis. By contrast, farmers in rural areas shifted to
more capital-intensive agriculture, which in turn discouraged US-born and other unrestricted
workers from living there. The mining industry contracted, shedding both workers and capital.
        Such large-scale immigration restrictions are rare events, and so this historical episode has
some important lessons for contemporary policy. Some workers gained from the border closure
(e.g., those who moved into urban areas to take manufacturing jobs) and other workers lost out


                                                   22
(e.g., those who remained in rural areas). However, using immigration restriction to raise the
earnings of US-born workers more broadly is unlikely to be effective given the adaptability of
local economies in substituting away from immigrant workers. In the early twentieth century,
restricting immigration from Europe encouraged labor flows from Mexico and Canada into urban
areas, and the investment in new capital in rural areas. Today, these sources of substitutability may
be automation in the manufacturing sector or the off-shoring of high-skilled tasks like computer
programming or legal services.




                                                 23
References

 Abbott, Edith. 1927. "Immigration Restriction ­ Economic Results and Prospects. American Economic
   Review, 17(1): 127-132.

 Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Platt Boustan. 2017. "Immigration in American Economic History." Journal
   of Economic Literature, 55(4): 1311­1345.

 Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. "Europe's Tired, Poor, Huddled
   Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration." American Economic
   Review, 102(5): 1832­1856.

 Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2013. "Have the Poor Always Been Less
   Likely to Migrate? Evidence from Inheritance Practices During the Age of Mass Migration." Journal
   of Development Economics, 102: 2-14.

 Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2014. "A Nation of Immigrants:
   Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Political Economy,
   122(3): 467­506.

 Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. Forthcoming. "Do Immigrants
   Assimilate More Slowly Today Than in the Past?" American Economic Review: Insights.

 Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2019. "To the New World and Back
   Again: Return Migrants in the Age of Mass Migration." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 72(2):
   300-322.

 Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James Feigenbaum, and Santiago Pérez.
   2019a. "Automated Linking of Historical Data." NBER Working Paper No. 25825.

 Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Elisa Jacome and Santiago Perez. 2019b. "Intergenerational
   Mobility of Immigrants in the US over Two Centuries." NBER Working Paper No. 26408.

 Adao, Rodrigo, Michal Kolesár, and Eduardo Morales. 2018. "Shift-Share Designs: Theory and
   Inference." NBER Working Paper No. 24944.

 Ager, Philipp, and Casper Worm Hansen. 2016. "National Immigration Quotas and Local Economic
   Growth." Working Paper.

 Ager, Philipp, and Casper Worm Hansen. 2017. "Closing Heaven's Door: Evidence from the 1920s US
   Immigration Quota Acts." Working Paper.

 Ager, Philipp, and Markus Brueckner. 2013. "Cultural Diversity and Economic Growth: Evidence from
   the US During the Age of Mass Migration." European Economic Review, 64: 76-97.

 Ager, Philipp, and Markus Brueckner. 2018. "Immigrants' Genes: Genetic Diversity and Economic
   Development in the United States." Economic Inquiry 56(2): 1149-1164.




                                                  24
Ager, Philipp, James Feigenbaum, Casper Worm Hansen, and Hui Ren Tan. 2019. "How the Other Half
  Dies: Immigration and Mortality in U.S. Cities." Working Paper.

Alexander, Rohan, and Zachary Ward. 2018. "Age at Arrival and Assimilation during the Age of Mass
  Migration." The Journal of Economic History, 78(3): 904-937.

Allen, Treb, Cauê de Castro Dobbin, and Melanie Morten. 2019. "Border Walls." NBER Working Paper
  No. 25267.

Alsan, Marcella, Katherine Eriksson, and Gregory T. Nimesh. 2018. "The Rise and Fall of the Know-
  Nothing Party." Working Paper.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
  Effects of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic Review, 103(6): 2121-68.

Bandiera, Oriana, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo. 2013. "The Making of Modern America:
  Migratory Flows in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Development Economics, 102: 23-47.

Bartel, Ann P. 1989. "Where Do the New US Immigrants Live?" Journal of Labor Economics, 7(4):
  371-391.

Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. "Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?." W.E.
  Upjohn Institute,

Bogue, Donald Joseph. 1951. State Economic Areas: A Description of the Procedure Used in Making a
  Functional Grouping of the Counties of the United States. US Govt. Print. Off.

Borjas, George J. 2006. "Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
  Immigration." Journal of Human Resources, 41(2): 221-258.

Borjas, George, Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence Katz. 1997. "How Much Do Immigration and Trade
  Affect Labor Market Outcomes?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 28(1): 1-90.

Borusyak, Kirill, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel. 2018. "Quasi-Experimental Shift-Share Research
  Designs." NBER Working Paper No. 24997.

Burchardi, Konrad B., Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A. Hassan. 2016. Migrants, Ancestors, and
  Investments. NBER Working Paper No. 21847.

Burstein, Ariel, Gordon Hanson, Lin Tian, and Jonathan Vogel. 2017. "Tradability and the Labor-Market
  Impact of Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the US." NBER Working Paper No. 23330.

Card, David. 2001. "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
  Immigration." Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1): 22-64.

Card, David and John DiNardo. 2000. "Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?" American
  Economic Review, 90(2): 360-367.




                                                 25
Chen, Joyce J. 2015. "The Impact of Skill-Based Immigration Restrictions: The Chinese Exclusion Act
  of 1882." Journal of Human Capital, 9(3): 298-328.

Clemens, Michael A., Ethan G. Lewis, and Hannah M. Postel. 2018 "Immigration Restrictions as Active
  Labor Market Policy: Evidence from the Mexican Bracero Exclusion." American Economic
  Review, 108(6): 1468-87.

Cohen, Lizabeth. 1990. Making A New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919-1939. Cambridge
  University Press.

Collins, Wiiliam J. 1997. "When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black
  Migration." The Journal of Economic History, 57(3): 607-632.Collins, William J. and Marianne H.
  Wanamaker. 2017. "Up from Slavery? African American Intergenerational Economic Mobility Since
  1880." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23395.

Collins, William J. and Ariell Zimran. 2019. "The Economic Assimilation of Irish Famine Migrants to
  the United States." Explorations in Economic History, 101.

Daniels, Roger. 2004. Guarding the Golden Door: American Immigration Policy and Immigrants since
  1882. Hill and Wang.

Dillingham, William P., et al. 1911. Abstracts of Reports of the Immigration Commission: With
  Conclusions And Recommendations, And Views of the Minority (in Two Volumes). Washington, D.C.:
  Government Printing Office.

Dix, Keith. 1988. What's A Coal Miner to Do? The Mechanization of Coal Mining. Pittsburgh:
  University of Pittsburgh Press.

Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, and Brian K. Kovak. 2017. "Trade Liberalization and Regional
  Dynamics." American Economic Review, 107(10): 2908-46.

Doran, Kirk, and Chungeun Yoon. 2018. "Immigration and Invention: Evidence from the Quota Acts."
  Working Paper.

Dustmann, Christian, Uta Schonberg, and Jan Stuhler. 2017. "Labor Supply Shocks, Native Wages, and
  the Adjustment of Local Employment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(1): 435-483.

Eriksson, Katherine. Forthcoming. "Ethnic Enclaves and Immigrant Outcomes: Norwegian Immigrants
  during the Age of Mass Migration." European Review of Economic History.

Escamilla-Guerrero, David. 2019. "Revisiting Mexican Migration in the Age of Mass Migration. New
  Evidence from Individual Border Crossings." Oxford Economic and Social History Working Paper
  No. 173.

Fairchild, Henry Pratt. 1917. "The Literacy Test and Its Making." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  31(3): 447-460.

Ferrie, Joseph P. 1999. Yankeys Now: Immigrants in the Antebellum US 1840-1860. National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.


                                                26
Filer, Randall. 1992. "The Effect of Immigrant Arrivals on Migratory Patterns of Native
   Workers." NBER Chapters, 245-270.

Foster, William Z. 1920. The Great Steel Strike and its Lessons. BW Huebsch, Incorporated.

Freedman, Matthew, Emily Owens, and Sarah Bohn. 2018. "Immigration, Employment Opportunities,
  and Criminal Behavior." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(2): 117-51.

Goldin, Claudia. 1994. "The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United States, 1890 to
  1921." NBER Chapters, 223-258.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. 2018. "Bartik instruments: What, When, Why,
  and How." NBER Working Paper No. 24408.

Greenwood, Michael J., and Zachary Ward. 2015. "Immigration Quotas, World War I and Emigrant
  Flows from the United States in the Early 20th Century." Explorations in Economic History, 55: 76-
  96.

Haines, Michael. 2010. "Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-
  2002." ICPSR Data File 2896.

Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and Economic
  Impact. Oxford University Press.

Higham, Nicholas J. 2002. Accuracy and Stability of Numerical Algorithms. Vol. 80. Siam.

Hirota, Hidetaka. 2016. Expelling the Poor: Atlantic Seaboard States and the Nineteenth-Century
  Origins of American Immigration Policy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Hornbeck, Richard, and Suresh Naidu. 2014. "When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and Economic
  Development in the American South." American Economic Review, 104(3): 963-90.

Hutchinson, Edward Prince. 1981. Legislative History of American Immigration Policy 1798-1965.
  University of Pennsylvania Press.

Jaeger, David A., Joakim Ruist, and Jan Stuhler. 2018. Shift-Share Instruments and the Impact of
  Immigration. NBER Working Paper No. 24285.

Jenks, Jeremiah W. and W. Jett Lauck. 1912. The Immigration Problem. Funk and Wagnalls Company.

King, Desmond. 2000. Making Americans. Harvard University Press.

Kovak, Brian K. 2013. "Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What is the Correct Measure of
  Liberalization?" American Economic Review, 103(5): 1960-76.

Lafortune, Jeanne, José Tessada, and Carolina González-Velosa. 2015. "More Hands, More power?
  Estimating the Impact of Immigration on Output and Technology Choices Using Early 20th Century
  US Agriculture." Journal of International Economics, 97(2): 339-358.



                                                 27
Lee, Jongkwan, Giovanni Peri, and Vasil Yasenov. 2017. "The Employment Effects of Mexican
  Repatriations: Evidence from the 1930s." NBER Working Paper No. 23885.

Lew-Williams, Beth. 2018. The Chinese Must Go: Violence, Exclusion, and the Making of the Alien in
  America. Harvard University Press.

Lew, Byron, and Bruce Cater. 2018. "Farm Mechanization on an Otherwise `Featureless' Plain: Tractors
  on the Northern Great Plains and Immigration Policy of the 1920s." Cliometrica, 12(2): 181-218.

Lewis, Ethan. 2011. "Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 126(2): 1029-1069.

Luebke, Frederick C. 1977. "Ethnic group settlement on the Great Plains." The Western Historical
  Quarterly, 8(4): 405-430.

Markel, Howard and Alexandra Minna Stern. 2002. "The Foreignness of Germs: The Persistent
 Association of Immigrants and Disease in American Society." Milbank Quarterly, 80(4): 757-788.

Massey, Catherine G. 2016. "Immigration Quotas and Immigrant Selection." Explorations in Economic
 History, 60: 21-40.

Matheis, Mike. 2016. "Local Economic Impacts of Coal Mining in the United States, 1870 to 1970."
 Journal of Economic History 76(4): 1152-1181.

Miles, Thomas J., and Adam B. Cox. 2014. "Does Immigration Enforcement Reduce Crime? Evidence
 from Secure Communities." The Journal of Law and Economics, 57(4): 937-973.

Moralez, Felicia. 2018. From Immigrants to Citizens: Mexicans and Settlement Houses in Gary, Indiana,
 1919-1965. Doctoral Dissertation. University of Notre Dame.

Moser, Petra, and Shmuel San. 2019. "Immigration, Science, and Invention: Evidence from the 1920s
 Quota Acts." Working Paper.

Ngai, Mae M. 2003. "The Strange Career of the Illegal Alien: Immigration Restriction and Deportation
  Policy in the United States, 1921­1965." Law and History Review, 21(1): 69-108.

Okrent, Daniel. 2019. The Guarded Gate: Bigotry, Eugenics and the Law That Kept Two Generations of
  Jews, Italians, and Other European Immigrants Out of America. Scribner.

Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber. 2011. "Assessing inherent model bias: An application to native
  displacement in response to immigration." Journal of Urban Economics, 69(1): 82-91.

Phillips, Julie A., and Douglas S. Massey. 1999. "The New Labor Market: Immigrants and Wages after
  IRCA." Demography, 36(2): 233-246.

Price, Joseph, Christian vom Lehn and Riley Wilson. 2020. "The Winners and Losers of Immigration:
  Evidence from Linked Historical Data." NBER Working Paper 27156.

Putnam, Lara. 2013. "The Ties Allowed to Bind: Kinship Legalities and Migration Restriction in the
  Interwar Americas." International Labor and Working-Class History, 83: 191-209.

                                                 28
Roberts, Peter. 1912. The New Immigration: A Study of the Industrial and Social Life of Southeastern
  Europeans in America. Vol. 3. The Macmillan Company.

Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and Mat-
  thew Sobek. 2010. "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0" [Machine-readable data-
  base]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. Saavedra, Martin and Tate Twinam. 2018. "A Machine
  Learning Approach to Improving Occupational Income Scores." Working Paper.

Sequeira, Sandra, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian. Forthcoming. "Immigrants and the Making of
  America." Review of Economic Studies.

Spitzer, Yannay, and Ariell Zimran. 2018. "Migrant Self-Selection: Anthropometric Evidence from the
  Mass Migration of Italians to the United States, 1907­1925." Journal of Development
  Economics, 134: 226-247.

Spitzer, Yannay. 2015. "The Dynamics of Mass Migration: Estimating the Effect of Income Differences
  on Migration in a Dynamic Model of Discrete Choice with Diffusion." Unpublished manuscript,
  Brown University, Department of Economics.
Steiner, Edward Alfred. 1909. The Immigrant Tide: Its Ebb and Flow. FH Revell.

Tabellini, Marco. 2019. "Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the Age of Mass
  Migration." Harvard Business School BGIE Unit Working Paper 19-005

Tichenor, Daniel J. 2001. Dividing Lines: The Politics of Immigration Control in America. Princeton
  University Press.

Timmer, Ashley S., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. "Immigration Policy Prior to the 1930s: Labor
  Markets, Policy Interactions, and Globalization Backlash." Population and Development
  Review, 24(4): 739-742.

Wang, Peter H. 1975. "Farmers and the Immigration Act of 1924." Agricultural History, 49(4): 647-652.

Ward, Zachary. 2017. "Birds of Passage: Return Migration, Self-selection and Immigration
 Quotas." Explorations in Economic History, 64: 37-52.

Ward, Zachary. Forthcoming. "The Not-So-Hot Melting Pot: The Persistence of Outcomes for
 Descendants of the Age of Mass Migration." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics..

Wozniak, Abigail, and Thomas J. Murray. 2012. "Timing is Everything: Short-Run Population Impacts
 of Immigration in US Cities." Journal of Urban Economics, 72(1): 60-78.

Wright, Richard A., Mark Ellis, and Michael Reibel. 1997. "The Linkage Between Immigration and
 Internal Migration in Large Metropolitan Areas in the United States." Economic Geography, 73(2):
 234-254.

Wright, Gavin. 2006. "Natural Resource Industries." In Susan B. Carter, Scott S. Gartner, Michael
 Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright, eds. Historical Statistics of the United
 States: Millennial Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.


                                                 29
Xie, Bin. 2017. "The Effects of Immigration Quotas on Wages, the Great Black Migration, and Industrial
  Development." IZA Discussion paper No. 11214.




                                                 30
Figures

Figure 1. Foreign-Born Stock as a Percentage of the US Population (1850-2010)




Source: This Figure corresponds to Panel B of Figure 1 from Abramitzky and Boustan (2017). Authors' calculations
based on Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) samples of US Census (Ruggles et al. 2010).




                                                      31
Figure 2. Sending Regions Within the Foreign-Born Population (1850-2010)




Source: Authors' calculations based on Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) samples of US Census
(Ruggles et al. 2010).




                                                   32
Figure 3. Annual Immigrant Flows to the US by Quota Restriction Categories, 1900-1930




Notes: Annual immigrant flows (in thousands) to the US from 1900 to 1930, separated into three categories: high
restriction, low restriction, and no restriction. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of countries and their classification.

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, "Immigrants, by country of last residence­Europe: 1820­1997."




                                                          33
Figure 4. Decadal Immigrant Flows to the US by Quota Restriction Categories




Notes: Decadal immigrant flows (in thousands) to the US from 1902 to 1910 in black, from 1922-1930 in dark grey,
and decadal quota slots in light grey, separated into three categories: high restriction, low restriction, and no restriction.
See Appendix Table 1 for a list of countries and their classification.

Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, "Immigrants, by country of last residence­Europe: 1820­1997."
Ferenzi and Wilcox (1929).




                                                             34
Figure 5a. SEA Quota Exposure Measure QE-3




Notes: The figure plots the 460 SEAs used in the analysis and assigns a darker red color to SEAs with higher quota
exposure measure QE-3 (see text for definition of the exposure measure).




                                                        35
Figure 5b. SEA Quota Exposure Measure QE-3, Controlling for Census Region and 1900
Foreign Born Share




Notes: The figure plots the residuals from a regression of quota exposure measure QE-3 on census region indicators
and 1900 foreign-born share and assigns a darker red color to SEAs with larger residuals.




                                                       36
Tables

 Table 1: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Income Score of US-born
                                    Foreign-Born
         Outcome:
                                       Share                           Log Mean Income Score
                                                               Matched       Matched        Matched
          Sample:                    Full Count                Sample -      Sample -       Sample -
                                                               Overall        Stayers        Movers
                                          (1)                    (2)            (3)           (4)
A. Urban Sample (SEAs = 177)
Policy Exposure x 1930                -1.129***                -0.00454              0.149             -0.839*
                                        (0.173)                 (0.338)             (0.367)            (0.441)
B. Mining Sample (SEAs = 115)
Policy Exposure x 1930                -1.361***                 -0.109            -0.885***           -0.00700
                                        (0.152)                 (0.191)             (0.341)            (0.169)
C. Rural Sample (SEAs = 168)
Policy Exposure x 1930                 -1.064**                -0.347**           -0.338***            -0.140
                                        (0.417)                 (0.136)             (0.112)            (0.155)
D. Full Sample (SEAs = 460)
Policy Exposure x 1930                -1.252***                 -0.246             -0.446**            -0.352*
                                        (0.164)                 (0.153)             (0.177)            (0.186)
Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. Panel A presents results for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, Panel B presents results for the
mining sample of 115 SEAs, Panel C presents results for the rural sample of the remaining 168 SEAs, and Panel D
presents results for the full sample of 460 SEAs. The dependent variables in these specifications are the SEA
foreign-born share (column 1) and the log of the average predicted income score among working-age males (Age
15-65, columns 2-4), measured at the SEA level. In all specifications, each SEA has three observation for the years
1900, 1910, and 1930. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed effects, census region time trends and initial
(1900) foreign-born share time trends. Column 2 considers all matched US-born individuals, column 3 considers
US-born individuals from the matched sample who reside in the same SEA at the beginning and end of the decade,
and column 4 considers US-born individuals who reside in the SEA at the beginning of the decade but did not reside
in the SEA at the end of the decade. The number of observations is 531 in the urban sample, 345 in the mining
sample, 504 in the rural sample and 1,380 in the full sample. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in
parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                        37
  Table 2: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rate

                                     Immigrants,         US-        US-Born, Immigrants, Immigrants,
      Population Group:              Europe, <10        Born,        Non-    Europe, 10+   Western
                                      yrs in US         White        White    yrs in US  Hemisphere
                                         (1)             (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)
A. Urban Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)          -1.469**        2.318**       0.0857          -0.0443           0.640
                                        (0.647)        (1.101)       (0.187)         (0.531)          (0.498)
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -1.102*          1.240      0.382***         -0.525          1.164***
                                        (0.629)         (1.303)      (0.118)         (0.386)          (0.372)
C. Rural Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         -1.345***       -3.005***     -0.191**       -1.640***           0.189
                                        (0.201)         (1.086)     (0.0858)         (0.388)          (0.151)
D. Full Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         -1.485***         -0.115        0.0257        -0.899**          0.576**
                                        (0.296)         (1.119)      (0.0779)        (0.376)          (0.231)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text for various populations. The dependent variables in these specifications are defined as the
decadal change in working-age male population change for the relevant population group over total working-age
male population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each SEA has one observation for the 1900-
1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed
effects, census region time trends, and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trend. The number of SEAs in the
urban sample is 177, 115 in the mining sample, and 168 in the rural sample. The number of observations is 354 in
the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample, and 336 in the rural sample. The number of SEAs in the full sample is
460 and the number observations in the full sample specifications is 920. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                       38
   Table 3: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rate by Industry
                                                                                                 Other         No Industry
      Industry Category:               Manufacturing          Mining         Agriculture
                                                                                               Industries       Reported
                                              (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)
                                                      A. Urban Sample
A.1. European Immigrants,
<10 years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)              -0.836*             0.0133          0.00447          -0.336**          -0.315**
                                           (0.430)            (0.0133)         (0.0407)          (0.135)           (0.136)
A.2. All Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)              0.715**             0.0355          0.582**           1.307*            0.360
                                           (0.350)            (0.0336)         (0.268)           (0.702)          (0.596)
                                                      B. Mining Sample
B.1. European Immigrants,
<10 years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                0.198           -1.164***         -0.310**           0.104           0.0702
                                            (0.234)            (0.244)          (0.153)          (0.229)          (0.157)
B.2. All Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                0.336             -0.360           0.200             0.829           1.257**
                                            (0.295)           (0.437)          (0.560)           (0.656)          (0.588)
                                                      C. Rural Sample
C.1. European Immigrants,
<10 years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)               -0.0139          -0.0162**        -0.876***         -0.242***        -0.196***
                                           (0.0137)          (0.00666)          (0.141)          (0.0478)         (0.0229)
C.2. All Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)               0.0590            -0.0536*        -2.785***         -0.999**         -0.869***
                                            (0.135)           (0.0314)          (1.034)          (0.390)          (0.273)
                                                       D. Full Sample
D.1. European Immigrants,
<10 years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                -0.239          -0.553***         -0.383**         -0.172**           -0.137*
                                            (0.169)            (0.197)          (0.175)         (0.0774)          (0.0773)
D.2. All Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)               0.276*            -0.289**          -0.670            0.133            0.139
                                            (0.159)            (0.140)         (0.937)           (0.430)          (0.364)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described
in the text for various industry categories. The dependent variables in these specifications are defined as the decadal change
in working-age male population reporting an industry in a specific industry group over total working-age male population
in the beginning of the decade, at the SEA level. The industry groups are defined using the census of population industry
codes as described in the text. Panel A presents results for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, panel B presents results for the
mining sample of 115 SEAs, Panel C presents results for the rural sample of the remaining 168 SEAs and Panel D presents
results for the full sample of 460 SEAs. Sub-panels 1 show the coefficients of interest for the policy restricted population
and sub-panels 2 show the coefficients of interest for the policy unrestricted populations. In all specifications, each SEA
has one observation for the 1900-1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications
include SEA and decade fixed effects, census region time trends, and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trends. Robust
standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.


                                                                39
Table 4: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rates by Age Group

             Age Group:                             15-39 Years Old                            40-65 Years Old
                                             Immigrants,          All                   Immigrants,          All
         Population Group:                   Europe, < 10 Unrestricted                  Europe, < 10 Unrestricted
                                              years in US     Population                 years in US     Population
                                                  (1)             (2)                        (3)             (4)
A. Urban Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                   -1.234**            1.956**               -0.235***           1.043**
                                                 (0.561)            (0.969)                (0.0890)           (0.471)
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                   -0.985*               1.610                 -0.117              0.651
                                                (0.553)              (1.116)               (0.0813)            (0.544)
C. Rural Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                  -1.142***            -3.634***             -0.203***           -1.013**
                                                (0.157)               (1.064)              (0.0460)            (0.435)
D. Full Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                  -1.283***             -0.487               -0.203***            0.0752
                                                (0.262)              (1.145)               (0.0392)            (0.443)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described
in the text for various populations. Each column lists the dependent variable in the specifications that are defined as the
decadal change in working-age male population change for the relevant population group over total working-age male
population in the beginning of the decade. Panel A presents results for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, panel B presents
results for the mining sample of 115 SEAs, Panel C presents results for the rural sample of the remaining 168 SEAs and
Panel D presents results for the sample of 460 SEAs. Columns 1-2 consider the decadal change for the 15-39 years old
age group over the total working age male population in the beginning of the decade. Columns 3-4 consider the decadal
change for the 40-65 years old age group over the total working age male population in the beginning of the decade. In
all specifications, each SEA has one observation for the 1900-1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930
decade. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed effects, census region time trends, and 1900 foreign-born share
time trends. The number of observations is 354 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample, 336 in the rural sample
and 920 in the full sample. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; *
p<0.1.




                                                               40
 Table 5: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rate -
                                  Placebo Experiment

                                        Actual Experiment (1900-                 Placebo Experiment (1890-
     Estimation Sample:                    1910 vs. 1920-1930)                       1900 vs. 1900-1910)
      Population Group:              Foreign Born        Native Born           Foreign Born        Native Born
                                          (1)                (2)                    (3)                (4)
A. Urban Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -2.453***           1.790**                 0.313            -1.646**
                                         (0.800)            (0.749)                (0.691)            (0.789)
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -2.940***            0.374                 -0.0103             0.476
                                         (0.943)            (0.860)                (0.778)            (1.178)
C. Rural Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -2.890***           -2.703**               -0.141             -1.137
                                         (0.670)             (1.164)               (0.694)            (4.051)
D. Full Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -2.847***           -0.362                  0.111             -0.150
                                         (0.456)            (0.852)                (0.374)            (1.082)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. The number of SEAs in the urban sample is 177, 115 in the mining sample, 168 in the rural
sample, and 459 in the full sample. The number of observations is 354 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining
sample, 336 in the rural sample, and 918 in the full sample. Panel A presents results for the urban sample, Panel B
presents results for the mining sample, Panel C presents results for the rural sample, and Panel D presents results
for the full sample. The dependent variables in these specifications are the decadal change in male age 18-44
population over total male age 18-44 population in the beginning of the decade. All specifications include SEA
fixed effects and census region time trends. Columns 1-2 present results for the actual timing of the experiment -
1900-1910 and 1920-1930, while columns 3-4 present results for a placebo experiment where the decades compared
are 1890-1900 to 1900-1910. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; **
p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                       41
 Table 6: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on the Manufacturing Sector

               Outcome:                         Log Wage per          Log Output per           Log Horsepower
                                                  Worker                 Worker                  per Worker
                                                     (1)                   (2)                       (3)

Policy Exposure x Post                               1.042                   0.512                   -0.115
                                                    (0.676)                 (0.640)                  (1.989)

Number of SEAs                                        203                     203                      203
Number of Observations                                812                     812                      609
Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. The variable Post is an indicator for post quota policy years, 1925 and 1929. The sample in
this analysis includes 203 SEAs from the urban sample that have available data in the census of manufacturers in
each of the years 1909, 1914, 1925, and 1929. Column 1 reports the result where the dependent variable is log
average wage per worker in manufacturing. Column 2 reports the result where the dependent variable is log average
value of manufacturing output per worker. Column 3 reports the result where the dependent variable is log average
horsepower per worker in manufacturing. All monetary values are expressed in 1929 dollars. In columns 1 and 2,
each SEA has four observations, one for each of the years 1909, 1914, 1925, and 1929. In column 3, each SEA has
three observations, one for each of the years 1909, 1914, and 1929. All specifications include SEA and year fixed
effects. The specifications include region and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trends. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                        42
   Table 7: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on the Agriculture Sector
                                                                     Share
                                 Log           Share Labor          Capital         Log Mules            Log
      Outcome:
                              Farmland          Intensive          Intensive        and Horses         Wages per
                                Value             Crops             Crops           per Worker          Worker
                                 (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)

Policy Exposure x
Post                            -0.290             -0.723           0.994***          -2.302**          -2.923**
                                (1.750)            (0.490)           (0.318)           (1.085)           (1.423)

Number of SEAs                    230                230               230               230               230
Number of
                                  920                920               920               920               920
Observations
Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. The sample in this analysis includes 230 SEAs from the rural sample that have available data
in the census of agriculture in each of the years 1900, 1910, 1925, and 1930. The variable Post is an indicator for
post quota policy years, 1925 and 1930. Column 1 reports the result where the dependent variable is log farmland
value. Column 2 reports the result where the dependent variable is the share of cultivated land planted in labor-
intensive crops, which we define as hay and corn. Column 3 reports the result where the dependent variable is the
share of cultivated land planted in capital-intensive crops, which we define as wheat. Column 4 reports the result
where the dependent variable is log ratio of horses and mules to farm workers, where the number of farm workers
is computed as the number of working-age males in farming occupations. Column 5 reports the result where the
dependent variable is log labor expenditures to farm workers All dollar values are expressed in 1929 dollars. Across
all specifications, each SEA has four observations, one for each of the years 1900, 1910, 1925, and 1930. All
specifications include SEA fixed effects, census region and 1900 foreign-born share time trends. The number of
observations in all specifications is 920. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. ***
p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                        43
      Table 8: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on the Mining Sector

                                                           Log Capital          Log Average
           Outcome:                   Log Output           Expenditures          Wage per           Log Number
                                      per Worker           per Worker             Worker             of Mines
                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (3)

Policy Exposure x Post                   -4.410               -8.462**              -0.292              -4.521
                                         (6.286)               (4.140)              (3.751)             (4.253)
Number of States                            45                   45                    45                 45
Number of Observations                      90                   90                    90                 90
Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. The variable Post is an indicator for post quota policy year-1929. The sample in this analysis
includes 45 states that have available data in the census of mining in each of the years 1909 and 1929. Column 1
reports the result where the dependent variable is log average output per worker in mining. Column 2 reports the
result where the dependent variable is log average value of capital expenditures per worker per worker in mining.
Column 3 reports the result where the dependent variable is log average wage per worker in mining. Column 4
reports the result where the dependent variable is the log number of mines in the state. All monetary values are
expressed in 1929 dollars. Each SEA has two observations, 1909 and 1929. All specifications include SEA and
year fixed effects. The specifications include region and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trends. Robust
standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                        44
                 The Effects of Immigration on the Economy:
                   Lessons from the 1920s Border Closure



Ran Abramitzky   Philipp Ager     Leah Boustan       Elior Cohen   Casper W. Hansen
 Stanford and     SDU and         Princeton and         UCLA         University of
    NBER            CEPR              NBER                           Copenhagen



                                   May 2020




                 Appendix Material ­ For Online Publication Only




                                       45
    Appendix Table 1: Border Closure Policy and World War I Intensity Measures by
                                      Country

                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                     Quota               Quota               Quota              World War I
     Country Group                 Intensity 1         Intensity 2         Intensity 3           Intensity
A. High-Restriction
Countries
   Asia                                 1                 0.912               0.947                  0.496
   Central Europe                       1                 0.935               0.968                  0.978
   Eastern Europe                       1                 0.830               0.935                  0.957
   Greece                               1                 0.935               0.965                  0.502
   Italy                                1                 0.921               0.962                  0.887
   Portugal                             1                 0.840               0.945                  0.411
   Rest of World                        1                 0.640               0.686                  0.000
   Russia                               1                 0.834               0.933                  0.950
   Spain                                1                 0.867               0.980                  0.140
B. Low-Restriction
Countries
   Germany                              0                 0.000                 0                    0.919
   Ireland                              0                 0.133                 0                    0.789
   Scandinavia                          0                 0.540               0.100                  0.675
   United Kingdom                       0                 0.293                 0                    0.795
   Western Europe                       0                 0.497               0.559                  0.716
C. Non-Restriction
Countries
   Canada                               0                    0                   0                     0
   Caribbean                            0                    0                   0                   0.112
   Latin America                        0                    0                   0                     0
   Mexico                               0                    0                   0                     0

Notes: This table presents the list of countries used in the paper to construct the quota intensity measures and the
World War I intensity measure for the different 18 country groups used in the analysis. Columns 1-3 present the
country-specific quota intensity measure, according to the equations described in the text. Column 4 presents the
country-specific WWI intensity measure, constructed as described in the text. Panel A lists the high-restriction
country groups, Panel B lists the low-restriction country groups, and Panel C lists the non-restriction country
groups, as described in the text.




                                                        46
  Appendix Table 2: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Occupational
                                   Score of US-born
                                     Foreign-Born
          Outcome:
                                        Share                   Log Mean Occupational Score (No %FB)
                                                                Matched      Matched         Matched
           Sample:                     Full Count               Sample -     Sample -        Sample -
                                                                 Overall      Stayers         Movers
                                            (1)                    (2)          (3)             (4)

A. Urban Sample (SEAs = 177)
Policy Exposure x 1930                  -1.129***               -0.584***          -0.607***          -0.929***
                                          (0.173)                 (0.159)            (0.173)            (0.151)
B. Mining Sample (SEAs = 115)
Policy Exposure x 1930                  -1.361***               -0.464***          -0.594***          -0.769***
                                          (0.152)                 (0.179)            (0.192)            (0.135)
C. Rural Sample (SEAs = 168)
Policy Exposure x 1930                  -1.064**                -0.465***          -0.467***           -0.205*
                                         (0.417)                  (0.117)            (0.102)           (0.120)
D. Full Sample (SEAs = 460)
Policy Exposure x 1930                  -1.252***               -0.481***          -0.505***          -0.689***
                                          (0.164)                (0.0848)           (0.0993)            (0.120)
Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. Panel A presents results for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, Panel B presents results for the
mining sample of 115 SEAs, Panel C presents results for the rural sample of the remaining 168 SEAs and Panel D
presents results for the full sample of 460 SEAs. The dependent variables in these specifications are the foreign-
born share (column 1) and the log of the average occupational score among working-age males (Age 15-65, columns
2-4). In all specifications, each SEA has three observation for the years 1900, 1910, and 1930. All specifications
include SEA and decade fixed effects and census region time trends. Column 2 considers all matched US-born
individuals, column 3 considers US-born individuals from the matched sample who reside in the same SEA at the
beginning and at the end of the decade, and column 4 considers US-born individuals who reside in the SEA at the
beginning of the decade but do not reside in the SEA at the end of the decade. The number of observations is 531
in the urban sample, 345 in the mining sample, 504 in the rural sample and 1,380 in the full sample. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                        47
        Appendix Table 3: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rate by Industry Groups
                                                                                                                                                 Transportation,
                                         Agriculture, Forestry,                                                                                                                  Wholesale and                                     Public                  No Industry
       Industry Category:                                                 Mining             Construction            Manufacturing             Communications and                                           Services
                                              and Fishing                                                                                                                        Retail Trade                                   Administration              Reported
                                                                                                                                                    Utilities
                                                    (1)                      (2)                   (3)                      (4)                        (5)                             (6)                     (7)                     (8)                      (9)
A. Urban Sample
A.1. Policy Restricted Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                    0.00447                   0.0133              -0.0947**                  -0.836*                      -0.0746                      -0.126***              -0.0555***                0.0148                  -0.315**
                                                 (0.0407)                 (0.0133)              (0.0450)                  (0.430)                      (0.0596)                      (0.0307)                (0.0195)               (0.0115)                  (0.136)
A.2. Policy Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                    0.582**                   0.0355               0.259*                   0.715**                        0.116                         0.260                   0.262                 0.410**                    0.360
                                                 (0.268)                  (0.0336)              (0.154)                  (0.350)                       (0.179)                       (0.176)                 (0.190)                (0.204)                   (0.596)
B. Mining Sample
B.1. Policy Restricted Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                    -0.310**                -1.164***               0.0332                    0.198                       0.0496                       0.000518                0.00548                0.0150***                  0.0702
                                                  (0.153)                  (0.244)              (0.0506)                  (0.234)                      (0.149)                      (0.0310)                (0.0253)               (0.00557)                  (0.157)
B.2. Policy Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                      0.200                  -0.360                0.0965                     0.336                       0.452**                       0.0378                  0.0156                  0.227                   1.257**
                                                  (0.560)                 (0.437)               (0.153)                   (0.295)                      (0.227)                       (0.161)                 (0.143)                (0.151)                  (0.588)
C. Rural Sample
B.1. Policy Restricted Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                   -0.876***                -0.0162**            -0.0733***                  -0.239                      -0.107***                    -0.0356***              -0.0322***               0.00538                 -0.196***
                                                  (0.141)                (0.00666)              (0.0134)                  (0.169)                      (0.0353)                     (0.00393)               (0.00439)              (0.00611)                 (0.0229)
B.2. Policy Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                   -2.785***                 -0.0536*             -0.240***                  0.0590                      -0.189**                      -0.321***              -0.329***                 0.0807                 -0.869***
                                                  (1.034)                 (0.0314)              (0.0737)                  (0.135)                     (0.0833)                        (0.105)                (0.122)                (0.0803)                  (0.273)
D. Full Sample
B.1. Policy Restricted Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                    -0.383**                -0.553***              -0.0387*                  -0.239                       -0.0617                     -0.0513***              -0.0290***              0.00854**                  -0.137*
                                                  (0.175)                  (0.197)              (0.0223)                  (0.169)                      (0.0441)                      (0.0179)               (0.00994)              (0.00404)                 (0.0773)
B.2. Policy Unrestricted
Population
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                      -0.670                 -0.289**               0.0315                   0.276*                       0.0918                        -0.0805                 -0.0869                0.177**                    0.139
                                                  (0.937)                  (0.140)              (0.0907)                  (0.159)                      (0.105)                       (0.110)                 (0.115)                (0.0775)                  (0.364)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described in the text for various occupation categories. The dependent variables in these specifications are defined as the decadal change in working-age
male population reporting an industry in a specific industry group over total working-age male population in the beginning of the decade, at the SEA level. The industry groups are defined using the census of population industry codes as described in the text. Panel
A presents results for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, Panel B presents results for the mining sample of 115 SEAs, Panel C presents results for the rural sample of the remaining 168 SEAs and Panel D presents results for the full sample of 460 SEAs. Sub-panels 1
show the coefficients of interest for the policy restricted population, and sub-panels 2 show the coefficients of interest for the policy unrestricted populations. In all specifications, each SEA has one observation for the 1900-1910 decade and another observation for
the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed effects, census region time trends, and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trends. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.
Appendix Table 4: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rate - Robustness to State Time
                                                 Trends and Controls
               Sample:                              Urban Sample                                Mining Sample                            Rural Sample
                                             (1)         (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)
A. European immigrants, <10 years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)        -2.027***         -2.756***    -1.833***        -1.927***     -1.183**     -1.138*      -1.206***    -1.057***     -1.105***
                                       (0.526)          (0.782)      (0.683)          (0.605)       (0.500)     (0.585)       (0.195)      (0.235)       (0.234)
B. Native Born White
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         1.248**            0.232        0.631            0.207        2.091        1.487       -2.386**     -2.797***     -3.385***
                                       (0.612)          (0.410)      (0.880)          (0.761)      (1.385)      (1.620)       (1.087)      (0.964)       (0.775)
C. Native Born Non-White
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         0.175**           0.319**       -0.247          0.0247       0.158**    0.492***         -0.112      -0.192**     -0.208**
                                      (0.0822)          (0.145)      (0.256)         (0.0418)      (0.0784)    (0.127)        (0.0829)     (0.0926)     (0.0899)
D. European immigrants, 10+ years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -0.113         -0.400***      -0.791         -0.817***      -0.372    -0.702**       -1.536***    -1.794***     -1.811***
                                       (0.217)          (0.152)      (0.563)          (0.244)      (0.280)     (0.352)        (0.345)      (0.277)       (0.251)
E. Immigrants from Western Hemisphere
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)            0.125           0.115        0.907          0.209**        0.193     0.984***         -0.0231    -0.165***      0.0224
                                      (0.0954)          (0.101)      (0.668)         (0.0998)      (0.139)     (0.257)        (0.0525)     (0.0541)     (0.0926)
Time Trends                            Region            State        State           Region        State       State          Region        State        State
Share Foreign-Born in 1900 Controls       No              No           Yes              No           No          Yes             No           No          Yes

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described in the text for various populations.
Panel A presents results for the policy restricted population, panels B-E present results for the various policy unrestricted populations. The dependent variables
in these specifications are defined as the decadal change in working-age male population change for the relevant population group over total working-age male
population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each SEA has one observation for the 1900-1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-
1930 decade. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed effects. The number of SEAs in the urban sample is 177, 115 in the mining sample and 168 in the
rural sample. The number of observations is 354 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample and 336 in the rural sample. Robust standard errors, clustered at
the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                                                49
Appendix Table 5: Lasso Results for the Relationship Between Quota Exposure Measure
                           and 1900 SEA Characteristics
                                                                                                          Full
                      Sample:                               Urban         Mining          Rural
                                                                                                         Sample
                                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
Foreign Born Share                                             x              x              -               x
Log Total Population                                           -              -              -               -
Share Urban Population                                         -              -              -               -
Share Black Population                                         -              -              -               -
Literacy Rate                                                  -              -              -               -
Share Workers in Manufacturing                                 -              -              -               -
Share Workers in Agriculture                                   x              -              -               x
Share Workers Holding White Collar
Occupation                                                     -              -              -               -
Log Average Wage in Manufacturing                              -              -              -               -
Log Average Farm Value                                         -              -              -               -
Log Value of Farm Output per Acre                              -              -              -               -
Share Owner Operated Farms                                     -              -              -               -
Share Farmland Cultivated                                      -              -              -               -
Share Wheat in Cultivated Farmland                             -              -              -               -
Share Cotton in Cultivated Farmland                            -              -              -               -
Share Hay/Corn in Cultivated Farmland                          -              -              -               -

Census Region FE                                              Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Observations                                                  177            115           168             460
Notes: This table presents the coefficient selected by a lasso procedure of a cross-sectional specification where the
dependent variable is the SEA quota exposure measures and the potential explanatory variables are a set of 1900
SEA socioeconomic characteristics. All Lasso procedure partial out census region fixed effects prior to control
selection. Column 1 shows the controls selected for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, column 2 shows the controls
selected for the 115 SEAs in the mining sample, column 3 shows the controls selected for the 168 SEAs in the rural
sample, and column 4 shows the controls selected for the 460 SEAs in the full sample. Controls marked with an
"x" are chosen by the Lasso specification.
    Appendix Table 6: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population
                   Change Rate - Robustness to % farming in 1900

                                     Immigrants,         US-        US-Born, Immigrants, Immigrants,
      Population Group:              Europe, <10        Born,        Non-    Europe, 10+   Western
                                      yrs in US         White        White    yrs in US  Hemisphere
                                          (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)
A. Urban Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -1.093*       3.270***       0.372*           0.121            0.589
                                        (0.664)        (1.041)       (0.190)         (0.496)          (0.444)
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -1.136*          1.714      0.352***         -0.456          1.150***
                                        (0.623)         (1.296)      (0.131)         (0.384)          (0.376)
C. Rural Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         -1.350***       -2.911***     -0.191**       -1.619***           0.157
                                        (0.201)         (1.086)     (0.0864)         (0.389)          (0.128)
D. Full Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         -1.436***         -0.140        0.0531        -0.907**          0.586**
                                        (0.278)         (1.112)      (0.0937)        (0.373)          (0.235)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text for various populations. The dependent variables in these specifications are defined as the
decadal change in working-age male population change for the relevant population group over total working-age
male population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each SEA has one observation for the 1900-
1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed
effects, census region time trends, and initial (1900) foreign-born share and share of labor force in farming time
trends. The number of SEAs in the urban sample is 177, 115 in the mining sample, and 168 in the rural sample. The
number of observations is 354 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample, and 336 in the rural sample. The
number of SEAs in the full sample is 460 and the number observations in the full sample specifications is 920.
Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                       51
       Appendix Table 7: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rates - Alternative Quota
                                                     Exposure Measures
             Sample:                                        Urban Sample                                                      Mining Sample                                                       Rural Sample
                                        (1)                (2)        (3)                (4)                  (5)            (6)         (7)                (8)                 (9)             (10)        (11)               (12)
A. European immigrants, <10 years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)      -2.122***            -1.549**      -1.702***       -1.499***           -1.818***         -0.873       -1.699***      -1.474***            -1.253***       -1.283***       -0.640**         -0.879*
                                     (0.575)             (0.669)        (0.327)         (0.392)             (0.605)        (0.612)         (0.466)        (0.479)              (0.123)         (0.132)        (0.320)         (0.509)
B. Native Born White
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)       1.330**             2.157**          0.343          0.777                0.332          1.388         -0.297          -0.238             -2.612***       -2.948***        -1.576         -3.412**
                                     (0.651)            (1.011)         (0.424)        (0.976)              (0.722)        (1.302)        (0.669)         (1.107)              (0.864)         (0.856)        (1.056)         (1.403)
C. Native Born Non-White
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)       0.200**               0.128         0.0944         -0.0574              0.0287        0.343***       -0.00513        0.347***              -0.0981        -0.140*         -0.0910       -0.316***
                                    (0.0862)             (0.158)       (0.0579)        (0.207)             (0.0377)        (0.111)       (0.0456)         (0.107)             (0.0753)       (0.0718)        (0.0730)         (0.118)
D. European immigrants, 10+ years in US
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)        -0.0621             0.0387        -0.317**        -0.622             -0.769***         -0.416       -0.787***      -0.925***            -1.544***       -1.516***      -1.120***       -1.896***
                                     (0.230)             (0.467)        (0.160)        (0.518)              (0.244)        (0.375)         (0.194)        (0.334)              (0.279)         (0.328)        (0.416)         (0.542)
E. Immigrants from Western Hemisphere
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         0.119               0.528         0.117*          0.788               0.173*        0.944***        0.277**        1.685***              -0.0304         0.115         0.00638          0.493*
                                    (0.0963)             (0.420)       (0.0682)        (0.547)             (0.0895)        (0.343)        (0.113)         (0.267)             (0.0483)        (0.109)        (0.0542)         (0.256)
Exposure Measure                       Q1                  Q1             Q2             Q2                   Q1             Q1              Q2             Q2                   Q1             Q1              Q2              Q2
Controls                               No                  Yes            No             Yes                  No             Yes             No             Yes                  No             Yes             No              Yes

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described in the text. Columns 1-4 present results for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, columns 5-8 present results for
the mining sample of 115 SEAs, and columns 9-12 present results for the rural sample of 168 SEAs. Panel A presents results for the policy restricted population, and panels B-E present results for the policy unrestricted populations.
The dependent variables in these specifications are the decadal change in policy restricted and unrestricted working-age male population over total working-age male population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications,
each SEA has one observation for the 1900-1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. Odd-numbered columns present results from a specification that includes SEA and Census region time trends. Even-
numbered columns add trends by initial (1900) foreign-born share. The number of observations is 354 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample, and 336 in the rural sample. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level,
in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.
    Appendix Table 8: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population
                             Change Rates - County Level

                                     Immigrants,          US-        US-Born,      Immigrants, Immigrants,
      Population Group:              Europe, <10         Born,        Non-         Europe, 10+   Western
                                      yrs in US          White        White         yrs in US  Hemisphere
                                           (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)              (5)
A. Urban Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -0.763**         0.123        -0.0215         -0.402             0.159
                                         (0.363)        (0.571)       (0.0621)        (0.296)           (0.150)
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)          -1.464***         11.29          0.168          0.279           0.470***
                                         (0.269)        (14.68)        (0.158)        (0.952)           (0.120)
C. Rural Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)          -0.668***        -1.401**     -0.0750**       -1.050***         0.128**
                                         (0.231)         (0.640)      (0.0373)         (0.264)         (0.0635)
D. Full Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)          -0.866***         1.529        -0.0359         -0.692**         0.189***
                                         (0.175)        (3.291)       (0.0408)         (0.282)         (0.0536)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text for various populations. The dependent variables in these specifications are defined as the
decadal change in working-age male population change for the relevant population group over total working-age
male population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each county has one observation for the 1900-
1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications include county and decade fixed
effects, census region time trends, and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trend. The number of counties in the
urban sample is 517, 705 in the mining sample, 1,592 in the rural sample and 2,814 in the full sample. The number
of observations is 1,034 in the urban sample, 1,410 in the mining sample, 3,184 in the rural sample and 5,628 in
the full sample. Robust standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; *
p<0.1.
    Appendix Table 9: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population
                       Change Rate - 1900 Population Weights

                                     Immigrants,         US-        US-Born,      Immigrants, Immigrants,
      Population Group:              Europe, <10        Born,        Non-         Europe, 10+   Western
                                      yrs in US         White        White         yrs in US  Hemisphere
                                          (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)               (5)
A. Urban Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -0.625*        0.931**       0.0612         -0.369*           0.0293
                                        (0.372)        (0.404)      (0.0880)        (0.197)           (0.104)
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)           -0.721           1.435       0.261**         -0.469           0.513*
                                        (0.738)         (1.108)      (0.105)         (0.360)          (0.295)
C. Rural Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         -1.029***        -2.792**      -0.277        -1.473***          0.0787
                                        (0.340)         (1.106)      (0.229)         (0.448)          (0.148)
D. Full Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)         -1.114***          0.289       0.0344        -0.663***          0.124
                                        (0.339)         (0.446)     (0.0629)         (0.173)         (0.0787)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text for various populations. The dependent variables in these specifications are defined as the
decadal change in working-age male population change for the relevant population group over total working-age
male population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each SEA has one observation for the 1900-
1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed
effects, census region time trends, and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trend. The number of SEAs in the
urban sample is 177, 115 in the mining sample, 168 in the rural sample, and 460 in the full sample. The number of
observations is 354 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample, 336 in the rural sample, and 920 in the full
sample. All specifications are weighted by 1900 population. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in
parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                       54
    Appendix Table 10: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rate - Alternative Urban
                                                   Sample Definition

                                                                    Immigrants,                                      Immigrants,     Immigrants,
                                                                                      US- Born,      US-Born,
                      Population Group:                             Europe, <10                                      Europe, 10+       Western
                                                                                       White         Non-White
                                                                     yrs in US                                        yrs in US      Hemisphere
                                                                         (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)
A. "High" Urban Sample (Above 30% Urban Share in 1900)
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                         -1.622**        2.601***          0.247            0.280           0.0295
                                                                       (0.735)         (1.009)         (0.155)          (0.345)          (0.124)
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                          -1.102*          1.240         0.382***          -0.525         1.164***
                                                                       (0.629)         (1.303)         (0.118)          (0.386)         (0.372)
C. Rural Sample (Below 30% Urban Share in 1900)
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                         -1.115***        -2.421*        -0.192**        -1.618***           0.566
                                                                        (0.273)        (1.343)        (0.0812)          (0.480)          (0.396)
D. Full Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                         -1.485***        -0.115           0.0257         -0.899**         0.576**
                                                                        (0.296)        (1.119)         (0.0779)         (0.376)         (0.231)

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described in the text for various
populations. The dependent variables in these specifications are defined as the decadal change in working-age male population change for the
relevant population group over total working-age male population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each SEA has one
observation for the 1900-1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications include SEA and decade fixed effects,
census region time trends, and initial (1900) foreign-born share time trend. The number of SEAs in the "high" urban sample is 136, 115 in the
mining sample, and 209 in the rural sample. The number of observations is 272 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample, and 418 in the
rural sample. The number of SEAs in the full sample is 460 and the number observations in the full sample specifications is 920. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.
Appendix Table 11: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population Change Rate - Robustness to Outliers
               Population Group:                                   Policy Restricted                                       Policy Unrestricted
                                                                        Policy         Policy-                                   Policy        Policy-
                                                                     Restricted Unrestricted                                   Restricted Unrestricted
                                                           Policy                                                  Policy
               Outliers Excluded:                                    Population      Population                                Population Population
                                                          Exposure                                                Exposure
                                                                       Change         Change                                    Change         Change
                                                                         Rate           Rate                                      Rate          Rate
                                                            (1)           (2)            (3)                        (4)            (5)           (6)
A. Urban Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                              -1.925**         -1.750**          -1.665*              2.810*           3.404**          3.236**
                                                            (0.821)          (0.771)          (0.886)              (1.493)          (1.562)          (1.493)
Number of SEAs                                                169              165              166                  169              165              166
Number of Observations                                        338              330              332                  338              330              332
B. Mining Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                              -1.045*           -0.807           -1.026                2.502            2.491             2.592
                                                           (0.589)           (0.534)          (0.662)              (1.756)          (1.629)           (1.654)
Number of SEAs                                               111               108              110                  111              108               110
Number of Observations                                       222               216              220                  222              216               220
C. Rural Sample
Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                              -0.399**         -0.429*         -1.348***               0.137           -3.443          -4.817***
                                                            (0.195)         (0.222)           (0.196)              (2.175)          (2.216)           (1.488)
Number of SEAs                                                160             151               157                  160              151               157
Number of Observations                                        320             302               314                  320              302               314

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described in the text. Panel A presents results
for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, and panel B presents results for the mining sample of 115 SEAs, and Panel C presents results for the rural sample of the
remaining 168 SEAs. The dependent variables in these specifications are the decadal change in policy restricted and unrestricted working-age male population
over total working-age male population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each SEA has one observation for the 1900-1910 decade and
another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. Columns 1 and 4 present results from a specification that excludes SEAs from the bottom and top 2.5% of
policy exposure distribution. Columns 2 and 5 exclude SEAs who were in the bottom or top 2.5% distribution of the policy restricted population change rate
in either 1900-1910 or 1920-1930, and columns 3 and 6 exclude SEAs in the bottom or top 2.5% for the distribution of policy unrestricted population change
rate. All specification includes SEA fixed effects, census region and 1900 foreign-born rate time trends. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in
parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.


                                                                                56
   Appendix Table 12: The Effect of Exposure to Border Closure Policy on Population
                      Change Rate - Robustness to World War I

                                                                                 Policy              Policy
                          Population Group:
                                                                                Restricted         Unrestricted

                                                                                     (1)                 (2)
A. Urban Sample

   WWI Exposure X (1910-1920)                                                   -0.798***             0.864***
                                                                                  (0.154)              (0.247)

   Policy Exposure X (1920-1930)                                                -1.582***             1.636**
                                                                                  (0.424)             (0.645)

Number of SEAs                                                                                 177
Number of Observations                                                                         531
B. Mining Sample
   WWI Exposure X (1910-1920)                                                   -1.384***              -0.406
                                                                                  (0.300)              (0.580)

   Policy Exposure X (1920-1930)                                                -1.670***              -0.960
                                                                                  (0.529)              (0.934)

Number of SEAs                                                                                 115
Number of Observations                                                                         345
C. Rural Sample
   WWI Exposure X (1910-1920)                                                    -0.500**              -0.367
                                                                                  (0.241)              (1.141)

   Policy Exposure X (1920-1930)                                                -0.763***             -2.348**
                                                                                  (0.186)              (1.193)

Number of SEAs                                                                                 168
Number of Observations                                                                         504

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. Panel A presents results for the urban sample, Panel B presents results for the mining sample,
and Panel C presents results for the rural sample. The dependent variables in these specifications are the decadal
change in quota restricted and unrestricted working-age male population over total working-age male population
in the beginning of the decade. All specifications include SEA fixed effects, Census region time trends, and 1900
foreign born share time trends. The number of SEAs is 230 in both the urban and rural samples. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.
Appendix Table 13: The Effect of Border Closure Policy Exposure on Population Change
                                   Rates of Women

                       Population Group:                                   Policy Restricted               Policy Unrestricted

                                                                            (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)

A. Urban Sample

Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                           -1.206***      -0.869***           1.131          1.729
                                                                         (0.248)        (0.335)           (0.756)        (1.544)


Control for 1900 Foreign Born Share                                         No            Yes                No            Yes
B. Mining Sample

Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                           -1.827***      -1.233***           -0.351         2.377
                                                                         (0.376)        (0.409)           (0.881)        (1.522)


Control for 1900 Foreign Born Share                                         No            Yes                No            Yes
C. Rural Sample

Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                           -2.568***      -2.579***         -3.007***     -3.316***
                                                                         (0.487)        (0.583)           (1.130)        (1.238)
D. Full Sample

Policy Exposure x (1920-1930)                                           -1.825***      -1.731***           -0.688        -0.275
                                                                         (0.308)        (0.432)           (0.845)        (1.315)


Control for 1900 Foreign Born Share                                         No            Yes                No            Yes

Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification described in the
text. Panel A presents results for the urban sample of 177 SEAs, Panel B presents results for the mining sample of 115 SEAs,
Panel C presents results for the rural sample of the remaining 168 SEAs and Panel D presents results for the full sample of 460
SEAs. The dependent variables in these specifications are the decadal change in policy restricted and unrestricted working-age
women population over total working-age women population in the beginning of the decade. In all specifications, each SEA has
one observation for the 1900-1910 decade and another observation for the 1920-1930 decade. All specifications include SEA
and census region time trends. Even-numbered column include trends by initial (1900) foreign-born share. The number of
observations is 354 in the urban sample, 230 in the mining sample, 336 in the rural sample and 920 in the full sample. Robust
standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                               58
   Appendix Table 14: The Effect of Border Closure Policy Exposure on Female Labor
                                  Force Participation

                                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)

Policy Exposure x 1930                                               -0.0287 0.000950 -0.0754 -0.0121
                                                                     (0.0867) (0.0452) (0.0673) (0.0404)

Sample                                                                Urban       Mining        Rural        Full
Number of SEAs                                                         177         115           168         460
Number of Observations                                                 531         345           504         1380
Notes: This table presents the coefficient of interest from the continuous difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. Column 1 presents result for the urban SEAs, column 2 presents result for the mining SEAs,
column 3 presents result for the rural SEAs and column 4 presents result for the all SEAs. The dependent variable
in these specifications is the share of policy unrestricted women with gainful occupation among the policy
unrestricted working-age women population. In all specifications, each SEA has three observations for each of the
years 1900,1910, and 1930. All specifications include SEA and year fixed effects, and trends by census region and
initial (1900) foreign-born share. Robust standard errors, clustered at the SEA level, in parenthesis. *** p<0.01; **
p<0.05; * p<0.1.




                                                        59
