                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SERVICES DEVELOPMENT AND COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE IN MANUFACTURING

                                          Xuepeng Liu
                                         Aaditya Mattoo
                                           Zhi Wang
                                         Shang-Jin Wei

                                       Working Paper 26542
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26542


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26542.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Xuepeng Liu, Aaditya Mattoo, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Services Development and Comparative Advantage in Manufacturing
Xuepeng Liu, Aaditya Mattoo, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 26542
December 2019
JEL No. F1

                                         ABSTRACT

Most manufacturing activities use inputs from the financial and business services sectors. But
these services sectors also compete for resources with manufacturing activities, provoking
concerns about deindustrialization attributable to financial services in developed countries like
the United States and United Kingdom, and business services in developing countries like India
and the Philippines. This paper examines the implications of services development for the export
performance of manufacturing sectors. We develop a methodology to quantify the indirect role of
services in international trade in goods and construct new measures of revealed comparative
advantage based on value-added exports. We show that the development of financial and business
services enhances the revealed comparative advantage of manufacturing sectors that use these
services intensively but not of other manufacturing sectors. We also find that a country can
partially overcome the handicap of an underdeveloped domestic services sector by relying more
on imported services inputs. Thus, lower services trade barriers in developing countries can help
to promote their manufacturing exports.

Xuepeng Liu                                     Zhi Wang
Kennesaw State University                       Schar School of Policy and Government
2460 Gablewood Dr NE                            George Mason Universty
Marietta, GA 30062                              3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1,
xuepengliu@gmail.com                            Alington, VA 22201
                                                zwang36@gmu.edu
Aaditya Mattoo
The World Bank                                  Shang-Jin Wei
amattoo@worldbank.org                           Graduate School of Business
                                                Columbia University
                                                Uris Hall 619
                                                3022 Broadway
                                                New York, NY 10027-6902
                                                and NBER
                                                shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
I.         Introduction

         On the face of it, services play a relatively small role in international trade. Conventional
trade statistics show that services trade currently accounts for only one-fifth of cross-border trade
(Loungani et al., 2017). However, a significant part of goods trade includes trade in embodied
services. In the United States, for example, more than a quarter of intermediate inputs purchased
by manufacturers were from the services sector (USITC, 2013). For certain manufacturing sectors,
such as computers and electronic products, this percentage -- a measure of "services intensity" --
is as high as 47.6 percent. Drawing on the Trade in Value-added Database (TiVA, 1995-2011),
Miroudot and Cadestin (2017) show that services inputs account for about 37 percent of the value
of manufacturing exports in the sample of 62 countries covered. The development of the domestic
services sector, as well as access to imported services inputs, can, therefore, be expected to
influence comparative advantage in manufacturing trade. This paper seeks to understand this
indirect role of services development drawing upon new measures based on newly available data.
         The impact of services development is not straightforward. On the one hand, as services are
used as inputs in the production of manufactured goods, services development can help to increase
manufacturing production. On the other hand, since services and manufacturing compete for
resources, the development of the former can be at the expense of the latter. For example, it is
evident that the development of the services sector has drawn resources away from manufacturing
not just in developed countries like the United States and the United Kingdom, but also in
developing countries like India.1
         We focus on two services sectors that are crucial for modern economic development:
financial services and business services. Both have emerged as skill-intensive, dynamic,
internationally traded services. These two services sectors are often regarded as the pillars of
modern economies, and their value-added shares in GDP have a strong positive correlation with
countries' income levels. The two sectors also represent the tension we discussed above in the
sharpest form. On the one hand, manufacturing performance is critically dependent on the
domestic availability of these services. On the other, these are the sectors that often provoke
"deindustrialization" concerns ­ financial services in industrial countries like the United States
and United Kingdom, and business services in developing countries like India and the Philippines.

1
    See, for example, Kochhar et al. (2006).
                                                                                                    2
      Well-functioning financial sectors are critical in mobilizing resources, stimulating
investment, and at the same time helping firms (and households) better managing their risks. As
shown in Appendix 1, the business services sector covers a variety of critical activities, ranging
from software consulting and data processing to management consultancy, engineering and R&D
services. Intensive use of these modern services can help manufacturing firms increase
productivity, reduce the cost of doing business, expand their choices within a longer geographic
distance, differentiate their products from those of their competitors,2 strengthen their after-sale
customer services, etc.3 USITC (2013) shows that business services accounted for nearly half of
all services purchased by manufacturing sectors in the U.S. in 2008.
      Our first hypothesis is that, while the overall effect of services development on the
performance of manufacturing sectors is ambiguous, the effect is more likely to be positive for
manufacturing sectors that use the services inputs more intensively. We develop a methodology to
quantify the indirect role of services in international trade in goods using a framework developed
by Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014) and Wang, Wei, and Zhu (2013) that generalizes the vertical
specialization measures proposed by Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001). We use a suitably modified
version of revealed comparative advantage (RCA) to measure the competitiveness of
manufacturing sectors. We improve on the traditional Balassa (1965) RCA and construct new
measures of RCA based on value-added exports (RCA_VAX) rather than gross exports. These
measures take into account both domestic production sharing (such as the use of service inputs in
manufacturing production) and international production sharing (such as the use of imported
foreign inputs in domestic production).
      In our econometric analysis of the impact of services development on the RCA of
manufacturing sectors, the key explanatory variable is an interaction between a measure of the
development of financial (or business) services and the financial (or business) services input
intensity of each manufacturing sector. We find that domestic services development indeed has a
mixed effect on manufacturing export RCA: in manufacturing sectors with low embodied services,
services development reduces manufacturing export RCA; however, in sectors with a high degree

2
  To differentiate a product from others, firms need to invest more in R&D, quality-upgrading, and advertisement. The
groups of manufacturing sectors with high embodied financial and business services as listed in Appendix 3 indeed
produce more differentiated products than those sectors with low services input intensity. In addition, combining pure
manufacturing and after-sale services is also a way to differentiate itself from competitors.
3
  See the next section for discussion in the literature on how producer services may affect firms' productivity.
                                                                                                                    3
          of embodied services, services development increases manufacturing RCA. Figure 1 provides a
          visual illustration of this relationship in the case of financial services. We see a negative association
          between manufacturing RCA and a measure of financial development for a sector with low
          financial services input intensity (SII), but a positive association for a sector with high SII.


                       Basic & Fabricated Metals (low SII)                                  Food, Beverages & Tobacco (high SII)
                   2




                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                         IRL   DNK
                                  SVK

                                         SVN
                                                                                                          BRA
                                                             JPN                                                                               NLD
                                   CZE
                                  BRA
             1.5




                                                       KOR
                                                       ITA
                                                                                                     IDN
                                                                                                                                               CYP




                                                                                            2
                             TUR                               AUT
                                                 FIN            DEU ESP                                                BEL
                                                               CHN                                         LTU
                             RUS                                                                                                 AUS
RCA_VAX




                                                                            RCA_VAX

                            ROM                              SWE
                              POL
                                BGR                                                                       POL
                                                 BEL FRA
                   1




                                                        AUS
                            MEX                                     CAN                                             EST
                                                                                                                  LVA
                                                                                                                           FRAMLT   ESP
                                   IND                                                                                                PRT
                                           USA                                                      TUR CZE                    AUT
                                         HUN                              PRT                                                   CHN
                                                                                            1



                                                                   LUX           GBR                ROMSVK                                GBR
                                                                                                         BGR             ITA      CAN
                                                                                   NLD                                          DEU
                                                                                    DNK
                                          LVA GRC                                                                      GRC
              .5




                                                                                                                 HUN
                                            EST                                                     MEX           SVN              LUX
                                                                                                                   USA FIN       SWE
                                                                                                           IND
                             IDN                                                      CYP
                                LTU
                                                                                                                             KOR JPN
                                                             MLT           IRL
                                                                                                     RUS
                   0




                                                                                            0




                        0            .5            1                       1.5                  0            .5            1             1.5
                                  (Bank Private Credit)/GDP                                               (Bank Private Credit)/GDP


          Figure 1: RCA against Bank Private Credit to GDP (Df1), year 2005. The vertical axis represents
          the RCA based on value-added exports (VAX) for Basic & Fabricated Metals sector and Food,
          Beverages & Tobacco sector, respectively. The horizontal axis represents a measure of financial
          development ­ the ratio of bank private credit to GDP from the World Bank Global Financial
          Development Database (GFDD).

                   Furthermore, we distinguish embodied domestic services inputs from embodied foreign
          services inputs. When domestic firms have access to foreign services, they may at least partially
          bypass their own inefficient services provision by relying more on imported services inputs. As
          our second hypothesis, we expect to see a more positive effect of access to foreign services inputs
          on manufacturing export performance in countries with lower levels of domestic services
          development. This is also supported by our empirical analysis.
                                                                                                                                                     4
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We review the relevant literature in Section II.
In Section III, we present our hypotheses and describe the data. The empirical analysis is carried
out in Section IV. We conclude in Section V.


II. Literature review
     This paper is related to at least two strands of the literature: one is on the estimation of
services embodied in traded goods; the other is on the role of services in economic development.
     Research on services embodied in traded goods, based on the Leontief inverse, can be traced
back to Grubel (1988) who examined Canadian exports in 1973 and 1983. He found that, over that
decade, Canadian embodied services exports had increased substantially to the point where Canada
enjoyed a surplus in embodied services trade but had a deficit in direct trade in services. Urata and
Kiyota (2003) examined the embodied services in total gross trade for several major services
categories of five Asian economies ­ China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand -
in 1990. They found that embodied services accounted for a large share of total services trade for
each country. Francois and Woerz (2008) examined the role of services as inputs in manufacturing
sectors. They found a significant and strong positive effect of increased business services openness
(i.e. greater levels of imports) on some industries, supporting the notion that offshoring of business
services may promote the competitiveness of the most skill and technology intensive industries in
the OECD countries. Francois et al. (2013) demonstrated that the ratio of value-added exports to
gross exports is significantly higher than one in services sectors, suggesting an important role of
services sectors in downstream sectors through forward inter-industrial linkages. Their studies
cover many countries and provide some interesting insights.
     These earlier studies used single national input-output tables, rather than an international
input-output table as in this paper, so they could not break down the inputs according to their
origins or address the mismeasurement problem (double counting) in services inputs due to two-
way trade in intermediate products (Koopman, Wang, and Wei, 2014). In addition, they can only
consider how much a service sector's value-added is embodied in manufacturing exports but not
whether parts of the exported value-added return to the exporting country. In the current paper, we
make use of the recently developed approach of Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014) and the newly
constructed World Input-Output Database (WIOD) to measure more precisely the embodied

                                                                                                    5
services and indirect trade through other sectors.4 With the multi-country input-output table and
the information about the origins of inputs, we can study embodied domestic and foreign services
and their interaction with domestic services development. Stehrer, Foster, and Vries (2012) and
Timmer et al. (2013) also use a similar method and the WIOD data to estimate the shares of
services, income and jobs in a country that are directly and indirectly related to the production of
manufacturing goods, but their work is primarily descriptive without connecting embodied
services to the performance of manufacturing sectors.
         On the role of services in economic development, Hoekman and Mattoo (2008) review the
literature, focusing on channels through which openness to trade in services may increase the
productivity of a firm, an industry and an economy as a whole. The existing studies show that the
access to low-cost and high quality producer services can promote economic growth. Based on an
industry level analysis of the U.S., Amiti and Wei (2009a) find that service offshoring by high-
income countries tends to raise their manufacturing sectors' productivity. While services
offshoring has both positive and negative effects on domestic employment, Amiti and Wei (2009b)
show that, at least for the case of the United States, it tends to enhance domestic employment on
average because the enlarged domestic production due to improved efficiency from offshoring (the
scale effect) dominates a direct substitution effect (loss of certain domestic jobs now performed
by foreign workers). Arnold, Javorcik, and Mattoo (2011), using firm-level data from the Czech
Republic for the period 1998-2003, find a positive effect of services sector reforms on the
productivity of domestic firms in downstream manufacturing. The manufacturing-services linkage
is measured using information on the degree to which manufacturing firms rely on intermediate
inputs from services industries. Arnold et al. (2012) use a similar methodology to show that
services reforms had significant and positive effects on the productivity of manufacturing firms in
India. Fernandes and Paunov (2012), using the annual manufacturing survey of Chilean firms, find
a positive effect of substantial FDI inflows in producer services sectors on the total factor
productivity (TFP) of Chilean manufacturing firms. Their findings also suggest that services FDI
fosters innovation activities in manufacturing and offers opportunities for laggard firms to catch
up with industry leaders. Debaere et al. (2013) find that greater availability of services increases
manufacturing firms' foreign sourcing of materials, which may in turn enhance manufacturing

4
    See Dietzenbacher et al. (2014) and Timmer et al. (2015) for more information on the construction of the WIOD.
                                                                                                                     6
productivity. Using Swedish firm level data, Lodefalk (2014) shows that in-house and outsourced
services help to increase export intensity measured by the share of merchandise exports in total
sales. Finally, a recent paper by Bamieh et al. (2017) show that more intensive use of producer
services appears to be positively associated with resilience to greater import competition.
      In this paper, we study particularly the roles of financial services and business services in
manufacturing production. On financial services, Rajan and Zingales (1998) and a number of
follow-up studies find that industries that are particularly dependent on financing grow relatively
faster in countries with more developed financial markets. Beck (2003), Manova (2008), and Chor
(2010) show that financially-developed countries are more successful exporters in industries that
depend more on external capital funding.5 Ju and Wei (2011) show in a general equilibrium model
that, for economies with low-quality institutions, finance is a key driver of the real economy and
a source of comparative advantage. Buera et al. (2011) demonstrate in a model that sectors with
more financing needs are disproportionately vulnerable to financial frictions. A growing literature
on credit constraints demonstrates that access to external finance helps to increase firms' export
performance (e.g., Amiti and Weinstein, 2011). Using firm-level evidence, Manova, Wei, and
Zhang (2015) show that credit constraints reduce exports in developing countries, and
multinational firms that do not rely on local financial systems tend to be more successful exporters
in sectors where credit constraints are more binding. All of these papers suggest that financial
services development is a source of comparative advantage.
      Our approach differs from Rajan and Zingales (1998) and these other papers in two major
ways. First, we consider modern business services sectors in addition to financial services. For
most countries in our sample, business services as a share of GDP are generally on par with or
greater than financial services. Second, even for financial services, we measure the intensity of use
in manufacturing sectors differently from Rajan and Zingales in order to maintain consistency with
our measure of business services intensity. In particular, their measure of financial dependence is
about the intrinsic needs for externally raised funds relative to total funding needs for long-term
investment. In an Input-output context, the financial services sector only provides financial
services in value-added terms, rather than the amount of external finance raised. Financial services

5
 Based on a non-parametric estimation, however, Shen (2013) shows that the effect is even stronger for financially
underdeveloped countries than financially developed countries due to diminishing returns.

                                                                                                                7
may facilitate an investment deal, but is different from investment. Therefore, their measures and
ours reflect two different concepts.6
      Business services cover a wide range of activities as listed in Appendix 1. There are many
case studies on how a certain type of business services promotes the economic performance at firm,
state or national level (see USITC, 2013). However, comprehensive empirical analyses covering
most of the major economics at a detailed industry level are rare, probably owning to the lack of
detailed services data.
      In the existing literature, the estimation of embodied services and the empirical analyses on
their linkage to manufacturing export performance are somewhat disconnected. The former
estimates the embodied services, but does not examine empirically how services input intensity
affects the performance of downstream sectors. The latter, on the other hand, uses some proxies of
inter-sectoral linkage or the direct inputs in gross output to examine the effects of services reforms
on downstream manufacturing sectors without quantifying precisely services input intensity. The
current paper connects the two literatures: we measure precisely services input intensity as the
ratio of embodied services to manufacturing value-added, considering both direct and indirect
input usages; then, we directly quantify the effect of services development on the export
performance of manufacturing sectors. In addition, the second hypothesis in this paper considers
how the access to foreign services markets may help developing countries to bypass their possibly
inefficient domestic services provision.7 Such a bypass effect is also discussed in a theoretical
model by Ju and Wei (2010); they derive the conditions under which financial globalization can



6
  We compare our embodied financial services measures with the external financial dependence measures used by
Rajan and Zingales (1998) for the U.S. and find a very weak correlation between them, using a concordance between
ISIC Rev. 1 and the WIOD sectors (constructed by authors). The simple correlation coefficient is actually negative at
-0.32 or -0.36, depending on whether we consider only embodied domestic financial services inputs or embodied
domestic and foreign financial services inputs. A note of caution is that our sample period (1995-2007) differs from
theirs (1970s and 1980s). Although we tried narrowing the gap as much as we can by picking their measure for year
1980 and ours for 1995, the weak correlation can be partially due to the different time coverages.
7
  By distinguishing domestic from foreign services input, we implicitly assume that they are incomplete substitutes.
The magnitude of the Armington elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign varieties depends on several
factors such as the time windows (long run vs. short run) and the level of product disaggregation. In general, estimates
of the elasticity are usually quite small at macroeconomic level. This is why, for example, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2007)
found that rebalancing the U.S. current account would require a 30 percent depreciation of U.S. dollar. Even at sector
level, the suggested Armington elasticity in Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP Commodity Model) is less than
two for most of the services categories, generally lower than those of manufacturing sectors (Hertel, 1997). The U.S.
International Trade Commission (e.g., USITC-128 Sector Model) uses similar estimates for financial and business
services sectors (Donnelly et al., 2004).
                                                                                                                      8
serve as a substitute for reforms of domestic financial system. This is also broadly consistent with
the theory of comparative advantage ­ countries with under-developed services sectors benefit
from imported services, but our paper shows that these benefits may go beyond services sectors
through inter-sectoral linkages.


III.      Empirical strategy and the data

        In this section, we test empirically the following two hypotheses.
        Hypothesis 1: Greater domestic services development promotes export competitiveness more
in those manufacturing sectors that use services as inputs more intensively.
        Hypothesis 2: The positive effect of embodied foreign services inputs on manufacturing
export competitiveness is stronger in countries with lower levels of domestic services development,
especially for manufacturing sectors with a high level of services input intensity.
        Although the above two hypotheses seem to be straightforward, the predictions are not
unambiguous as discussed in the introduction. The development in services can, on the one hand,
draw resources away from manufacturing sectors, and, on the other hand, can also enhance the
productivity of manufacturing when more productive services are used as inputs. Whether the net
effect is positive or negative is an empirical question.
        As for the second hypothesis, how the effects of foreign services on domestic manufacturing
sectors are influenced by the level of development of the domestic services sector is not
straightforward either. Whether the effect is dampened or enhanced can depend on whether
domestic and foreign services are substitutes or complements. We seek to establish some robust
patterns on these questions.
        In the following, we will lay out our empirical strategy, explain the measures of the key
variables and describe the data.


       III.1 Empirical strategy
        In our empirical analysis, we use a modified definition of revealed comparative advantage
(RCA) to measure the export competitiveness of individual manufacturing sectors. We will explain
our modifications after stating our specification.


                                                                                                  9
       To test Hypotheses 1, we estimate the effect of services development (D) on manufacturing
export performance (RCA), and analyze how this effect depends on services input intensity as
measured by the ratio of embodied domestic services in total final demand to manufacturing value-
added (or simply SII; see a later section for more details). Our baseline regression specification is:
         (1)         = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3    +  +  +  +  + 
where subscripts j, s, and t refer to exporting country, manufacturing sector and year respectively;
SII may measure a benchmark country's (U.S.) or each country j's own services input intensity. In
some regressions, we will average the measure over time so as to focus on cross-country patterns.
In other regressions, we will allow it to vary both over time and across countries. Z is a vector of
control variables;  ,  ,  are the country, manufacturing sector and year dummies or fixed
effects; and  is an i.i.d. error term. As a robustness check, we also use time-varying country
and sector fixed effects (i.e., country*year and sector*year).8 The key parameter of interest is, 3,
which under Hypothesis 1, is positive. This interaction term captures how the impact of service
sector development varies with services input intensity of manufacturing sectors.
       Our second hypothesis suggests that the effect of D on RCA depends not only on SII, but also
on the access to foreign services markets. To capture the relative importance of foreign services
inputs compared to domestic services inputs, we measure access to foreign services markets by
the share of embodied foreign services in total embodied (domestic and foreign) services in a
manufacturing sector of a country (forsh).9 To facilitate the interpretation of the results (and avoid
having triple interactions in a regression), we focus on the manufacturing sectors with a high
services input intensity. This is justified since the first test will have established that services
development is less relevant when a sector relies less on services as inputs. For completeness, we
will run and report the same regressions for all other sectors with low SII to show how the results


8
  For now, we do not use country*sector fixed effects in these regressions for at least two reasons. First, the positions
of countries in terms of RCA and key explanatory variables are quite stable during our sample period and there is
limited variation in these variables' over time. For example, the variations of RCA within country*sector are less than
a quarter of the variations between country*sector. Second, interpolation is often used to fill the data between
benchmark years for the WIOD, so the within variations for a sector of a country may not be very informative (Timmer
2012). Instead, we include in our regressions several variables that vary across countries and sectors to control for the
heterogeneity at country*sector level. We will revisit this issue later in the section on robustness checks.
9
  For instance, a country with low embodied foreign services does not necessarily mean that this country is not open
to foreign markets, especially when it also uses limited domestic services inputs. The low foreign services input
intensity of this country is probably just because the technology it adopts requires little services inputs. Therefore, the
share of embodied foreign services can capture better a country's openness or access to foreign services markets.
                                                                                                                        10
differ. The specification of the regressions is similar to equation (1), except that we replace SII
with forsh as follows:
        (2)      = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3   
                                               + +  +  +  + 
      According to Hypothesis 2, 1 is expected to be positive, while 3 should be negative.


    III.2 Measures of RCA
      The original concept of RCA was proposed by Balassa (1965). Conventional export RCA of
a country j's sector s is defined as the share of gross exports (X) of sector s in j's total gross exports
relative to the world average share of the same sector s in world gross exports as follows:
                                        
        _ = (                  ) / ( =1
                                       
                                         ), where country i, j = 1, 2, ..., G; sector s=1, 2, ..., N
                         =1         =1      

where G is the total number of countries in the world and N is the total number of sectors. The
RCA measure has been used extensively in the literature to measure the competitiveness of a
country in a particular sector. When the RCA exceeds one, the country is deemed to have a
revealed comparative advantage in that sector; when it is below one, the country is deemed to have
a revealed comparative disadvantage in that sector.
      Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014) and Wang, Wei, and Zhu (2013) point out that the
traditional RCA ignores production sharing in two ways. First, it ignores the fact that a country-
sector's value-added may be exported indirectly via the country's exports in other sectors. Second,
it ignores the fact that a country-sector's gross exports partly reflect foreign content. For these
reasons, the traditional measure does not accurately capture whether the export of a specific
sector's value-added from a particular country is truly above or below the world average. A
conceptually correct measure of comparative advantage needs, on the one hand, to exclude foreign-
originated value-added and pure double-counted terms in gross exports, and, on the other hand, to
include indirect exports of a sector's value-added through other sectors of the exporting country.
When a country uses imported intermediate goods intensively to produce for its exports, Koopman,
Wang and Wei (2014) show that RCA based on gross exports can be misleading. As double
counting of certain value-added components appears to rise over time as percent of the official
trade statistics, the traditional computation of RCA becomes increasingly less accurate. The gross
export decomposition method suggested by Koopman, Wang and Wei (2014) provides a way to
                                                                                                       11
remove the distortion of double counting by focusing on domestic value-added in exports. We
calculate RCA based on valued added exports (VAX) in gross exports, rather than gross exports,
for country j in sector s as follows (i, j = 1, 2, ..., G; s = 1, 2, ..., N).
                                                           =1 
                            _ = (                   ) / (       )
                                                =1       =1 
                                                          
                                                               

      The above new RCA measure is the share of a country-sector's forward-linkage based
measure of VAX in the country's total VAX relative to that sector's total VAX of all countries as
a share of global VAX. VAX are produced at home but ultimately absorbed abroad.10
      The conventional RCA measure based on gross exports (the dependent variable) can cause
an endogeneity problem because the embodied services (an explanatory variable) are part of gross
manufacturing exports. Our paper addresses this endogeneity problem because manufacturing
RCA is based on the value-added by the factors employed in manufacturing sectors, not including
the embodied services in gross exports which are contributed by the factors employed in services
sectors. Intuitively, we focus on how services help factors employed in manufacturing sectors to
create value by improving their productivity, reducing costs, or both.11
      Algebraically, the value-added exports based measure of RCA (which we will label as
RCA_VAX) differs from the conventional, gross exports based measure (which we label as
RCA_X). But are the differences empirically important? After we compute both measures, a
simple t-test rejects the null hypothesis that RCA_X = RCA_VAX with a p-value at 0.0017. We
also calculate a ratio as RCA_VAX / RCA_X. It shows that RCA_VAX is on average 25% larger
than RCA_X in our sample. For 58% of the observations, RCA_VAX is bigger than RCA_X, with
the rest falling into the opposite case. For 10% of the observations, RCA_VAX is less than 74%
of RCA_X. For another 10% of the observations, RCA_VAX is more than 1.68 times larger than
RCA_X. The first diagram in Figure 2 is a histogram of RCA_VAX/RCA_X for all of the
observations in our sample (except some outliers as explained in the notes of the figure). It shows


10
   VAX in this paper (based on forward-linkage based GDP or value-added decomposition) is different from the
backward-linkage based VAX in Wang, Wei, and Zhu (2013). The right decomposition of GDP should be based on
forward-linkage, while the right gross trade flow decomposition should be based on backward-linkage. VAX in Wang,
Wei, and Zhu (2013) is bounded by gross exports, while the VAX in our current paper is not. At aggregate level,
however, the two types of VAX should be the same and always bounded by a country's total gross exports.
11
   Miroudot and Cadestin (2017) provide a detailed discussion on how services help manufacturing sectors to create
values by facilitating exchange among users and by solving problems and bringing tailored solutions. See also Heuser
and Mattoo (2017) for a review of services in global value chains.
                                                                                                                 12
that, for a large portion of observations in our sample, RCA_VAX/RCA_X differs significantly
from 1. Figure 2 also provides the scatter plots of RCA_VAX against RCA_X for each of the 14
WIOD manufacturing sectors in 2005. For every sector, there are countries that locate considerably
away from the 45 degree line. We conclude that the differences between the two RCA measures
is economically and statistically significant.




Figure 2: The histogram shows the distribution of RCA_VAX/RCA_X for all countries, sectors
and years used in our analysis but drops about 1% of the observations as outliers when this ratio
is larger than 5. All of the scatter plots of RCA_VAX against RCA_X for each manufacturing
sector use only the data for year 2005. The straight lines are the 45 degree lines. Each country is
labeled with its 3-digit ISO code.
                                                                                                  13
   III.3: Measurement of embodied services and services input intensity (SII)
     We compute embodied services in manufacturing sectors using a method developed by
Koopman, Wang and Wei (2014) and Wang, Wei, and Zhu (2013) that generalizes the vertical
specialization measures proposed by Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001). Assume a world with G
countries, in which each country produces goods in N tradable sectors. Goods and services
produced in each sector can be consumed directly or used as intermediate inputs, and each country
exports both intermediate and final goods to other countries. All gross outputs (X) produced by a
country must be used as intermediate goods/services or as final goods/services (F), i.e.,

                X i   j ( Aij X j  Fij ),
                        G
       (3)                                   i, j = 1,2, ..., G

where Xi is the N×1 gross output vector of country i, Fij is the N×1 vector for final goods and
services produced in country i and consumed in country j, and Aij is the N×N input-output
coefficient matrix, giving intermediate use in j of goods and services produced in i.
     The G-country, N-sector production and trade system can be written as an inter-country
input-output (ICIO) model in block matrix notation as follows.

                X 1   A11        A12  A1G   X 1   F11  F12    F1G 
               X  A              A22  A2G                           
                2    21                      X 2    F21  F22    F2G 
                                                                    
       (4)                                                          
                X G   AG1        AG 2  AGG   X G   FG1  FG 2    FGG 
      After rearranging, we have

                                                              1     G F1 j 
                X 1   I  A11          A12            A1G           j 1   B11        B12     B1G   F1 
                X   A                                A2G           G F  B                   B2 G   
                                                                    j 1 2 j    21
                2        21         I  A22                                          B22            F2 
       (5)
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                X G    AG1            AG 2         I  AGG           G FGj   BG1     BG 2    BGG   FG 
                                                                   j 1 
where I is an NxN identity matrix, and Bij denotes the N×N block Leontief inverse matrix, which
is the total requirement matrix that gives the amount of gross outputs in producing country i
required for a one-unit increase in final demand in destination country j.
     Let Vi be the N×1 direct value-added coefficient vector. Each element of Vi gives the ratio of
direct domestic value-added to gross output (exports) for country i at sector level. This is equal to

                                                                                                   14
one minus the intermediate input share from all countries (including domestically produced
intermediates):

                  Vi  (u   j 1 Aji u )
                              G
       (6)

     where u is an Nx1 unit vector of 1. Putting all Vi in the diagonal and denoting it with a hat-
          
symbol ( V i ), we can define a GN×GN matrix of direct domestic value-added coefficients for all
countries as,
                          0         0
                      V 1            
       (7)        V^   0 V2        0
                                     
                                    
                                   
                      0 0          VG
     Putting final demand in the diagonals, we can define another GN×GN matrix of all countries'
final demand as

                    F^            0    0
                                         
                      1
                                  ^    0
       (8)         F0             F
                                  2
                                        
                                         
                    0                  ^ 
                                       F
                                  0     G


Then the decomposition of value-added in final demand can be conducted by following equation:

                                                           B1G   F1
                                                                   
                                                                                    
                        V1 0            0   B11    B12
                                                                          0       0
                                                           B2G            
                   ^
                        0 V            0   B21     B22          0        F2      0
                  VB F                                                              
                            2

                                                    
                                                                                  
                                         
                                                           BGG   0                
                                                                                    
                        0 0            VG   BG1    BG 2
                                                                          0      FG 
       (9)
                                                           
                                                             
                          V B  F
                          1 11 1   V  B
                                    1 12 2F        V1 B1G FG 
                                                           
                         V B F V B F               V2 B2G FG 
                          2 21 1    2 22 2
                                                             
                                                             
                                                           
                                                             
                         VG BG1 F1 VG BG 2 F2      VG BGG FG 
             
where V^B F is a GN×GN square matrix that gives the estimates of sector and country sources of
                                                                          
value-added in a country's total final demand. Each block matrix   Vi Bij Fj   is an N×N square matrix,

with each element representing the value-added from a source sector of a source country directly
                                                                                                    15
or indirectly used by an absorbing sector in a destination country's total final demand (both
domestic and foreign). Because we assume that the same technology is used in the production
meeting a country's domestic demand and foreign demand (exports), we use total final demand,
which is the sum of domestic final demand and final export demand, to calculate embodied services
ratios.
      Based on equation (9), for each manufacturing sector s, we create the following measure of
domestic services input intensity in manufacturing sectors in country i:
                 
          (10)    =  
                       / , j = 1, 2, ..., G
                      

where  
         , an element in equation (9), refers to country j's domestic services values
        
embodied in country j's total final demand in a manufacturing sector (subscript s);  is the total
value-added created by the factors employed in the manufacturing sector s in the exporting country
j (or j's GDP of its manufacturing sector s). SII defined in formula (10) is a scalar for a specific
services and manufacturing sector in a country j in a given year. The numerator on the right hand
side of formula (10) refers to the value-added contributed directly and indirectly by the factors
employed in a services sector, while the denominator measures the value-added contributed by
factors employed in a manufacturing sector of a particular country. Therefore, the numerator is not
a part of the denominator and the SII measure is not bounded by one, although it is always less
than one in the data. It would be bounded by one if we used the gross manufacturing output in the
denominator, and the SII of one services sector would likely be negatively correlated to the SII of
other goods or services sectors, and so omitted variable bias can be a problem if we do not include
all other sectors in our analysis. The strategy we adopt to measure SII as in formula (10) can help
us to avoid this problem and keep our specification simple.
      It is tempting to use a country's own services input intensity (SII) directly in the regression.
But there are a number of issues with such a strategy. SII of a country with underdeveloped services
sectors (e.g., financial repression) may not be able to capture the required services input intensity
along the manufacturing production possibility frontier. Hence, instead of using countries' own
services input intensities, we use U.S. services input intensity for all the countries under the
assumption that the U.S. is among the countries with the least financial and business services
transaction costs and frictions. If inter-sectoral linkage is considered as a feature of the production
technology, it should be the same across countries in the absence of services under-development.
                                                                                                    16
Adopting a similar strategy, Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure industries' dependence on
external funds using only U.S. data for all countries covered by their analysis. Figure 3 shows a
scatter plot of the domestic financial services input intensity in manufacturing against the business
services input intensity for each of the WIOD countries in 2005.12 As we expect, U.S. embodied
services ratios are among the highest for both financial and business services.



                         IND
     .04




                                                PRT                                                 FRA
                           TWN
                                       GRC                                     USA
                               BGR                         CYP      ITA
                                             BRA
     .03




                                                JPN
                                                MEX
                                                          GBR

                                             HUN
     .02




                               TUR          DNK
                               MLT          ESP
                                    KOR
                                   LVA      AUS NLD BEL
                                                                                       DEU
                                       AUT IRL
                            CHN
                                           POL
                                          SVN
                                     CAN           SWE
                            ROM
                            LTU       EST
     .01




                          ZOW
                                 CZE
                   IDN          SVK FIN
                          RUS
                                 LUX
           0




               0                                .05                       .1                      .15
                                              Business Services Input Intensity

Figure 3: Scatter plot of average financial services input intensity (SIIf) against average business
services input intensity (SIIb) for all manufacturing sectors, year 2005. Each country is labeled
with its 3-digit ISO code. Data Source: WIOD.

           Another problem with using countries' own services input intensity is a potential endogeneity
issue because a country's embodied services and services development can also be affected by its
own manufacture performance. For example, a country like India with comparative disadvantage


12
     The countries covered by the WIOD and their ISO codes are listed in Appendix 2.
                                                                                                        17
in manufacturing may choose to specialize in services, which in turn will promote services
development and reduce embodied services due to the weakness of manufacturing sectors. The
maintained assumption we need is that the financial and business service sectors in the United
States are well developed, so that the usage of these services observed in a given manufacturing
sector reflects its intrinsic technical demand, rather than the supply constraints in the service sector.
When we use only U.S. embodied services, the feedback or reverse causality to the U.S. embodied
services from other countries' manufacturing export RCA is not a significant concern. In our
regression sample, we will drop all U.S. observations to further alleviate the endogeneity problem.
Finally, as another justification for using U.S. measures, the U.S. is arguably one of the countries
with the most reliable data.
      We will either use the time-varying U.S. services input intensities or take their averages over
years. An advantage of the former measure is that it retains the time variations, while the later
measure can smooth out temporal fluctuations and hence is less sensitive to outliers. The variations
in the U.S. services input intensities over the years are small for most of the WIOD sectors and
some of the input-output data in the WIOD are filled in based on interpolation. Therefore, we will
take the averaged measure as the benchmark and use the time-varying measure only as a robustness
check. When average U.S. SIIs is used, this variable will drop out of regressions with sector or
time-varying sector fixed effects. When time-varying sector fixed effects are used, SIIst will also
be dropped.
       Note that even a measure based on U.S. data is still a proxy intending to capture the potential
linkage between services and manufacturing sectors. A noisy measure, however, should create a
bias against finding a significant effect of services intensity on manufacturing RCA. Should we be
able to find a better measure, the effect is likely to be even stronger.
      In our empirical analysis, for each manufacturing sector s, we also use the share of foreign
embodied services in the total embodied domestic and foreign services as follows (for country j):
                
        (11)     = , 
                      
                          
                        / =1 
                              
                               

      The denominator in equation (11) sums  
                                              over all source countries i=1,
2, ..., G, including j itself, while the nominator leaves out country j's own (domestic) embodied
services.


                                                                                                      18
     III.4 Measures of domestic services development (D)
      Our main services development measure (D) is defined as the average value-added per
worker. It is calculated as total value-added divided by total number of employees for financial or
business services based on the data from the WIOD and its Socio-Economic Accounts (SEA). It
is commonly used as a measure for labor productivity in services sectors, which should be closely
linked to the levels of services development.
      Alternatively, we use the shares of financial or business services value added in GDP to
measure domestic services development. Services sectors, especially modern ones like financial
and business services, usually account for larger shares in total value-added in countries with more
developed services sectors. A higher share of financial or business services value-added is a typical
feature of a modern economy, and hence capture the level of development of these sectors.
However, this may not always be the case for other sectors, such as agricultural and manufacturing,
as suggested by the literature on structural change (see, e.g., Kongsamut, Rebelo and Xie (2001),
among others).
      We also use other measures of services development to check for the robustness of our results
when data are available. Following the tradition in the literature, as in Rajan and Zingales (1998),
we adopt two alternative measures for financial services development using the data from the
World Bank Global Financial Development Database (GFDD). GFDD is an extensive dataset of
financial system characteristics for 203 economies from 1960 to 2010. The first measure is the
bank private credit to GDP ratio, which is defined as the share of financial resources provided to
the private sector by domestic banks in a country's GDP, originally from the International
Financial Statistics of the IMF.13 The second measure is the share of the bank private credit and
stock market capitalization in GDP. Stock market capitalization refers to the total value of all listed
shares in a stock market based on Standard & Poor's Global Stock Markets Factbook and
supplemental S&P data.


     III.5 Data and some stylized facts on embodied services



13
  Domestic money banks comprise commercial banks and other financial institutions that accept transferable deposits,
such as demand deposits.

                                                                                                                 19
      The primary data source for this study is the WIOD (2013 Version) which covers 35
industries for 40 countries over 1995-2007, so our data structure is a panel at country-sector level
over 13 years (see Appendixes 1 and 2 for lists of WIOD sectors and countries).14 The original
2013 version of the WIOD data cover years 1995-2009, but we drop the data for 2008-2009 to
avoid potential complication resulting from the 2008 global financial crisis. We consider all of the
manufacturing sectors (WIOD sectors 3-16), and focus on two types of modern services: financial
intermediation services (WIOD sector 28) and other business services sector (WIOD sector 30).
      To illustrate the importance of embodied services and to motivate our empirical analysis,
Online Data Appendix Table A1 shows some data on the gross exports (X) and value-added
exports (VAX) of financial services for WIOD countries over 1995-2007. We further separate
VAX into direct value added exports (dVAX) and indirect value added exports through all other
sectors (indVAX).15 The last row reports the world total for all the WIOD economies. Overall,
VAX of services are 53 percent higher than the gross exports, and indirect VAX are 88 percent
higher than the direct VAX. Among the 40 WIOD countries/regions excluding ROW (the rest of
the world), only three of them (Ireland, Luxembourg, and U.K.) have direct VAX higher than
indirect VAX. The BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China), Japan, Korea, Lithuania, Turkey, and
Taiwan have much higher indirect VAX than direct VAX (especially China, Russia, and Turkey).
Financial services in these countries may have reached an intermediate level of development at
which they can compete in the domestic market but not yet internationally. It could also be that
restrictions on cross-border imports in these countries oblige goods producers to use domestically
produced services. For instance, if firms in China have no easy access to foreign financial services
due to high service trade barriers, they will have to use domestic financial services (e.g., loans
from state-owned banks).
      The Online Data Appendix Table A2 for business services, analogous to Table A1, presents
a similar pattern. Japan and some emerging economics (e.g., Mexico, Russia, and especially


14
   Romania is not covered by the regressions due to missing employment data. Because the U.S. is used as the
benchmark country to define services input intensity, it is also dropped from most of the regressions to alleviate
potential endogeneity problem as explained in Section III.3. More details on sample coverage are discussed in the
Online Data Appendix.
15
   VAX can be bigger than X because it includes not only direct exports of a service sector, but also the indirect value-
added exports of services through other sectors.

                                                                                                                      20
Turkey) have much higher indirect business services VAX than direct VAX.16 Most of the high-
income countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom export a large volume of
business services both directly and indirectly. By comparison, developing or emerging economies
export significantly less business services, with the exception of India. India has developed an
internationally competitive business services industry which has large direct VAX. However,
India's indirect services exports are small, as domestic manufacturing sectors use relatively limited
modern services and manufacturing exports are also weak.
      Tables A3 and A4 are two similar tables for some manufacturing sectors with high or low
services input intensity, respectively. Using information from Appendix 3, we select two
manufacturing sectors with high financial and business services intensity: Food, Beverages and
Tobacco (WIOD sector 3) & Leather and Footwear (WIOD sector 5); we also select two other
manufacturing sectors with low financial and business services intensity: Other Non-Metallic
Mineral (WIOD sector 11) & Basic and Fabricated Metal (WIOD sector 12). A few things stand
out. First, VAX is always smaller than X for these sectors, although in theory the forward-linkage
based VAX is not bounded by X. This is different from what we see in Tables A1 & A2, where
VAX is mostly higher than X. This implies that services are used to a significant extent as inputs
in other sectors and are exported indirectly, but manufactured goods are used to a limited extent
as inputs and are exported indirectly through other sectors. The indirect VAX to direct VAX ratio
(ratio2) is mostly less than one. Services sectors appear to be more upstream than manufacturing
sectors.17
      Other major determinants of manufacturing RCA considered in this paper are constructed
based on standard trade theories. The total factor productivity (TFP) captures the Ricardian source
of comparative advantage and it is estimated using the dual approach as in Hsieh (2002) for each
WIOD manufacturing sector. It is calculated as an average of the growth rate of labor price or
wage (gW) and the growth rate of capital rental rate (gR), weighted by the share of payment to labor


16
   Japan is well-known for its competitive manufacturing but relatively inefficient services sectors. See, for example,
a report at https://www.economist.com/node/3219857. As a result, Japan exports business services mainly indirectly
through manufacturing sectors.
17
   Compared to Table A4 for sectors with low SII, VAX/X or ratio in Table A3 is lower, probably because sectors 3
& 5 use a lot of services as inputs which contribute to their larger gross exports (X) and hence smaller VAX/X ratio.
We also calculate the average VAX/X ratio for all of the manufacturing sectors. This ratio is negatively correlated
with manufacturing sectors' financial and business SII, with a simple correlation coefficient of -0.8. Consistent with
what we see from Tables A3 & A4, manufacturing sectors with high SII tend to have lower VAX/X ratios.
                                                                                                                    21
(sL) and capital (sK): TFP = sK*gR+sL*gW. For this method to be valid, no assumptions are needed
for the relations between factor prices and social marginal products or about the production
function form as long as the total factor payments add up to total output (i.e., Y = R*K + W*L).
We expect to see a positive association between TFP and RCA.
      We also include two variables to capture the Heckscher-Ohlin (HO) source of comparative
advantage based on factor endowment including capital-labor ratio (K/L) and skill ratio which is
defined as the share of the wage payment to high skill workers in total wage payment. These
variables vary across countries and sectors and over time. Following Chor (2010), HO_SK is
defined as the product of a country's economy-wide skill ratio and the skill ratio of a particular
manufacturing sector in the same country; and HO_K/L is defined as the product of a country's
overall K/L and the K/L of a particular manufacturing sector in the same country. Chor (2010)
finds that countries that are more skill abundant exhibit higher volumes of bilateral exports in more
skill-intensive industries; similarly, countries that have more physical capital per worker tend to
export more in capital-intensive industries. Similar findings can be found in Romalis (2004).
Therefore we would expect to obtain positive coefficients from the two HO variables.
      The scale economy effect as suggested by the new trade theory is captured by a
manufacturing sector's total employment size, measured in logarithms. 18 We expect to see a
positive correlation between this variable and RCA.
      In addition, to capture the increasingly important role of cross-border value chains, we also
include a measure for GVC participation. Wang et al. (2017) propose a framework to decompose
total production activities into different types, depending on whether they are for pure domestic
demand, traditional international trade, simple GVC activities (intermediate inputs that cross a
border only once before being embodied in final products), and complex GVC activities
(intermediate inputs that cross borders at least twice before being embodied in final products).
Then they construct indices of GVC participation to measure the degree of a sectors' GVC
participation ­ a concept similar to the vertical specialization (VS1) as in Hummels, Ishii, and Yu
(2001) but with a few important improvements. We include a measure of forward industrial linkage
based GVC participation to estimate how a country/sector's engagement in GVC activities


18
  To retain zero values, we use log(employment*1000+1) in the regressions. We multiply employment by 1000
because the original unit of measurement of employment in the WIOD-SEA database is 1000 workers.
                                                                                                            22
strengthens its overall export performance. Instead of using the simple GVC index or the complex
GVC index, we use a comprehensive measure which addes up the two indexes. Finally, we also
control for the levels of countries' overall development using the GDP per capita data from the
Penn World Tables.
     These control variables are mostly constructed or estimated using data from the WIOD and
its Socio-Economic Accounts (SEA). More details on the variables, data sources, sample coverage,
and variable summary statistics can be found in the Online Data Appendix.


IV. Empirical results
     In this section, we will test empirically our first hypothesis, carry out various robustness
checks, address the endogeneity problem, and then test the second hypothesis.


   IV.1. Baseline results
     In Table 1, we estimate the specification in equation (1). The dependent variable is
manufacturing export RCA calculated based on VAX. The U.S. domestic services input intensity
is averaged over 1995-2007 and treated as time-invariant. The financial (business) services
development measure (D) is defined as services value-added per worker. Because the embodied
services measures are based on U.S. data, we drop the observations for the U.S. from the
regressions to alleviate the potential endogeneity problem. To facilitate the interpretation of the
coefficients, we report the standardized beta coefficients (i.e., the point estimate of a coefficient
times the standard deviation of the regressor in question and divided by the standard deviation of
the dependent variable). With this standardization, the coefficient can be directly read as the
number of standard deviations the dependent variable will change if the regressor in question is
increased by one standard deviation in the sample.
     In the first three columns of Table 1, we consider financial services (f), business services (b),
and the combined financial and business services (fb) respectively. Country, year, and
manufacturing sector dummies are all included in the first three regressions. Standard errors are
always robust to heteroscedasticity and are also clustered by country to address the potential serial
and inter-sectoral correlations in the error terms for a particular country.



                                                                                                    23
       The coefficient of services development (D) is always negative but insignificant at the 10%
level. The coefficient of the key interaction term is always positive and highly significant. The
results imply that financial services development reduces manufacturing RCA when embodied
financial services are sufficiently low. This is not surprising given the definition of RCA: services
development tends to increase a country's services export RCA and should lower some
manufacturing sectors' export RCA if these manufacturing sectors do not benefit much from
services development due to their low services input intensity. When embodied services in a sector
are sufficiently high, greater services development can increase that manufacturing sector's RCA.
These results provide strong support for our first hypothesis. The last three columns of Table 1 are
analogous to the first three regressions except that we include time-varying country and time-
varying sector fixed effects and cluster the standard errors by country*year. As a result, services
development measures and log(GDP/capita) are dropped from the regressions. The three
interaction terms remain positive and highly significant, with similar magnitude as in the first three
regressions.
       The control variables in Table 1 have the expected signs. Consistent with trade theories,
manufacturing productivity (TFP), Heckscher-Ohlin type of variables (HO_SK and HO_K/L), the
measure of scale economy (log(employment)) and GVC participation increase a country's
comparative advantage in manufacturing exports.19 Their effects are mostly significant at the 10%
level. Interestingly, log(GDP/capita) does not have a significant effect. Among all of the variables,
both the economic significance and the size of the standardized beta coefficient of D*SII are
among the highest ones, only next to log(employment) and GVC participation variables.


                      (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
 Df                   -0.097
                      (0.183)
 Df*SIIf              0.209***                                   0.238***
                      (0.002)                                    (0.000)
 Db                                 -0.082
                                    (0.217)
 Db*SIIb                            0.223***                                   0.233***
                                    (0.001)                                    (0.000)
 Dfb                                              -0.115
                                                  (0.116)


19
 Wang et al. (2017) construct indices for simple, complex and overall GVC participation. We use only the overall
measure in our regressions. The results are robust to other measures.
                                                                                                               24
 Dfb*SIIfb                                     0.249***                               0.268***
                                               (0.000)                                (0.000)
 log(GDP/capita)     0.000      -0.027         -0.021
                     (0.999)    (0.874)        (0.900)
 TFP                 0.023*     0.023*         0.024*           0.048***   0.048***   0.048***
                     (0.094)    (0.095)        (0.087)          (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)
 HO_SK               0.076      0.064          0.065            0.162***   0.149***   0.147***
                     (0.139)    (0.228)        (0.225)          (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 HO_K/L              0.075***   0.079***       0.079***         0.077***   0.080***   0.081***
                     (0.004)    (0.002)        (0.003)          (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 log(employment)     1.899***   1.896***       1.910***         1.941***   1.934***   1.949***
                     (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 GVC Participation   0.408***   0.398***       0.402***         0.427***   0.416***   0.421***
                     (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 Country FEs         Yes        Yes            Yes
 Sector FEs          Yes        Yes            Yes
 Year FEs            Yes        Yes            Yes
 Country*Year FEs                                               Yes        Yes        Yes
 Sector*Year FEs                                                Yes        Yes        Yes
 Observations        6,184      6,184          6,184            6,184      6,184      6,184
 R-squared           0.561      0.562          0.564            0.575      0.575      0.577
Table 1: The effects of services development on manufacturing export RCA (the baseline
regressions). The dependent variable is manufacturing export RCA_VAX. Df (Db) refers to
financial (business) services value-added per worker. Dfb refers to financial & business services
value-added per worker. SIIf (SIIb) is the ratio of the U.S. embodied domestic financial (business)
services to U.S.' manufacturing value-added, averaged over 1995-2007. SIIfb = SIIf + SIIb. All
WIOD manufacturing sectors 3-16 are covered (not grouped together). The standardized beta
coefficients rather than the regular regression coefficients are reported. The p-values based on
robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country in the first three regressions, and
clustered by country*year in the last three regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    IV.2. Robustness checks: alternative measures of D and SII
       In this section, we perform various robustness checks. In Table 2, we use several alternative
measure of services development. To save space, we report here only the results from regressions
using time-varying country and time-varying sector dummies. The results from regressions using
separate country, sector and year dummies are similar and available upon request. In the first three
columns, domestic services development (D) is defined as the share of services value-added in
GDP (Df, Db, or Dfb). Our previous results continue to hold well. The coefficients of the interaction
term D*SII are always positive and significant at the 1% level, similar to the results in Table 1.

                     (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)
 Df*SIIf             0.204***
                     (0.000)
 Db*SIIb                                0.246***
                                        (0.000)
                                                                                                     25
 Dfb*SIIfb                                              0.378***
                                                        (0.000)
 Df1*SIIf                                                                0.211***
                                                                         (0.000)
 Df2*SIIf                                                                                 0.224***
                                                                                          (0.000)
 TFP                 0.049***         0.048***          0.048***         0.052***         0.048***
                     (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.001)          (0.003)
 HO_SK               0.166***         0.169***          0.165***         0.175***         0.177***
                     (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
 HO_K/L              0.079***         0.077***          0.080***         0.083***         0.083***
                     (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
 log(employment)     1.930***         1.924***          1.954***         1.932***         1.946***
                     (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
 GVC Participation   0.431***         0.427***          0.433***         0.427***         0.428***
                     (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
 Country*Year FEs    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
 Sector*Year FEs     Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
 Observations        6,198            6,198             6,198            5,782            5,755
 R-squared           0.574            0.574             0.580            0.578            0.577
Table 2: Robustness check (1), alternative measure of services development. The dependent
variable is manufacturing export RCA_VAX. Df (Db) refers to the share of financial (business)
services value-added in GDP. Dfb refers to the share of financial & business services value-added
in GDP (Dfb = Df + Db). Df1 refers to the ratio of bank credits to private sectors to GDP. Df2 is the
ratio of bank credits to private sectors and stock market capitalization to GDP. SIIf (SIIb) is the
ratio of the U.S. embodied domestic financial (business) services to U.S.' manufacturing value-
added, averaged over 1995-2007. SIIfb = SIIf + SIIb. The standardized beta coefficients rather than
the regular regression coefficients are reported. The p-values based on robust standard errors in
parentheses, clustered by country*year. All WIOD manufacturing sectors 3-16 are covered (not
grouped together). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

       In the last two columns in Table 2, we use another two alternative measures for financial
services as discussed in Section III.4. Because such a measure is not available for the
corresponding WIOD business services sector, we perform this robustness check only for financial
services. Our previous findings still hold very well.
       In Table 3, we examine the sensitivity of our results to alternative measures of services input
intensity (SII). We consider here financial and business services separately. Although other
countries have generally a much lower average SII than the US, the ranking of manufacturing
sectors by SII as listed in the Appendix 3 is not very different across countries. Therefore we would
expect to see robust findings from regressions using different countries' SII data.

                     Time-varying U.S. SII        Own time-varying SII        Average U.K.'s SII
                     (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)              (5)          (6)
 Df*SIIf             0.208***                     0.071***                    0.111***
                                                                                                     26
                     (0.000)                      (0.000)                     (0.005)
 Db*SIIb                          0.190***                    0.112***                     0.179***
                                  (0.000)                     (0.000)                      (0.000)
 TFP                 0.048***     0.048***        0.049***    0.050***        0.047***     0.046***
                     (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)     (0.001)         (0.003)      (0.003)
 HO_SK               0.163***     0.155***        0.147***    0.148***        0.144***     0.138***
                     (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
 HO_K/L              0.077***     0.079***        0.084***    0.082***        0.072***     0.074***
                     (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
 log(employment)     1.932***     1.920***        1.930***    1.930***        1.968***     1.965***
                     (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
 GVC Participation   0.427***     0.418***        0.430***    0.432***        0.426***     0.422***
                     (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
 Country*Year FEs    Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
 Sector*Year FEs     Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
 Observations        6,184        6,184           6,352       6,352           6,186        6,186
 R-squared           0.574        0.573           0.570       0.571           0.571        0.574
Table 3: Robustness check (2), using alternative financial or business services input intensity
measures. The dependent variable is manufacturing export RCA_VAX. Df (Db) refers to financial
(business) services value-added per worker. In regressions (1)-(2), SIIf (SIIb) is the ratio of the U.S.
embodied domestic financial (business) services to U.S.' manufacturing value-added (not
averaged over years). In regressions (3)-(4), SIIf (SIIb) measures each country's own services input
intensity (not averaged over years). In regressions (5)-(6), SIIf (SIIb) is the ratio of the U.K.
embodied domestic financial (business) services to U.K.' manufacturing value-added, averaged
over 1995-2007. All WIOD manufacturing sectors 3-16 are covered (not grouped together). U.S.
observations are dropped from regressions (1)-(2) and the U.K. observations are dropped from
regressions (5)-(6). The standardized beta coefficients rather than the regular regression
coefficients are reported. The p-values based on robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered
by country*year. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

       In the first two regressions of Table 3, we replace the average U.S. SII with time-varying
U.S. SII; our main findings remain unchanged, with a slightly smaller coefficient of the interaction
term than the corresponding one reported in Table 1. Although the services input intensity of the
U.S. is arguably the best choice to capture the role of financial and business services in
manufacturing sectors, it is still useful to check the robustness of the results when countries' own
SII measures are used. Regressions (3)-(4) in Table 3 are analogous to those in the first two
columns, except that we replace U.S. SII with each country's own SII (time-varying). Despite the
issue of using a country's own SII as discussed earlier, a benefit is that we can measure the actual
SII of each country instead of approximating its potential SII using the U.S. measure. We no longer
drop the U.S. observations from this regression. The interaction terms remain positive and
significant at the 1% level, but the magnitude of the coefficient is much smaller than the one
reported in the first two columns, probably because a country's own SII may not capture well the
                                                                                                      27
potential role of services in manufacturing sectors if services sectors are under-developed as we
would expect.20 In the last two columns, we use the average SII of the U.K., another developed
country with competitive services sectors. The results are similar to those when the U.S. data are
used: the magnitude of D*SII's coefficient is smaller than what is reported in Table 1 when the
U.S. SII data are used.
         Finally, although we focus on financial and business services in this paper, we also check the
robustness of our findings to other types of services, including sales services (s), transportation
services (t), and communication services (c). Appendix 1 provides a list of other services
considered in this paper. Table 4 reports the results from regressions using the same specifications
as in Table 1. The results are broadly consistent with what we found from financial and business
services. Column 4 of Appendix 3 lists the U.S.'s average SII for the additional three types of
services categories combined. They are mostly smaller than the financial and business SII but the
two are comparable in size. Interestingly, the ranking of U.S. manufacturing sectors based on the
SII are the same for the two groups of services (financial & business vs. sales & transportation &
communication), keeping in mind that the rankings can differ, at least slightly, when we use more
narrowly defined services categories. This implies that a manufacturing sector using intensively
financial and business services also tends to use more other types of services in general. Hence it
is not surprising to see similar results across different types of services.


                        (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)
     s
 D                      -0.026
                        (0.753)
 Ds*SIIs                0.206***                                          0.219***
                        (0.003)                                           (0.000)
 Dt                                      -0.063
                                         (0.422)
 Dt*SIIt                                 0.210***                                         0.226***
                                         (0.002)                                          (0.000)
 Dc                                                      -0.061
                                                         (0.396)
 Dc*SIIc                                                 0.184***                                          0.195***
                                                         (0.005)                                           (0.000)
 log(GDP/capita)        0.015            0.034           0.025
                        (0.931)          (0.856)         (0.889)
 TFP                    0.023*           0.024*          0.024*           0.049***        0.048***         0.050***

20
   If we also drop U.S. observations from regressions (3)-(4) in Table 3 to make it more comparable to previous
regressions using U.S. SII, the results do not change much. The coefficient of the interaction terms is only a bit
larger (0.075 and 0.135) and coefficients of other variables are very similar.
                                                                                                                     28
                     (0.095)       (0.082)       (0.085)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)
 HO_SK               0.062         0.076         0.085*        0.145***      0.148***      0.169***
                     (0.240)       (0.125)       (0.088)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 HO_K/L              0.079***      0.075***      0.082***      0.080***      0.077***      0.084***
                     (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 log(employment)     1.907***      1.913***      1.885***      1.945***      1.953***      1.924***
                     (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 GVC Participation   0.411***      0.412***      0.410***      0.430***      0.431***      0.429***
                     (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Country FEs         Yes           Yes           Yes
 Sector FEs          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year FEs            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Country*Year FEs                                              Yes           Yes           Yes
 Sector*Year FEs                                               Yes           Yes           Yes
 Observations        6,184         6,184         6,184         6,184         6,184         6,184
 R-squared           0.562         0.562         0.560         0.575         0.576         0.573
Table 4: Robustness checks (3) - other services. The dependent variable is manufacturing export
RCA_VAX. Ds, Dt, and Dc refer to services value-added per worker for sales services (s),
transportation services (t), and communication services (c), respectively. SIIs, SIIt, SIIc are the
ratios of the U.S. embodied domestic sales/transportation/communication services to U.S.'
manufacturing value-added, averaged over 1995-2007. All WIOD manufacturing sectors 3-16 are
covered (not grouped together). The standardized beta coefficients rather than the regular
regression coefficients are reported. The p-values based on robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered by country in the first three regressions, and clustered by country*year in the last three
regressions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


   IV.3. The endogeneity of domestic services development
     The domestic services development variable (D) is potentially endogenous. For instance, a
country like India with comparative disadvantage in manufacturing (lower RCA) may choose to
specialize in services, which in turn will promote services development leading to a higher D,
which tends to weaken manufacturing exports (even lower RCA). The coefficients for D in Table
1, although insignificant, suggest such a negative relationship. In the law and finance literature, as
legal origins are found to be a key determinant of financial development (e.g., La Porta et al., 1997,
1998), researchers have used legal origins to instrument for a country's financial development (e.g.,
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003). Following this literature, we use the common law and
the civil law legal origin dummies as instruments, taking socialist legal origin as the default
category. The data on legal origins come from La Porta et al. (1999). Because we have an
interaction term D*SII in the regression, we also use the interactions between legal origin dummies
with D as instruments.


                                                                                                   29
       The results are reported in Table 5. In the first three regressions, domestic services
development (D) is measured by value-added per worker in the service sector. As a robustness
check, it is measured by the share of service value-added in GDP in the last three regressions. Note
that the D variable itself is dropped from all these regressions because we always include
country*year fixed effects. The large first-stage F statistics imply that the instruments are strong.
The regressions also pass the Hansen J over-identification test, although only weakly for financial
services. We cannot reject the null that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term at the
1% level, implying that the instruments are valid. Our previous findings continue to hold as well.
The coefficients of the key interaction term, D*SII, remain positive and highly significant; their
magnitude is even larger than that from corresponding OLS regressions reported in Tables 1 and
2. The results for other variables are very similar to what we have found earlier.

                         D = Value-added per worker         D = Share of service value-added in GDP
                         (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
 Df*SIIf                 0.350***                           0.537***
                         (0.000)                            (0.000)
 Db*SIIb                             0.508***                            1.077***
                                     (0.000)                             (0.000)
 Dfb*SIIfb                                       0.447***                             0.733***
                                                 (0.000)                              (0.000)
 TFP                     0.047***    0.047***    0.048***   0.049***     0.046***     0.048***
                         (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.003)      (0.001)
 HO_SK                   0.159***    0.126***    0.132***   0.159***     0.166***     0.160***
                         (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
 HO_K/L                  0.077***    0.083***    0.083***   0.083***     0.076***     0.082***
                         (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
 log(employment)         1.963***    1.980***    1.986***   1.983***     2.012***     2.007***
                         (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
 GVC Participation       0.428***    0.404***    0.417***   0.439***     0.432***     0.439***
                         (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
 Country*Year FEs        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
 Sector*Year FEs         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
 1st stage F-statistic   311.91      168.9       373.5      209.83       29.84        99.52
 (p-value)               (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
 Hansen J statistic      5.45        0.124       0.537      5.329        0.273        0.176
 (p-value)               (0.020)     (0.725)     (0.464)    (0.021)      (0.601)      (0.675)
 Observations            6,184       6,184       6,184      6,198        6,198        6,198
 R-squared               0.528       0.518       0.528      0.509        0.442        0.523
Table 5: Robustness checks (4) - 2SLS regression results. The dependent variable is manufacturing
export RCA_VAX. Common law and civil law legal origin dummies and their interactions with
SII are used as instruments for variable D*SII. The standardized beta coefficients rather than the
regular regression coefficients are reported. The p-values based on robust standard errors in
parentheses, clustered by country*year. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                                      30
     IV.4. Other robustness checks
      In this sub-section, we will perform some additional robustness checks and explain why we
do not adopt these specifications in our baseline regressions.
      First, since  varies over time, × will vary by country, sector and year. It is natural to
consider including country*sector fixed effects in addition to country*year and sector*year fixed
effects. This specification explores the variations in RCA from a change in SII within a sector
based on the benchmark country (U.S.) and the change in D in each country.
      Second, manufacturing sectors may also use imported foreign services. To enrich our
analysis, for each manufacturing sector s, we also construct the following foreign services input
intensity (FSII) using the terms and notations as in section III.3:
               
        (12)    = , 
                     
                       / , j = 1, 2, ..., G

      where  
               , an element in equation (9), refers to country i's domestic services
              
values embodied in country j's total final demand in a manufacturing sector (subscript s). The
numerator in equation (12) sums  
                                  over all source countries i=1, 2, ..., G, except
country j itself so as to capture total imported services embedded in the manufacturing sector in
question.  is country j's GDP produced by its manufacturing sector s. In addition to D*,
we include another interaction term D*FSII in one equation.
      The above two additions allow us to check the robustness of our results to a more "complete"
specification using both SII and FSII, with a full set of fixed effects including country*sector,
country*year, and sector*year dummies. We consider financial and business services together and
report the results in Table 6. In the first two regressions, the dependent variable is the RCA_VAX
calculated based on value-added exports (VAX). The U.S. SII and FSII are used in the first
regression, while each country's own SII and FSII are used in the second regression. In both
regressions, the coefficients of D*SII remain positive and highly significant as before, while the
coefficients of D*FSII are always insignificant at the 10% level. This is one of the reasons why
we choose not to include FSII in the regressions with SII, but rather consider the share of foreign
services inputs in total embodied domestic and foreign services later when testing the hypothesis
2.
      Finally, in the last column of Table 6, we report the results from a regression using RCA_X
based on gross exports (X) as the dependent variable, as has been used in the literature, with the
                                                                                                31
same specifications as in the first two regressions. Now even the interaction D*SII turns highly
insignificant. This contrasts sharply with the results in the first regression using RCA_VAX. The
results are similar if we drop D*FSII from the regression. These differences show the importance
of using value-added exports (VAX) instead of gross exports (X) to construct RCA.
       Although the results from regressions using country*sector fixed effects continue to support
our previous findings, we do not want to rely solely on the within variations. This exercise with
more comprehensive controls requires sufficient variation in SII and D to obtain significant results.
Given the limited variations in our key variables over time as discussed in footnote 8, including
the full set of fixed effects is demanding and may lead to useful information being discarded. The
country*year fixed effects also bring other challenges. For example, in our previous 2SLS
regressions using average SII, we cannot use country-specific time-invariant legal origin dummies
as instruments any longer because they and their interaction with SII will be fully absorbed by
country*sector fixed effects. As a result, we choose not to include the country*sector fixed effects
in our baseline regressions.

                           Dep Var = RCA_VAX                            Dep Var = RCA_X
                      (1)                  (2)                          (3)
                      U.S. SII & FSII      Own SII & FSII               U.S. SII & FSII
 Dfb*SIIfb            0.123***             0.076***                     -0.002
                      (0.007)              (0.000)                      (0.973)
 Dfb*FSIIfb           -0.060               -0.013                       0.002
                      (0.131)              (0.412)                      (0.959)
 TFP                  0.045***             0.045***                     0.018***
                      (0.000)              (0.000)                      (0.001)
 HO_SK                0.115***             0.105***                     0.118***
                      (0.000)              (0.000)                      (0.000)
 HO_K/L               0.052***             0.053***                     0.051***
                      (0.009)              (0.009)                      (0.000)
 log(employment)      0.802***             0.799***                     0.343***
                      (0.000)              (0.000)                      (0.000)
 GVC Participation    0.134***             0.136***                     0.133***
                      (0.001)              (0.001)                      (0.002)
 Country*Year FEs     Yes                  Yes                          Yes
 Sector*Year FEs      Yes                  Yes                          Yes
 Country*Sector FEs   Yes                  Yes                          Yes
 Observations         6,184                6,352                        6,184
 R-squared            0.964                0.964                        0.961
Table 6: Robustness check (5). The dependent variable is manufacturing export RCA_VAX in
regressions (1) and (2), but RCA_X in regression (3). Dfb refers to financial & business services
value-added per worker. In regressions (1) and (3), SIIfb (FSIIfb) is the ratio of the U.S.'s embodied
domestic (foreign) financial & business services to U.S. manufacturing value-added, averaged
over 1995-2007. In regression (2), SIIfb (FSIIfb) is the ratio of each country's own embodied
                                                                                                   32
domestic (foreign) financial & business services to its manufacturing value-added, averaged over
1995-2007. All WIOD manufacturing sectors 3-16 are covered (not grouped together). The
standardized beta coefficients rather than the regular regression coefficients are reported. The p-
values based on robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country*year. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.


     IV.5. Testing hypothesis 2
      In this sub-section, we test the second hypothesis, which states that in certain circumstances,
countries may bypass their own inefficient domestic services sectors by relying on imported
foreign services. As defined in equation (11), the share of embodied foreign services in total
embodied services (forsh) is used to measure the degree of a country's access to foreign services
markets. Because our story is relevant only to the sectors that use a significant amount of services
as inputs, in the baseline regression, we consider only the first seven manufacturing sectors with
high services input intensity as listed in Appendix 3.21 We examine how the interaction between
foreign services and domestic services development affects manufacturing export RCA based on
specification (2) and report the results in Table 7. Here we consider financial and business services
together and include country*year and sector*year dummies. The first regression covers only the
seven manufacturing sectors with high SII, while the second regression covers the other seven
sectors with low SII. The coefficient of D*forsh is negative and significant at the 1% level in the
first regression. This shows that the benefit of foreign services inputs on manufacturing export
RCA decreases with the level of domestic services development, suggesting that foreign and
domestic services inputs are at least partially substitutable. Together with a positive coefficient of
forsh, this also implies that the access to foreign services can help a country to bypass under-
developed domestic services provision. In the second regression, the coefficient on D*forsh is
insignificant. This is to be expected, because services development and access to foreign services
markets should matter less for these sectors that use little services as inputs (low SII). These results
provide further support to the second hypothesis.


                            (1)                                  (2)
                            High Service Intensive Sectors       Low Service Intensive Sectors
 forshfb                    0.478***                             -0.042

21
  The sector rankings are identical if we consider only financial or only business services, or if we consider both
embodied domestic and foreign services.
                                                                                                                33
                          (0.000)                         (0.661)
 Dfb*forshfb              -1.647***                       -0.144
                          (0.000)                         (0.456)
 TFP                      0.064***                        0.038
                          (0.002)                         (0.111)
 HO_SK                    0.092***                        0.114***
                          (0.000)                         (0.008)
 HO_K/L                   0.079***                        0.082***
                          (0.000)                         (0.000)
 log(employment)          2.106***                        1.705***
                          (0.000)                         (0.000)
 GVC Participation        0.199***                        0.731***
                          (0.000)                         (0.000)
 Country*Year FEs         Yes                             Yes
 Sector*Year FEs          Yes                             Yes
 Observations             3,146                           3,180
 R-squared                0.633                           0.630
Table 7: Effects of embodied foreign services on manufacturing export RCA_VAX. Variable forsh
is defined as the share of embodied foreign financial & business services in the total embodied
domestic and foreign financial & business services for each country. The first regression covers
MORE services intensive manufacturing sectors (the first seven sectors in Appendix 3), while the
last regression covers LESS services intensive manufacturing sectors (the last seven sectors in
Appendix 3). Dfb refers to financial & business services value-added per worker. The standardized
beta coefficients rather than the regular regression coefficients are reported. The p-values based
on robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country*year. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

V. Concluding remarks
       In this paper, we examine how the development of domestic services sectors may affect the
export performance of downstream manufacturing sectors, taking into account the services input
intensities of manufacturing sectors. We focus on two types of modern services, i.e., financial
services and business services, whose shares in an economy normally increase with the level of a
country's development.
       We show that the indirect exports of services are surprisingly high for a number of countries,
especially developing or emerging economies, even though most of these countries' direct exports
of services are relatively small. We also find that the manufacturing sectors that use these services
intensively as inputs benefit more from domestic services development. These findings suggest
that policy makers should take into account the linkages among sectors, not look at them in
isolation as can happen with the "silo" approach to trade negotiations (Hoekman and Jackson,
2013).


                                                                                                  34
     Industrial countries have been strong in exporting services, both directly and indirectly. For
example, according to the Online Data Appendix Table A2, the U.S. is not only the largest direct
exporter of business services in the world, but also the largest indirect exporter of business services
(actually twice as large), suggesting an important role of business services in U.S.' manufacturing
activities. However, developing and emerging economies have significantly lagged behind, with
India being the only exception as a significant direct exporter of business services. Services
development in these latter countries would not only strengthen their service sectors but also
promote manufacturing sectors.
     Countries such as China that may be concerned with the durability of their manufacturing
export success may consider building stronger service sectors as a way to upgrade their
manufacturing sectors to an even higher level of sophistication. According to the Online Data
Appendix Table A2, China's business services exports in value-added terms, relative to its exports
in gross terms, are less impressive compared to the corresponding figure for financial services
shown in Table A1. Both of its direct and indirect business services exports are only 8-9 percent
of the corresponding numbers of the United States. Drawing from the firm level data in ORBIS,
Miroudot and Cadestin (2017) show that China is the only country in their sample which has a
majority of the manufacturing firms (77 percent in 2013) selling only goods, with little bundling
of goods and services, as seen with Apple iPhones/iPads and Apple Stores. To strengthen the
manufacturing sector, countries may need to have a favorable business environment that facilitates
services upgrading, including but not limited to R&D, marketing, advertising, inventory
management, quality control, production scheduling, after-sale technical supports, and follow-up
customer services.
     With significant improvement in transportation and communication technologies and
increasing services outsourcing activities, some developing countries such as India have developed
competitive services sectors. For example, Indian financial services RCA_VAX since 1997 has
been greater than one, while the corresponding numbers for China is always less than one. For
business services after 2000, Indian RCA_VAX has been about three times as high as the
corresponding Chinese numbers. For developed countries that have the same strength in service
sectors as India, our paper suggests that the manufacturing sectors that use these services
intensively tend to have a strong revealed comparative advantage. However, different from most

                                                                                                    35
of the other WIOD countries, Indian gross exports of business services are actually larger than its
total value-added exports, suggesting relatively little embodied business services in other sectors,
as shown by the direct and indirect ratio of Indian business services exports in the Online Data
Appendix Table A2. There is a plenty of room left for India, Philippines and other similar countries
to take advantage of their competitive services sectors during their industrialization process.
     We also provide evidence for a bypass effect, that is, countries may bypass their inefficient
domestic services sectors by making use of imported services inputs. This suggests that nations
with under-developed services may take advantage of globalization in services. Countries that
hesitate to liberalize their services sectors in the hope of protecting their inefficient domestic
services sectors may hurt the competitiveness of their manufacturing sectors.
     Although this paper focuses only on the services-manufacturing linkages, many other
important research questions could also be studied using a similar methodology. With the inter-
country input-output tables, we have complete information on how countries and sectors are inter-
linked to each other. We expect to see more studies along this line of research.


References
     Ali-Yrkkö, Jyrki, Petri Rouvinen, Timo Seppälä, and Pekka Ylä-Anttila, 2011. "Who
Captures Value in Global Supply Chains? Case Nokia N95 Smartphone", Journal of Industry,
Competition and Trade 11(3): 263-278.
     Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, "Fear of outsourcing: Is it justified?" Economic
Policy 20 (April): 308­348.
     Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009a, "Service Offshoring and Productivity: Evidence
from the United States," The World Economy 32(2): 203-220.
      Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009b, "Does Service Offshoring Lead to Job Losses?
Evidence from the United States," Chapter in NBER book: International Trade in Services and
Intangibles in the Era of Globalization, edited by Marshall Reinsdorf and Matthew J. Slaughter
(p. 227 - 243).
     Amiti, Mary, and David E. Weinstein, 2011. "Exports and Financial Shocks," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1841-1877.
     Arnold, Jens M., Beata Javorcik, Molly Lipscomb, Aaditya Mattoo, 2012. "Services
Reform and Manufacturing Performance: Evidence from India," World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 4048.
     Arnold, Jens M., Beata Javorcik, Aaditya Mattoo, 2011. "Does Services Liberalization
Benefit Manufacturing Firms? Evidence from the Czech Republic," Journal of International
Economics 85(1): 136-146
                                                                                                  36
    Balassa, Bela, 1965. "Trade Liberalization and `Revealed' Comparative Advantage."
Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies 33: 99-123.
      Bamieh, Omar, Matteo Fiorini, Bernard M. Hoekman, Adam Jakubik, 2017. "Services
Input Intensity and US Manufacturing Employment. Responses to the China Shock." EUI
Working Paper RSCAS 2017/39
      Beck, Thorsten, 2003. Financial dependence and international trade. Review of
International Economics 11: 296-316.
      Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Ross Levine, 2003. "Law and finance: why does
legal origin matter?" Journal of Comparative Economics 31(4): 653-675.
     Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin, 2011. "Finance and
Development: A Tale of Two Sectors." American Economic Review 101(5): 1964-2002.
    Chor, Davin, 2010. "Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative
Approach." Journal of International Economics 82(2): 152-167.
    Debaere, Peter, Holger Görg, and Horst Raff, 2013. "Greasing the wheels of international
commerce: how services facilitate firms' international sourcing." Canadian Journal of
Economics 46(1):78­102.
     Dietzenbacher, Eric, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, Marcel Timmer, and Gaatzen de Vries,
2013. "The Construction of World Input-Output Tables in the WIOD Project", Economic
Systems Research 25: 71-98.
     Donnelly, William A., Kyle Johnson, Marinos E. Tsigas, and David Ingersoll, 2004.
"Revised Armington Elasticities of Substitution for the USITC Model and the Concordance for
Constructing a Consistent Set for the GTAP Model," USITC Office of Economics Research Note
No. 2004-01-A.
     Fernandes, Ana M., and Caroline Paunov, 2012. "Foreign Direct Investment in Services
and Manufacturing Productivity: Evidence for Chile," Journal of Development Economics 97(2):
305-321.
     Francois, Joseph, Mirian Manchin, and Patrick Tomberger, 2013. "Services Linkages and
the Value-added Content of Trade," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6432.
     Francois, Joseph, and Julia Woerz, 2008. "Producer Services, Manufacturing Linkages, and
Trade," Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade 8: 199-229.
      Grubel, Herbert G., 1988. "Direct and Embodied Trade in Services," in C. H. Lee and N.
Seiji (eds), 1988, Trade and Investment in Services in the Asia-Pacific Region, Westview Press,
Boulder Co, pp. 53-76.
    Hertel, Thomas W. (ed.), 1997. Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
     Heuser, Cecilia, and Aaditya Mattoo, 2017. "Services Trade and Global Value Chains,"
Chapter 6 in David Dollar and Zhi Wang (eds.), Measuring and Analyzing the Impact of GVCs
on Economic Development, World Bank, Washington, D.C.


                                                                                              37
      Hoekman, Bernard, and Selina Jackson, 2013. "Shifting Focus in Trade Agreements ­ From
Market Access to Value-Chain Barriers." World Bank Blogs. Available online at
http://blogs.worldbank.org/trade/shifting-focus-in-trade-agreements-from-market-access-to-
value-chain-barriers
     Hoekman, Bernard, and Aaditya Mattoo, 2008. "Services Trade and Growth," World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper 4461.
    Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 2002. "What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence
From the Factor Markets." American Economic Review 92(3): 502-526.
     Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001. "The Nature and Growth of Vertical
Specialization in World Trade." Journal of International Economics 54:75­96.
    Jensen, J. Bradford, 2011. Global Trade in Services: Fear, Facts, and Offshoring,
Washington, DC, Peterson Institute for International Economics Press.
     Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010. "Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of
Financial Globalization." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(4): 173-204.
     Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011. "When is Quality of Financial Institutions a Source
of Comparative Advantage?" Journal of International Economics 84 (2): 178-187.
     Kochhar, Kalpana, Utsav Kumar, Raghuram Rajan, Arvind Subramanian, and Ioannis
Tokatlidis, 2006. "India's Pattern of Development: What Happened, What Follows?" Journal of
Monetary Economics 53(5): 981­1019.
     Kongsamut, Piyabha, Sergio Rebelo, and Danyang Xie, 2001. "Beyond Balanced Growth,"
Review of Economic Studies 68(4): 869-882.
     Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2012. "Estimating domestic content in
exports when processing trade is pervasive." Journal of Development Economics 99(1): 178-
189.
    Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2014. "Tracing Value-added and Double
Counting in Gross Exports." American Economic Review 104(2):459-494. Also available as
NBER Working Paper No. 18579.
     La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,
1997. "Legal Determinants of External Finance." Journal of Finance 52(3): 1131­1150.
     La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,
1998. "Law and Finance." Journal of Political Economy 106(6): 1113­1155.
     La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,
1999. "The Quality of Government." Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 15(1): 222-
279.
     Lodefalk, Magnus, 2014. "The Role of Services for Manufacturing Firm Exports." Review
of World Economics 150(1): 59-82.
     Loungani, Prakash, Saurabh Mishra, Chris Papageorgiou, and Ke Wang, 2017. "World
Trade in Services: Evidence from A New Dataset." IMF Working Papers 17/77.
                                                                                              38
    Manova, K., 2008. Credit constraints, heterogeneous firms, and international trade. NBER
Working Paper 14531.
     Manova, Kalina, Shang-Jin Wei, and Zhiwei Zhang, 2015, "Firm Exports and Multinational
Activity under Credit Constraints," The Review of Economics and Statistics 97(3): 574-588.
     Miroudot, Sébastien, and Charles Cadestin, 2017. "Services In Global Value Chains: From
Inputs to Value-Creating Activities." OECD Trade Policy Papers, No. 197.
      Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2007. "The Unsustainable US Current Account
Position Revisited," in Richard Clarida (ed.), G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability
and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press.
    Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998. "Financial Dependence and Growth." The
American Economic Review 88(3): 559-586.
    Romalis, John, 2004. Factor proportions and the structure of commodity trade. American
Economic Review 94: 67-97.
     Shen, Leilei, 2013. "Financial Dependence and Growth: Diminishing Returns to
Improvement in Financial Development." Economics Letters 120(2): 215-219.
     Stehrer, Robert, Neil Foster, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, 2012. "Value-added and Factors in
Trade: A Comprehensive Approach," WIOD Working Paper No. 7.
     Timmer, Marcel P., 2012. "The World Input­Output Database (WIOD): Contents, Sources,
and Methods." Version 0.9.
     Timmer, Marcel P., Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, 2013.
"Fragmentation, Incomes and Jobs: An analysis of European competitiveness," Economic Policy
28(76): 613­661.
     Timmer, Marcel P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries,
2015. "An Illustrated User Guide to the World Input­Output Database: the Case of Global
Automotive Production", Review of International Economics 23: 575­605
     Urata, Shujiro, and Kozo Kiyota, 2003. "Services Trade in East Asia," in T. Ito and A. O.
Krueger (eds.), 2003, Trade in Services in the Asia-Pacific Region, NBER-East Asia Seminar on
Economics, Vol. 11, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.
     U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC), 2013. "The Economic Effects of
Significant U.S. Import Restraints." Investigation #332-325, Publication 4440.
     Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, and Kunfu Zhu, 2013. "Quantifying International Production
Sharing at the Bilateral and Sector Level." NBER Working Paper No. 19677.
      Wang, Zhi, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, and Kunfu Zhu, 2017. "Measures of Participation
in Global Value Chains and Global Business Cycles." NBER Working Paper No. 23222.




                                                                                                 39
Appendix 1: Manufacture (sec 3-16) and service sectors (sec 19-30) covered by this paper

 Sec #     Descriptions
 3         Food, Beverages and Tobacco
 4         Textiles and Textile Products
 5         Leather, Leather and Footwear
 6         Wood and Products of Wood and Cork
 7         Pulp, Paper, Paper , Printing and Publishing
 8         Coke, Refined Petroleum and Nuclear Fuel
 9         Chemicals and Chemical Products
 10        Rubber and Plastics
 11        Other Non-Metallic Mineral
 12        Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal
 13        Machinery, Nec
 14        Electrical and Optical Equipment
 15        Transport Equipment
 16        Manufacturing, Nec; Recycling
 19        Sale, Maintenance and Repair of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles; Retail Sale of Fuel
 20        Wholesale Trade and Commission Trade, Except of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles
 21        Retail Trade, Except of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles; Repair of Household Goods
 23        Inland Transport
 24        Water Transport
 25        Air Transport
 26        Other Supporting and Auxiliary Transport Activities; Activities of Travel Agencies
 27        Post and Telecommunications
 28        Financial Intermediation (see Appendix 1 for its coverage)
 30        Renting of M&Eq and Other Business Activities (see Appendix 1 for its coverage)

Service sectors classification:
    Sales services: sectors 19-21
    Transportation services: sectors 23-26
    Communication services: sector 27
    Financial services: sector 28 (see below for sub-categories)
    Business services: sector 30 (see below for sub-categories)

 Detailed ISIC sectors inside financial services (WIOD sector 28)
 6511          Central banking
 6519          Other monetary intermediation
 6591          Financial leasing
 6592          Other credit granting
 6599          Other financial intermediation n.e.c.
 6601          Life insurance
 6602          Pension funding
 6603          Non life insurance
 6711          Administration of financial markets
 6712          Security dealing activities
 6719          Activities auxiliary to financial intermediation n.e.c.
 6720          Activities auxiliary to insurance and pension funding

                                                                                                 40
Detailed ISIC sectors inside business services (WIOD sector 30)
7111        Renting of land transport equipment
7112        Renting of water transport equipment
7113        Renting of air transport equipment
7121        Renting of agricultural machinery and equipment
7122        Renting of construction and civil engineering machinery and equipment
7123        Renting of office machinery and equipment (including computers)
7129        Renting of other machinery and equipment n.e.c.
7130        Renting of personal and household goods n.e.c.
7210        Hardware consultancy
7220        Software consultancy and supply
7230        Data processing
7240        Data base activities
7250        Maintenance and repair of office, accounting and computing machinery
7290        Other computer related activities
7310        Research and experimental development on natural sciences and engineering (NSE)
7320        Research and experimental development on social sciences and humanities (SSH)
7411        Legal activities
7412        Accounting, book-keeping and auditing activities; tax consultancy
7413        Market research and public opinion polling
7414        Business and management consultancy activities
7421        Architectural and engineering activities and related technical consultancy
7422        Technical testing and analysis
7430        Advertising
7491        Labour recruitment and provision of personnel
7492        Investigation and security activities
7493        Building-cleaning activities
7494        Photographic activities
7495        Packaging activities
7499        Other business activities n.e.c.




                                                                                              41
Appendix 2: Countries & Codes in WIOD

 Code     Country               Code      Country        Code      Country               Code    Country
 AUS      Australia             DNK       Denmark        IRL       Ireland               POL     Poland
 AUT      Austria               ESP       Spain          ITA       Italy                 PRT     Portugal
 BEL      Belgium               EST       Estonia        JPN       Japan                 ROM     Romania
 BGR      Bulgaria              FIN       Finland        KOR       South Korea           RUS     Russia
 BRA      Brazil                FRA       France         LTU       Lithuania             SVK     Slovakia
 CAN      Canada                GBR       UK             LUX       Luxembourg            SVN     Slovenia
 CHN      China                 GRC       Greece         LVA       Latvia                SWE     Sweden
 CYP      Cyprus                HUN       Hungary        MEX       Mexico                TUR     Turkey
 CZE      Czech Rep.            IDN       Indonesia      MLT       Malta                 TWN     Taiwan
 DEU      Germany               IND       India          NLD       Netherlands           USA     United States




Appendix 3: Manufacturing sectors' domestic SII in the U.S., average over 1995-2007

                                                                              SII for Sales,
 WIOD                                                 SII for Financial    Transportation, and       1 for
 sector   Manufacturing Sector Description              & Business          Communication           High SII
                                                          Services              Services            Sectors
   5      Leather, Leather and Footwear                     .315                  .255                 1
   3      Food, Beverages and Tobacco                       .291                  .281                 1
  15      Transport Equipment                               .236                  .206                 1
  13      Machinery, Nec                                    .196                  .165                 1
  16      Manufacturing, Nec; Recycling                     .189                  .162                 1
   4      Textiles and Textile Products                     .171                  .142                 1
  14      Electrical and Optical Equipment                  .168                  .115                 1
   9      Chemicals and Chemical Products                   .128                  .088                 0
   7      Pulp, Paper, Paper, Printing & Publishing         .122                                       0
                                                                                  .079
   8      Coke, Refined Petroleum & Nuclear Fuel            .091                  .079                 0
   6      Wood and Products of Wood and Cork                .045                  .052                 0
  10      Rubber and Plastics                               .043                  .034                 0
  11      Other Non-Metallic Mineral                        .020                  .018                 0
  12      Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal                 .019                  .016                 0




                                                                                                               42
                      Online Data Appendix (not for publication)
Most of the data used in this paper are computed by authors based on the World Input-Output
Database (WIOD, 2013 version) and the Socio-economic Accounts database (SEA, 2012 version)
for 40 countries. Web address: http://www.wiod.org/

    I.       Data for dependent variables
1) Gross exports (X) by country, sector over years: The WIOD
2) Value-added exports (VAX): from the UIBE GVC Index, estimated based on the data from the
    WIOD. Web address: http://rigvc.uibe.edu.cn/english/D_E/database_database/index.htm
3) Revealed comparative advantage (RCA) using X or VAX based on Balassa method (country i,
    j = 1, 2, ..., G; sector s=1, 2, ..., N).
                                                          =1 
                             _ = (               ) / (             )
                                             =1       =1       
                                                                 =1 
                             _ = (                      ) / (                )
                                              =1             =1       
IV.     Data for explanatory variables
1) Domestic services input intensity (SII) and foreign services input intensity (FSII): estimated
    based on the data from the WIOD. See equations (10)-(12) and pages 14-18 in the paper.
    SII = embodied domestic services in a manufacturing sector s / manufacturing sector s' GDP
    The default measure of SII is based on the data of the benchmark country (the U.S.). We also
    use each country's own SII and or the U.K.'s SII data to check the robustness of the results.
    FSII = embodied foreign services in a manufacturing sector s / manufacturing sector s' GDP
    forsh = SII/(SII+FSII): the share of foreign services inputs in total embodied services in a
    manufacturing sector. We use each country's own data to measure FSII and forsh.
2) Domestic services development (D) measured by services value-added per worker engaged in
    a services sector (in 1000 national currency): services value-added are estimated based on the
    WIOD (Data source: http://rigvc.uibe.edu.cn/english/D_E/database_database/index.htm); the
    number of workers engaged in a services sector are from the WIOD-SEA.
3) Alternative measure of domestic services development (D) measured by the share of services
    value-added in GDP: estimated based on data from the WIOD. Web address:
    http://rigvc.uibe.edu.cn/english/D_E/database_database/index.htm
4) Alternative measures of financial services development used by Rajan & Zingales (1998): Df1=
    ratio of bank private credit to GDP; Df2 = (Bank private credit + Stock market
    capitalization)/GDP). Data source: the World Bank Global Financial Development Database.
5) log(GDP per capita): based on the PPP Converted GDP Per Capita (Chain Series), at 2005
    constant prices from the Penn World Table 6.0.
6) Total factor productivity (TFP) estimated based on the dual approach as in Hsieh (2002). It is
    calculated as a weighted average of the growth rates of labor prices (gW) and capital prices (gR),
    weighted by the share of payment to labor (sL) and capital (sK): TFP = =sK*gR+sL*gW. The
    factor shares (sK and sL) are calculated based on factor payments. The prices/returns to L and
    K (or wage W and rental rates R) are calculated using factor payments divided by the
    corresponding engaged factor amount. The growth rates in W an R are calculated based on log
    differentials over time. Therefore, the growth rates for first year in our sample, 1995, cannot
                                                                                                   43
   be calculated, and accordingly TFP estimates for 1995 become missing. The data of fixed
   capital stocks (K), total hours worked by labor engaged (L), and the payments to labor and
   capital for all WIOD countries at sector level over years are from the WIOD-SEA.
7) HO_SK and HO_K/L: Heckscher-Ohlin variables constructed following Chor (2010). HO_SK
   is defined as the product of a country j's economy-wide skill ratio, (SK)j, and the skill ratio of
   a particular manufacturing sector in the same country, (SK)js (i.e., HO_SK = (SK)j*(SK)js,
   where SK or skill ratio is the payment to high skill workers divided by the payment to all
   workers (in a manufacturing sector). HO_K/L is defined as the product of a country j's overall
   capital/labor ratio, (K/L)j, and the capital/labor ratio of a particular manufacturing sector in the
   same country, (K/L)js (i.e., HO_K/L = (K/L)j*(K/L)js, where K/L is the payment to capital
   divided by the payment to labor. All of the data on payment to capital and labor at different
   skill levels are from the WIOD-SEA database.
8) The scale economy variable, log(employment), is calculated as log(employment*1000+1). We
   add one to retain the zeros when no worker works in a sector. We multiply employment by
   1000 because the original employment data from the SEA are measured in 1000 workers.
9) GVC participation index are estimated by Wang et al. (2017). We use a measure of forward
   industrial linkage based GVC participation to estimate how a country/sector's engagement in
   GVC activities strengthens its overall export performance.

V.     Data for instruments of domestic services development (D)
1) legor_com: common law legal origin dummy. Data are from La Porte et al. (1999). Web source:
   https://scholar.harvard.edu/shleifer/publications/quality-government
2) legor_civ: civil law legal origin dummy. Data source: same as above.
3) legor_soc: socialist legal origin dummy (the default category). Data source: same as above.

VI.     The sample covered by our analysis
The U.S. as the benchmark country is dropped from our baseline regressions using U.S. SII.
Romania is also dropped from our sample due to missing employment data. Hence our baseline
regressions cover 38 out of the 40 WIOD countries. Our TFP is estimated based on information
on the growth rates of the returns to capital and labor. When calculating the growth rates of returns,
we lose the first year in our sample, 1995. Hence, our sample covers the period of 12 years (1996-
2007). Our full sample with 14 manufacturing sectors (WIOD sectors 3-16) should have totally
6384 observations (=38*14*12). Because the payment to capital is negative for quite a few
countries in different sectors, it becomes missing for 200 observations when we calculate the
growth rate of capital return using log differentials which are needed to calculate TFP. Therefore,
the number of observations in our baseline regressions is 6184 (= 6384 - 200). In regressions using
each country's own SII, the U.S. is covered, and hence the number of observations will be higher
(39*14*12-200=6352), as in regressions (3) and (4) in Table 3.

The following four tables list the direct and indirect exports of financial services, business services,
and some manufacturing sectors. They are discussed in section III.5 in the paper.




                                                                                                     44
Table A1: Total direct & indirect value-added export (VAX) of financial service, 1995-2007
                         X                                  Ratio1 =                                             Ratio2 =
 Country            (gross export)            VAX           VAX/X              dVAX          indVAX      indVAX/dVAX
 AUS                          210               579              2.76             133              447               3.74
 AUT                          564               686              1.22             334              352               1.00
 BEL                          620               896              1.45             327              569               1.65
 BGR                           20                 47             2.37               13              34               2.69
 BRA                           72               457              6.30               47             410               8.68
 CAN                          487               984              2.02             275              709               2.59
 CHN                           53              1774            33.62                34           1740               42.94
 CYP                             4                12             2.72                3               8               2.79
 CZE                           45               104              2.32               20              84               4.77
 DEU                         1151              2644              2.30             529            2115                3.56
 DNK                          122               282              2.30               76             206               2.83
 ESP                          438               847              1.93             284              563               1.82
 EST                             8                15             1.91                5              10               1.87
 FIN                           33               122              3.76               21             101               3.56
 FRA                          790              1925              2.44             405            1520                3.96
 GBR                         5050              4339              0.86            2591            1748                0.54
 GRC                           39                 87             2.27               28              59               2.21
 HUN                           52               118              2.28               29              89               3.74
 IDN                          139               271              1.95             103              168               1.95
 IND                          101               683              6.77               78             605               7.46
 IRL                         1597              1171              0.73             831              341               0.38
 ITA                          552              1604              2.90             331            1273                3.57
 JPN                          789              3603              4.57             522            3081                6.25
 KOR                          199               976              4.91             119              857               6.58
 LTU                             2                12             6.45                1              11               9.35
 LUX                         2910               849              0.29             640              209               0.32
 LVA                             8                16             1.96                5              10               2.09
 MEX                          181               512              2.83             119              393               3.70
 MLT                             7                11             1.49                4               7               1.97
 NLD                          820              1244              1.52             442              803               1.58
 POL                          114               219              1.92               70             148               2.55
 PRT                           93               235              2.52               65             170               2.76
 ROM                           24                 67             2.82               17              50               3.07
 RUS                             5              152            29.25                 4             149              49.65
 SVK                           20                 37             1.89               12              25               2.01
 SVN                             9                38             4.35                6              33               4.66
 SWE                          372               532              1.43             247              285               1.08
 TUR                             7              251            34.48                 5             247              45.46
 TWN                           95              1197            12.55                75           1122               13.78
 USA                        10116            11897               1.18            5624            6273                1.07
 ROW                         2382              4798              2.01            1598            3199                1.93
 TOT                        30300            46293               1.53           16070          30223                 1.88
Notes: The export values in this table are for financial services sector (WIOD sector 28) in 100 million U.S. dollars at
2005 constant price, using the U.S. GDP deflator from the Federal Reserve Economic Data (website address:
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2). X is total gross exports. VAX is total value-added exports. dVAX is direct value-
added exports. indVAX is indirect value-added exports through other sectors.
                                                                                                                    45
Table A2: Total direct & indirect value-added export (VAX) of business service, 1995-2007
                         X                                  Ratio1 =                                             Ratio2 =
 Country            (gross export)            VAX           VAX/X              dVAX          indVAX      indVAX/dVAX
 AUS                           512             1128              2.20             250              879               3.60
 AUT                         1012              1184              1.17             579              604               1.11
 BEL                         1964              2657              1.35             964            1693                1.76
 BGR                            11                26             2.41                8              18               2.23
 BRA                           303              665              2.19             193              472               2.38
 CAN                         1322              2380              1.80             812            1568                1.93
 CHN                         1765              1921              1.09             757            1164                1.33
 CYP                            12                21             1.78                8              13               1.66
 CZE                           274              352              1.28             121              231               1.97
 DEU                         3821            12761               3.34            2596          10166                 3.74
 DNK                           429              680              1.59             236              444               1.80
 ESP                         1576              1957              1.24             924            1033                1.08
 EST                            27                38             1.41               15              24               1.62
 FIN                           474              654              1.38             278              376               1.25
 FRA                         3138              8361              2.66            1801            6560                3.69
 GBR                         6748              9602              1.42            4635            4966                1.06
 GRC                            99              130              1.31               53              77               1.39
 HUN                           287              388              1.35             163              225               1.38
 IDN                            29                48             1.63               17              32               1.31
 IND                         1588              1279              0.81            1084              195               0.19
 IRL                         1563              1321              0.85             862              458               0.51
 ITA                         1713              4178              2.44             965            3212                3.29
 JPN                         1011              4660              4.61             608            4052                7.06
 KOR                           591             1624              2.75             374            1249                3.27
 LTU                            16                25             1.55               10              15               1.87
 LUX                           231              240              1.04             121              118               0.90
 LVA                            14                25             1.85                7              18               2.67
 MEX                            88              793              9.06               63             730              12.17
 MLT                            24                24             1.02               15               9               0.67
 NLD                         3266              3954              1.21            1896            2058                1.06
 POL                           258              511              1.98             148              363               2.28
 PRT                           175              299              1.70               92             206               2.16
 ROM                           106              119              1.12               52              66               1.23
 RUS                            72              524              7.27               45             480              12.01
 SVK                            85              121              1.42               43              78               1.86
 SVN                            50                99             2.00               27              72               2.68
 SWE                         1444              1903              1.32             811            1092                1.27
 TUR                          1.34              146           109.57                 1             146             148.14
 TWN                           423              516              1.22             216              300               1.61
 USA                         9517            20777               2.18            6230          14547                 2.20
 ROW                         9776              8234              0.84            5458            2776                0.51
 TOTAL                      55815            96323               1.73           33535          62788                 1.87
Notes: The export values in this table are for business service sector (WIOD sector 30) in 100 million U.S. dollars at
2005 constant price, using the U.S. GDP deflator from the Federal Reserve Economic Data (website address:
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2). X is total gross exports. VAX is total value-added exports. dVAX is direct value-
added exports. indVAX is indirect value-added exports through other sectors.
                                                                                                                    46
Table A3: Direct & indirect VAX of manufacturing sectors 3 & 5 (with high SII), 1995-2007
                  X                   VAX                  Ratio1 =                                      Ratio2 =
 Country     (gross export)      (value-added exports)     VAX/X          dVAX        indVAX      indVAX/dVAX
AUS                   1656                        617        0.37      499.089       117.703                0.24
AUT                    638                        265        0.42      218.756       46.1621                0.21
BEL                   2225                        739        0.33      571.601       167.742                0.29
BGR                     75                         29        0.38      22.2225         6.8221               0.31
BRA                   2311                        843        0.36      637.913       205.499                0.32
CAN                   1770                        815        0.46      592.857       222.096                0.37
CHN                   4071                       2077        0.51      990.675       1086.46                1.10
CYP                     38                         15        0.39      12.8356       2.20884                0.17
CZE                    294                        128        0.44      81.9917       45.7667                0.56
DEU                   4941                       1887        0.38      1543.71       343.729                0.22
DNK                   1758                        595        0.34        512.73      82.0623                0.16
ESP                   2143                        677        0.32      499.708       177.584                0.36
EST                     60                         20        0.34      17.1528       3.24623                0.19
FIN                    205                        112        0.55      63.3442       49.0072                0.77
FRA                   4791                       1599        0.33        1299.6      299.275                0.23
GBR                   2616                       1303        0.50      975.982       326.532                0.33
GRC                    181                         59        0.32      46.5704       12.2119                0.26
HUN                    255                         88        0.34      63.7534       23.9361                0.38
IDN                   1098                        549        0.50        406.96      142.345                0.35
IND                    922                        255        0.28      188.907         65.761               0.35
IRL                   1447                        561        0.39      457.327       103.267                0.23
ITA                   4025                       1551        0.39      1085.99       464.537                0.43
JPN                    320                        552        1.72      129.696       422.165                3.26
KOR                    662                        287        0.43      152.262       134.758                0.89
LTU                     81                         35        0.43      28.4086       6.09379                0.21
LUX                     80                         30        0.37      29.6651      0.364167                0.01
LVA                     32                         15        0.46      10.5561       4.15573                0.39
MEX                    605                        334        0.55        238.72        94.982               0.40
MLT                     17                          8        0.46      5.90263       2.06591                0.35
NLD                   4724                       1550        0.33      1280.25         269.72               0.21
POL                    753                        284        0.38        207.14      76.3639                0.37
PRT                    501                        198        0.39      151.559       46.3096                0.31
ROM                    129                         87        0.67      52.9534       33.9444                0.64
RUS                     99                         64        0.65        32.715      31.5184                0.96
SVK                    138                         53        0.38      41.1339       12.0521                0.29
SVN                     85                         37        0.44      28.5756       8.68974                0.30
SWE                    394                        191        0.48      136.519       54.4838                0.40
TUR                    584                        245        0.42      182.064       62.5506                0.34
TWN                    399                        151        0.38      116.861       33.8116                0.29
USA                   4905                       1898        0.39      1345.91       552.359                0.41
ZOW                  12624                       4436        0.35      3521.52       914.558                0.26
TOT                  64654                      25237        0.39     18482.09      6754.899                0.37
Notes: The export values in this table are for two WIOD manufacturing sectors 3 (Food, Beverages and Tobacco) &
5 (Leather and Footwear) in 100 million U.S. dollars at 2005 constant price. X is total gross exports. VAX is total
value-added exports. dVAX is direct value-added exports. indVAX is indirect value-added exports through other sectors.

                                                                                                                  47
Table A4: Direct & indirect VAX of manufacturing sectors 11 & 12 (with low SII), 1995-2007
                       X                    VAX               Ratio1 =                                        Ratio2 =
 Country         (gross export) (value-added exports)          VAX/X          dVAX         indVAX      indVAX/dVAX
 AUS                      1920                       900          0.47      589.171         311.119                 0.53
 AUT                      1730                       956          0.55      701.073         254.831                 0.36
 BEL                      3461                      1286          0.37      1021.63         264.453                 0.26
 BGR                       219                        66          0.30      48.7508         17.5144                 0.36
 BRA                      1519                      1074          0.71      606.168         467.778                 0.77
 CAN                      4073                      2241          0.55      1484.12         756.912                 0.51
 CHN                      5435                      4699          0.86      1290.45         3408.44                 2.64
 CYP                         26                       12          0.46      10.0616         1.99486                 0.20
 CZE                      1054                       536          0.51      328.896         206.773                 0.63
 DEU                     11714                      7746          0.66       4646.8         3098.82                 0.67
 DNK                       626                       411          0.66      282.504          128.37                 0.45
 ESP                      2456                      1760          0.72      865.997         893.721                 1.03
 EST                         49                       21          0.43      15.4525         5.53757                 0.36
 FIN                       940                       502          0.53      303.802         198.413                 0.65
 FRA                      4590                      3297          0.72      1677.53         1619.94                 0.97
 GBR                      3629                      2650          0.73      1534.12         1115.91                 0.73
 GRC                       229                       105          0.46      71.0804         33.6734                 0.47
 HUN                       390                       182          0.47      118.267         63.4104                 0.54
 IDN                       496                       197          0.40      173.442         23.5688                 0.14
 IND                      1282                       727          0.57      378.938         347.575                 0.92
 IRL                       224                       149          0.66      88.7054         60.1249                 0.68
 ITA                      5740                      4141          0.72      1983.96         2156.61                 1.09
 JPN                      7967                      7060          0.89      2663.67         4395.91                 1.65
 KOR                      2451                      2024          0.83      618.727         1405.56                 2.27
 LTU                         28                       14          0.50      11.8089         2.18443                 0.18
 LUX                       425                       145          0.34      129.839         14.6965                 0.11
 LVA                         47                       18          0.38      13.9866         4.01187                 0.29
 MEX                      1423                      1050          0.74      572.598         477.409                 0.83
 MLT                          3                         2         0.64      1.14616       0.873129                  0.76
 NLD                      2283                      1092          0.48      836.275          255.77                 0.31
 POL                      1123                       576          0.51      361.724         214.499                 0.59
 PRT                       415                       245          0.59      152.444         92.4503                 0.61
 ROM                       392                       154          0.39      111.224          42.657                 0.38
 RUS                      2538                      1571          0.62      953.391         617.212                 0.65
 SVK                       494                       217          0.44      163.856         53.2312                 0.32
 SVN                       294                       143          0.49      99.6685         43.3023                 0.43
 SWE                      1693                       998          0.59      626.745         371.189                 0.59
 TUR                      1289                       646          0.50      430.114         215.448                 0.50
 TWN                      2305                      1198          0.52      576.291          621.68                 1.08
 USA                      6274                      7049          1.12      2389.55         4659.14                 1.95
 ZOW                     13080                      6623          0.51      4237.11         2385.61                 0.56
 TOT                     96323                     64479          0.67     33171.09       31308.32                  0.94
Notes: The export values in this table are for two WIOD manufacturing sectors 11 (Other Non-Metallic Mineral) &
12 (Basic & Fabricated Metal) in 100 million U.S. dollars at 2005 constant price. X is total gross exports. VAX is total
value-added exports. dVAX is direct value-added exports. indVAX is indirect value-added exports through other sectors.

                                                                                                                    48
Table A5: Descriptive statistics of key variables (for WIOD countries over 1996-2007)

 Variables                           Mean                 Std. Dev.                    Min                   Max
 RCA_VAX                             1.132                    1.026                       0               12.397
 RCA_X                               1.153                    1.271                       0               19.785
 SIIf (U.S.)                         0.036                    0.025                  0.004                  0.100
 SIIb (U.S.)                         0.109                    0.074                  0.011                  0.309
 SIIfb (U.S.)                        0.145                    0.097                  0.015                  0.406
 SIIf (own)                          0.026                    0.031                       0                 0.530
 SIIb (own)                          0.045                    0.045                       0                 0.339
 SIIfb (own)                         0.071                    0.063                       0                 0.559
 forshf (own)                        0.405                    0.196                  0.036                  0.999
 forshb (own)                        0.485                    0.210                  0.081                  1.000
 forshfb (own)                       0.438                    0.191                  0.066                  0.999
 Df (VA/worker)                      74.02                    50.33                  4.989                  358.4
 Db (VA/worker)                      39.18                    25.82                  2.507                  162.5
 Dfb (VA/worker)                     48.39                    31.61                  3.471                  211.0
 Df (VA/GDP)                         0.055                    0.033                  0.012                  0.289
 Db (VA/GDP)                         0.069                    0.031                  0.012                  0.154
 Dfb (VA/GDP)                        0.124                    0.049                  0.040                  0.391
 Df1                                 0.713                    0.458                  0.072                  2.010
 Df2                                 1.239                    0.761                  0.086                  4.072
 log(GDP/capita)                     9.757                    0.746                  7.378                11.363
 TFP                                 0.073                    0.174                 -1.185                  2.228
 HO-SK                               0.058                    0.041                  0.000                  0.256
 HO-K/L                              2.040                    13.02                  0.000                196.28
 log(employment)                     11.16                    2.088                  2.738                16.901
 GVA Participation                   0.303                    0.197                       0                 3.870
 legor_com                           0.161                    0.367                       0                     1
 legor_civ                           0.552                    0.497                       0                     1
Notes: The summary statistics for most of the variables in this table are based on the sample used in the baseline
regressions in Table 1 (6184 observations), covering 14 manufacturing sectors of 38 WIOD countries over 1996-2007.
The first year 1995 in our data is dropped when we calculate the growth rates of capital and labor returns which are
used in the TFP calculation. Two WIOD countries are not covered: U.S. is dropped as the benchmark country to define
services input intensity; Romania is also dropped due to lack of employment data. The six SII and forsh variables with
"(own)" in the variable names are based on a bit larger sample used in regressions (3) & (4) of Table 3 (6352
observations), without dropping the U.S. Some subscripts i, j, s, etc. a not shown for simplicity.




                                                                                                                   49
