                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SUSTAINABLE INVESTING IN EQUILIBRIUM

                                           Lubos Pastor
                                        Robert F. Stambaugh
                                         Lucian A. Taylor

                                        Working Paper 26549
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26549


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2019




The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are affiliated
with. We are grateful for comments from our discussants Bernard Dumas, Harrison Hong and
Jacob Sagi, and also from Rui Albuquerque, Malcolm Baker, George Constantinides, Alex
Edmans, Gene Fama, Sam Hartzmark, John Heaton, Ravi Jagannathan, Ralph Koijen, Yrjo
Koskinen, Stavros Panageas, Raghu Rajan, Jeff Wurgler, Josef Zechner, conference participants
at the 2020 Spring NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, the 2020 SFS Cavalcade, and the 2020
INSEAD Finance Symposium, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago, WU
Vienna, and the National Bank of Slovakia. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26549.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sustainable Investing in Equilibrium
Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 26549
December 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G11,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

We model investing that considers environmental, social, and governance (ESG) criteria. In
equilibrium, green assets have low expected returns because investors enjoy holding them and
because green assets hedge climate risk. Green assets nevertheless outperform when positive
shocks hit the ESG factor, which captures shifts in customers' tastes for green products and
investors' tastes for green holdings. The ESG factor and the market portfolio price assets in a two-
factor model. The ESG investment industry is largest when investors' ESG preferences differ
most. Sustainable investing produces positive social impact by making firms greener and by
shifting real investment toward green firms.

Lubos Pastor                                     Lucian A. Taylor
University of Chicago                            Finance Department
Booth School of Business                         The Wharton School
5807 South Woodlawn Ave                          University of Pennsylvania
Chicago, IL 60637                                2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
and NBER                                         3620 Locust Walk
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu                    Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
                                                 luket@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

    Sustainable investing considers not only financial objectives but also environmental,
social, and governance criteria. This investment approach initially gained popularity by im-
posing negative screens under the umbrella of socially responsible investing (SRI), but its
scope has expanded significantly in recent years. Assets managed with an eye on sustain-
ability have grown to tens of trillions of dollars and seem poised to grow further.1 Given this
rapid growth, the effects of sustainable investing on asset prices and corporate behavior are
important to understand.

    We analyze both financial and real effects of sustainable investing through the lens of
an equilibrium model. The model features many heterogeneous firms and agents, yet it is
highly tractable, yielding simple and intuitive expressions for the quantities of interest. The
model illuminates the key channels through which agents' preferences for sustainability can
move asset prices, tilt portfolio holdings, determine the size of the ESG investment industry,
and cause real impact on society.

    In the model, firms differ in the sustainability of their activities. "Green" firms generate
positive externalities for society, "brown" firms impose negative externalities, and there are
different shades of green and brown. Agents differ in their preferences for sustainability,
or "ESG preferences," which have multiple dimensions. First, agents derive utility from
holdings of green firms and disutility from holdings of brown firms. Second, agents care
about firms' aggregate social impact. In a model extension, agents additionally care about
climate risk. Naturally, agents also care about financial wealth.

    We show that agents' tastes for green holdings affect asset prices. Agents are willing to
pay more for greener firms, thereby lowering the firms' costs of capital. Green assets have
negative CAPM alphas, whereas brown assets have positive alphas. Consequently, agents
with stronger ESG preferences, whose portfolios tilt more toward green assets and away from
brown assets, earn lower expected returns. Yet such agents are not unhappy because they
derive utility from their holdings.

    The model implies three-fund separation, whereby each agent holds the market portfolio,
the risk-free asset, and an "ESG portfolio" whose composition depends on assets' greenness.
Agents with stronger than average tastes for green holdings deviate from the market largely
    1
      According to the 2018 Global Sustainable Investment Review, sustainable investing assets exceeded $30
trillion globally at the start of 2018, a 34% increase in two years. As of November 2019, more than 2,600
organizations have become signatories to the United Nations Principles of Responsible Investment (PRI),
with more than 500 new signatories in 2018/2019, according to the 2019 Annual Report of the PRI.



                                                    1
by overweighting green assets and underweighting brown ones. Agents with weaker ESG
tastes deviate in the opposite direction, and agents with average tastes hold the market
portfolio. If there is no dispersion in ESG tastes, all agents simply hold the market. Even if
all agents derive a large amount of utility from green holdings, they nevertheless hold only
the market if their ESG tastes are equally strong, because asset prices then fully adjust to
reflect those tastes. For the ESG industry to exist, dispersion in ESG tastes is necessary.

   We define the "ESG factor" as a scaled return on the ESG portfolio. We show that the
ESG factor and the market portfolio together price assets in a two-factor model. Assets'
loadings on the ESG factor, their "ESG betas," equal their ESG characteristics: green assets
have positive ESG betas and brown assets have negative betas. A simple version of the
ESG factor is a green-minus-brown portfolio return, where both green and brown portfolios
are weighted by ESG characteristics. Assets' CAPM alphas reflect exposure to the omitted,
priced ESG factor. The factor has a negative premium that comes from investors' ESG
tastes.

   We interpret the ESG factor as capturing unexpected changes in ESG concerns. These
concerns can change in two ways: customers can shift their demands for goods of green
providers, and investors can change their appreciation for green holdings. The ESG factor
affects the relative performance of green and brown assets; its positive realizations boost
green assets while hurting brown ones. If ESG concerns strengthen unexpectedly and suffi-
ciently, green assets outperform brown ones despite having lower expected returns.

   To assess the model's quantitative implications, we calibrate a setting with two types
of investors: those sharing equal concerns about ESG ("ESG investors") and those having
no concerns ("non-ESG investors"). Given their portfolios' green tilts, ESG investors earn
lower expected returns than non-ESG investors. The difference in expected returns increases
with , the wealth share of ESG investors, and with , the maximum certain return ESG
investors are willing to forgo in exchange for investing in their desired portfolio instead of
the market. Non-ESG investors earn an alpha that is positive and increasing in both  and
. ESG investors earn a negative alpha whose magnitude is increasing in , concave in ,
and greatest when the dispersion in ESG tastes is greatest (i.e.,  = 0.5).

   Despite earning a negative alpha, ESG investors enjoy an "investor surplus": they sacri-
fice less return than they are willing to in order to hold their desired portfolio. The reason is
that equilibrium asset prices adjust to ESG tastes, thereby pushing the market portfolio to-
ward the portfolio desired by ESG investors. Specifically, ESG tastes make green firms more
valuable and brown firms less. The market portfolio thus moves closer to ESG investors'


                                               2
desired portfolio, pushing those investors' negative alpha closer to zero. For example, when
ESG investors have  = 4%, their alpha is at least -2%. We define investor surplus to be
the difference between alpha and -. The surplus is always positive, ranging from /2 to
.

   We measure the size of the ESG investment industry by the aggregate ESG dollar tilt
away from the market portfolio. The ESG industry is largest when the dispersion in ESG
tastes is greatest. In addition, the ESG industry's size is reduced by the price adjustment
mentioned above. For example, suppose that the ESG industry reaches 24% of the stock
market's value when  is 1%. Then doubling the strength of ESG tastes by raising  to 2%
increases that maximum industry size by less than half, to 35% of the market's value.

   Our model implies that sustainable investing leads to positive social impact. We define
a firm's social impact as the product of the firm's greenness and its scale. We show that
agents' tastes for green holdings increase firms' social impact through two channels. First,
firms choose to become greener, because greener firms have higher market values. Second,
real investment shifts from brown to green firms, due to shifts in firms' cost of capital (up
for brown firms, down for green firms). We obtain positive aggregate social impact even if
agents have no direct preference for it, shareholders do not engage with management, and
managers simply maximize market value.

   Finally, we extend the model by allowing climate to enter investors' utility. Expected
returns then depend not only on market betas and investors' tastes but also on climate
betas, which measure firms' exposures to climate shocks. Evidence suggests that brown
assets have higher climate betas than green assets (e.g., Choi, Gao, and Jiang, 2019; Engle
et al., 2020). This difference pushes up brown assets' expected returns in our model. The
idea is that investors dislike unexpected deteriorations in the climate. If the climate worsens
unexpectedly, brown assets lose value relative to green assets (e.g., due to new government
regulation that penalizes brown firms). Because brown firms lose value in states of the world
investors dislike, they are riskier, so they must offer higher expected returns. Brown stocks
thus have positive CAPM alphas not only because of investors' distastes for brown holdings,
but also because of brown stocks' larger exposures to climate risk.

   Our theoretical treatment of climate risk is related to recent empirical work on the im-
plications of such risk for asset prices. Hong, Li, and Xu (2019) analyze the response of
food producers' stock prices to climate risks. Bolton and Kacperczyk (2019) conclude that
investors demand compensation for exposure to carbon risk in the form of higher returns on
carbon-intensive firms. Ilhan, Sautner, and Vilkov (2020) show that firms with higher carbon


                                              3
emissions exhibit more tail risk and more variance risk. Engle et al. (2020) develop a pro-
cedure to dynamically hedge climate risk by constructing mimicking portfolios that hedge
innovations in climate news series obtained by textual analysis of news sources. Bansal,
Ochoa, and Kiku (2016) identify climate change as a long-run risk factor. Krueger, Sautner,
and Starks (2019) find that institutional investors consider climate risks to be important
investment risks.

   Besides climate risk, other aspects of ESG-related risk have been studied. Hoepner et
al. (2018) find that ESG engagement reduces firms' downside risk as well as their exposures
to a downside-risk factor. Luo and Balvers (2017) find a premium for boycott risk. We
complement these studies with a theoretical contribution. We construct an ESG risk factor
that is capable of pricing assets in a two-factor model, and we show that green and brown
assets have opposite exposures to this factor.

   Prior studies report, in various contexts, that green assets underperform brown assets.
Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) find that "sin" stocks (i.e., stocks of public firms producing
alcohol, tobacco, and gaming, which we would classify as brown) outperform non-sin stocks.
They argue that social norms lead investors to demand compensation for holding sin stocks.
Barber, Morse, and Yasuda (2020) find that venture capital funds that aim not only for
financial return but also for social impact earn lower returns than other funds. They argue
that investors derive nonpecuniary utility from investing in dual-objective funds. Baker et
al. (2018) and Zerbib (2019) find that green bonds tend to be priced at a premium, offering
lower yields than traditional bonds. Both studies argue that the premium is driven by
investors' environmental concerns. Similarly, Chava (2014) and El Ghoul et al. (2011) find
that greener firms have a lower implied cost of capital. All of these results are consistent
with our prediction that ESG tastes reduce green firms' costs of capital.

   Some studies find the opposite result, that green assets outperform brown, using alter-
native definitions of green and brown. Firms perform better if they are better-governed,
judging by employee satisfaction (Edmans, 2011) or by strong shareholder rights (Gompers,
Ishii, and Metrick, 2003), or if they have higher ESG ratings in the 1992­2004 period (Kempf
and Osthoff, 2007). These results are also consistent with our model as long as ESG tastes
strengthen unexpectedly over the sample period. We do not mean to imply that we can
always declare empirical success for our model. The model clearly predicts that green assets
underperform brown over a sufficiently long period--a period long enough so that unexpected
changes in ESG tastes average to zero. We simply explain why it is difficult to distinguish ex
ante versus ex post effects of ESG concerns by looking at realized returns over periods during
which ESG tastes shift. Disentangling alphas from ESG taste shifts is a major challenge for


                                                 4
empirical work in this area.

   Our model is also related to previous theoretical studies of sustainable investing. Heinkel,
Kraus, and Zechner (2001) build an equilibrium model in which exclusionary ethical investing
affects firm investment. They consider two types of investors, one of which refuses to hold
shares in polluting firms. The resulting reduction in risk sharing increases the cost of capital
of polluting firms, depressing their investment. Albuquerque, Koskinen, and Zhang (2019)
construct a model in which a firm's socially responsible investments increase customer loyalty,
giving the firm more pricing power. This power makes the firm less risky and thus more
valuable. Unlike these models, ours features neither a lack of risk sharing nor pricing power;
instead, the main force is investors' tastes for holding green assets.

   Fama and French (2007) argue that tastes for holding green assets can affect prices. Baker
et al. (2018) build a model featuring two types of investors with mean-variance preferences,
where one type also has tastes for green assets. Their model predicts that green assets have
lower expected returns and more concentrated ownership, and they find support for these
predictions in the universe of green bonds. Pedersen, Fitzgibbons, and Pomorski (2019)
consider the same two types of mean-variance investors but also add a third type that is
unaware of firms' ESG scores. This lack of awareness is costly if firms' ESG scores predict
their profits. The authors show that stocks with higher ESG scores can have either higher
or lower expected returns, depending on the wealth of the third type of investors. They
obtain four-fund separation and derive the ESG-efficient frontier characterizing the tradeoff
between the ESG score and the Sharpe ratio.

  While the models in these studies share some features with ours, we offer novel insights.
We show that an ESG factor, along with the market portfolio, prices assets in a two-factor
model. Positive realizations of this factor, which result from shifts in customers' and in-
vestors' tastes, can result in green assets outperforming brown. The size of the ESG invest-
ment industry, as well as investors' alphas, crucially depend on the dispersion in investors'
ESG tastes. ESG investors earn an investor surplus. We have a continuum of investors with
multiple dimensions of ESG preferences. Including climate in those preferences results in
the pricing of climate risk. Finally, ESG investing has positive social impact.

   Positive social impact also emerges from the model of Oehmke and Opp (2020), but
through a different channel. Key ingredients to generating impact in their model are fi-
nancing constraints and coordination among agents. Our model does not include those
ingredients, but it produces social impact nevertheless, through tastes for green holdings.
To emphasize these tastes, we do not model shareholder engagement with management,


                                               5
which is another channel through which ESG investing can potentially increase market value
(e.g., Dimson, Karakas, and Li, 2015). In our model, value-maximizing managers make
their firms greener voluntarily, without pressure from shareholders, because greener firms
command higher market values.2

   Our assumption that some investors derive nonpecuniary benefits from green holdings
has considerable empirical support in the mutual fund literature. Mutual fund flows re-
spond to ESG-salient information, such as Morningstar sustainability ratings (Hartzmark
and Sussman, 2019) and environmental disasters (Bialkowski and Starks, 2016). Flows to
SRI mutual funds are less volatile than flows to non-SRI funds (Bollen, 2007) and less re-
sponsive to negative past performance (Renneboog, ter Horst, and Zhang, 2011). Investors
in SRI funds also indicate willingness to forgo financial performance to accommodate their
social preferences (Riedl and Smeets, 2017).

       This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our baseline model. Section 3
discusses the ESG factor. Section 4 explores the model's quantitative implications. Section
5 extends the baseline model by letting agents care about the climate, showing that climate
risk commands a premium. Section 6 examines social impact. Section 7 concludes.


2. Model

       The model considers a single period, from time 0 to time 1, in which there are N firms,
n = 1, . . . , N . Let r
                       ~n denote the return on firm n's shares in excess of the riskless rate, rf ,
        ~ be the N × 1 vector whose nth element is r
and let r                                          ~n . We assume r
                                                                  ~ is normally distributed:

                                               r
                                               ~= µ+~,                                                 (1)

where µ contains equilibrium expected excess returns and ~  N (0, ). In addition to finan-
cial payoffs, firms produce social impact. Each firm n has an observable "ESG characteristic"
gn , which can be positive (for "green" firms) or negative (for "brown" firms). Firms with
gn > 0 have positive social impact, meaning they generate positive externalities (e.g., clean-
ing up the environment). Firms with gn < 0 have negative social impact, meaning they
generate negative externalities (e.g., polluting the environment). In Section 6, we model
firms' social impact in greater detail.
   2
     Theoretical work on sustainable investing also includes Friedman and Heinle (2016), Gollier and Pouget
(2014), and Luo and Balvers (2017). Bank and Insam (2017) do not mention sustainable investing, but they
model investors with preferences for other stock characteristics. Empirical work on sustainable investing
includes Geczy, Stambaugh, and Levin (2005), Hong and Kostovetsky (2012), and Cheng, Hong, and Shue
(2016), among others. For recent experimental work, see Humphrey et al. (2020). For surveys of the early
literature, see Bauer, Koedijk, and Otten (2005) and Renneboog, ter Horst, and Zhang (2008).

                                                    6
      There is a continuum of agents who trade firms' shares and the riskless asset. The
riskless asset is in zero net supply, whereas each firm's stock is in positive net supply. Let
Xi denote an N × 1 vector whose nth element is the fraction of agent i's wealth invested in
                                       ~ 1i = W0i (1 + rf + X r
stock n. Agent i's wealth at time 1 is W                     i ~), where W0i is the agent's
initial wealth. Besides liking wealth, agents also derive utility from holding green stocks and
disutility from holding brown stocks.3 Each agent i has exponential utility
                                                          ~ 1i -b Xi
                                      ~ 1i , Xi ) = -e-Ai W
                                   V (W                          i   ,                              (2)

where Ai is the agent's absolute risk aversion and bi is an N × 1 vector of nonpecuniary
benefits that the agent derives from her stock holdings. Holding the riskless asset brings no
such benefit. The benefit vector has agent-specific and firm-specific components:

                                              bi = d i g ,                                          (3)

where g is an N × 1 vector whose nth element is gn and di  0 is a scalar measuring the degree
of agent i's "ESG taste." Agent i thus derives a nonpecuniary benefit of di gn from holding
stock n. Agents with higher values of di have stronger tastes for the ESG characteristics of
their holdings. In addition to having ESG tastes, agents care about firms' aggregate social
impact, but that component of preferences does not affect agents' portfolio choice or asset
prices. Therefore, we postpone the discussion of that component until Section 6.3 .

2.1. Expected returns

    Due to their infinitesimal size, agents take asset prices (and thus the return distribution)
as given when choosing their optimal portfolios at time 0. To derive the first-order condition
for Xi , we compute the expectation of agent i's utility in Eq. (2) and differentiate it with
respect to Xi . As we show in the Appendix, agent i's portfolio weights on the N stocks are
                                         1           1
                                  Xi = -1 µ + bi ,                                        (4)
                                        ai           ai
where ai  Ai W0i is agent i's relative risk aversion. For tractability, we assume that ai = a
for all agents. We define i to be the ratio of agent i's initial wealth to total initial wealth:
i  W0i /W0 , where W0 = i W0i di. Because we assume a zero aggregate position in the
riskless asset, market clearing requires that wm , the N × 1 vector of weights in the market
portfolio of stocks, satisfies

                                    wm =           i Xi di
                                               i
                                              1 -1   ¯
                                                     d
                                          =      µ + 2 -1 g ,                                       (5)
                                              a     a
  3
    We frame the discussion in terms of green and brown stocks, but our main ideas apply more broadly to
any set of green and brown assets, such as bonds and private equity investments.

                                                     7
      ¯
where d     i di di  0 is the wealth-weighted mean of ESG tastes di across agents and
             i
                                                           ¯ > 0 unless the mass of agents
 wm = 1, with  denoting an N × 1 vector of ones. Note that d
who care about ESG is zero. Solving for µ gives

                                               d¯
                                      µ = awm - g .                                         (6)
                                               a
Premultiplying by wm gives the market equity premium, µm = wm µ:

                                              d¯
                                           2
                                     µm = am - wm g ,                                       (7)
                                              a
       2
where m  = wm wm is the variance of the market return. In general, the equity premium
                                      ¯, through w g , which is the overall "greenness"
depends on the average of ESG tastes, d                  m
of the market portfolio. If the market is net green (wm g > 0) then stronger ESG tastes
              ¯) reduce the equity premium. If the market is net brown (w g < 0), stronger
(i.e., larger d                                                          m
ESG tastes increase the premium as investors demand compensation for this brownness. For
simplicity, we assume that the market portfolio is ESG-neutral,

                                          wm g = 0 ,                                        (8)

which implies that the equity premium in Eq. (7) is independent of agents' ESG tastes.
Equivalently, we could view g as being defined so that agents derive utility (disutility) from
                                                                                             2
holdings that are greener (browner) than the market. Eqs. (7) and (8) imply a = µm /m          .
                                                                                 2
Combining this with Eq. (6) and noting that the vector of market betas is m = (1/m )wm ,
we obtain our first proposition.

Proposition 1. Expected excess returns in equilibrium are given by

                                                d¯
                                      µ = µm m - g .                                        (9)
                                                a

We see that expected excess returns deviate from their CAPM values, µm m , due to ESG
tastes for holding green stocks.

                ¯ > 0, the expected return on stock n is decreasing in gn .
Corollary 1. If d

                                                                        ¯ is positive, and
As long as the mass of agents who care about sustainability is nonzero, d
expected returns are decreasing in ESG characteristics. Given their ESG tastes, agents are
willing to pay more for greener firms, thereby lowering the firms' expected returns. Because
the vector of stocks' CAPM alphas is defined as   µ - µm m , Eq. (9) yields the following
corollary.


                                               8
Corollary 2. The CAPM alpha of stock n is given by
                                                 ¯
                                                 d
                                         n = - gn .                                      (10)
                                                 a
   ¯ > 0, green stocks have negative alphas, and brown stocks have positive alphas. Moreover,
If d
greener stocks have lower alphas.

   As long as some agents care about sustainability, Eq. (10) implies that the alphas of
stocks with gn > 0 are negative, the alphas of stocks with gn < 0 are positive, and n is
decreasing with gn . Furthermore, the negative relation between n and gn is stronger when
                                                           ¯, is higher.4
risk aversion, a, is lower and when the average ESG taste, d
Proposition 2. The mean and variance of the excess return on agent i's portfolio are
                                               d¯
                            ri ) = µm - i 3 g -1 g
                          E(~                                                        (11)
                                               a
                                                1
                        Var(~
                            ri ) = m  2
                                        + i 2
                                                 4
                                                   g -1 g ,                          (12)
                                               a
              ¯.
where i  di - d

       Both equations are derived in the Appendix. Agents with i > 0 accept below-market
expected returns in exchange for satisfying their stronger tastes for holding green stocks.
As a result, agents whose tastes for green holdings are weaker (i < 0) enjoy above-market
expected returns. In departing from market holdings, all agents with i = 0 incur higher
return volatility than that of the market portfolio.
                ¯ > 0 and g = 0, agents with larger i earn lower expected returns.
Corollary 3. If d

       Under the conditions of this corollary, the term in parentheses in Eq. (11) is strictly
positive. Therefore, agents with stronger ESG tastes (i.e., larger i ) earn lower expected
returns. The effect of i on E(~  ri ) is stronger when the average ESG taste is stronger (i.e.,
when d ¯ is larger), when risk aversion a is smaller, and when g -1 g is larger.

       The low expected returns earned by ESG-sensitive agents do not imply these agents are
unhappy. As we show in the Appendix, agent i's expected utility in equilibrium is given by
                                                               2
                                         ~ 1i )
                                    E V (W             ¯ e- 2ai2 g -1 g ,
                                                     = V                                                  (13)
where V¯ is the expected utility if the agent has i = 0. Expected utility is increasing in
i2                         ¯ < 0), so the more an agent's ESG taste di deviates from the
   (note from Eq. (2) that V
average in either direction, the more ESG preferences contribute to the agent's utility.
   4
     Proposition 1 and its corollaries continue to hold if agents disagree on stocks' ESG characteristics, gn .
In that case, the results hold with gn replaced by the wealth-weighted average of agents' perceived values of
gn , adjusted for any covariance between those perceived values and ESG tastes. See the Appendix.

                                                      9
2.2. Portfolio tilts and the ESG portfolio

       Substituting for µ from Eq. (9) into Eq. (4), we obtain an agent's portfolio weights:

Proposition 3. Agent i's equilibrium portfolio weights on the N stocks are given by

                                      Xi = wm + i /a2 -1 g .                                         (14)


   Proposition 3 implies three-fund separation, as each agent's overall portfolio can be im-
plemented with three assets: the riskless asset, the market portfolio, and an "ESG portfolio"
whose weights are proportional to -1 g . The fraction of agent i's wealth in the riskless asset,
1 -  Xi = - (i /a2 )  -1 g , can be positive or negative. The agent's remaining wealth is
invested in stocks. Specifically, the agent allocates a fraction i of his remaining wealth to
the ESG portfolio and a fraction 1 - i to the market portfolio. To see this, note that the
N × 1 vector of weights within agent i's stock portfolio, wi , equals the right-hand side of Eq.
(14) multiplied by 1/( Xi ), giving
                                        1
                       wi =                            wm + i /a2 -1 g
                                 (wm + (i /a2 ) -1 g )
                           = (1 - i )wm + i wg ,                                                     (15)

with the fraction of agent i's stock portfolio invested in the ESG portfolio given by

                                               (i /a2 ) -1 g
                                       i =                     ,                                     (16)
                                             1 + (i /a2 ) -1 g

and the N × 1 vector of weights in the ESG portfolio given by
                                                  1
                                          wg =         -1 g .                                        (17)
                                                  -1 g

In the special case where  -1 g = 0, no agent holds the riskless asset, and the ESG portfolio
is a zero-cost position, with5
                                             wg = -1 g ,                                             (18)

and wi = Xi , so that
                                          wi = wm + i wg ,                                           (19)

with i then defined as
                                              i = i /a2 .                                            (20)
   5
    In the special case considered in Section 4, in which  -1 g = 0 and  has a two-factor structure, wg is
proportional to g , so that the ESG portfolio goes long green stocks and short brown stocks.



                                                   10
   Denote the ESG portfolio's greenness as

                                         gg = w g g .                                    (21)

From Eqs. (17) and (18), gg is nonzero as long as g = 0. Also, gg is negative if  -1 g < 0,
but it is otherwise positive. From Eqs. (16) through (20), we see that i has the same sign
as the product of gg and i , if the denominator of i in Eq. (16) is positive. From Eq. (14),
this last condition obtains if agent i invests a positive fraction of her wealth in stocks, so
that  Xi > 0.

   Therefore, for an agent with positive wealth in stocks and i > 0, i is positive (negative)
if gg is positive (negative). That is, such an agent in general tilts away from the market
portfolio in the direction of greenness, in that she tilts toward the ESG portfolio when it is
green and away from it when it is brown. In contrast, agents with i < 0 tilt away from the
ESG portfolio when it is green and toward it when it is brown. From Eq. (10), the ESG
portfolio's CAPM alpha is
                                                  d¯
                                         g = - gg ,                                       (22)
                                                  a
whose sign is opposite that of gg . Therefore, for the same agents described above, those with
positive (negative) values of i have ESG-portfolio tilts that produce negative (positive)
alphas for their overall portfolios.

    The ESG tilt is zero (i.e., i = 0) for agents with average ESG concerns, i.e., for whom
     ¯ and thus i = 0. Those agents hold the market portfolio. In contrast, agents who are
di = d
indifferent to ESG, for whom di = 0 and thus i < 0, tilt away from the market portfolio
as explained above. It is suboptimal to say, "I don't care about ESG, so I just hold the
market." In a world with ESG concerns, agents indifferent to ESG should tilt away from
the market portfolio; otherwise they are not optimizing. The market portfolio is optimal for
agents with average concerns about ESG but not for those indifferent to ESG.

   If all agents have identical ESG concerns, so that i = 0 for all i, then Eqs. (16) and (20)
imply a zero ESG tilt for each agent. We thus have the following corollary.
Corollary 4. If there is no dispersion in ESG tastes across agents, then all agents hold the
market portfolio.

For example, all agents hold the market portfolio when none of them have ESG concerns, as
in the familiar CAPM. All agents also hold the market, however, when they have strong but
equal ESG tastes. The reason is that stock prices then fully adjust to reflect those tastes,
again making the market everybody's optimal choice. Dispersion in ESG tastes is necessary
for an ESG investment industry to exist.

                                             11
2.3. Two-factor pricing with the ESG portfolio

                                              ~g = wg r
    The excess return on the ESG portfolio is r       ~. From Eqs. (8) and (17) and
          2
m = (1/m    )wm , the ESG portfolio's market beta is zero (i.e., wg m = 0). Premultiplying
both sides of Eq. (9) by wg gives the expected excess return on the ESG portfolio as
                                                 ¯
                                                 d
                                           µg = - gg ,                                      (23)
                                                 a
the same as its alpha in Eq. (22). The variance of the ESG portfolio's return is
                                            2
                                    1                       1
                           2
                           g   =                g -1 g =         gg ,                       (24)
                                    -1 g                    -1 g
and the covariance of its return with the N assets is
                                                        1
                                   Cov(~
                                       r, r
                                          ~g ) =             g.                             (25)
                                                        -1 g
                                                               2
Define the vector of simple betas with respect to r
                                                  ~g as g = (1/g )Cov(~
                                                                      r, r
                                                                         ~g ). From Eqs.
(24) and (25),
                                                   1
                                           g =        g.                                    (26)
                                                   gg
By combining Eqs. (9), (23), and (26), we relate expected returns to betas on the market
and the ESG portfolio:

Proposition 4. Expected excess returns in equilibrium are given by

                                       µ = µm m + µg g .                                    (27)


   As noted earlier, the ESG portfolio is zero-beta, so that Cov(~
                                                                 rg , r
                                                                      ~m ) = 0. Thus m and
g are also the slope coefficients in the multivariate regression of r
                                                                    ~ on r
                                                                         ~m and r
                                                                                ~g . Therefore,
using Eq. (27), we have a two-factor asset pricing model:

Proposition 5. Excess returns obey the regression model

                                      r
                                      ~ = m r
                                            ~m + g r
                                                   ~g + ~,                                  (28)

            |r
in which E(~ ~m , r
                  ~g , m , g ) = 0 and all assets have zero two-factor alphas, equivalent to zero
intercepts in the above regression.


   From Eqs. (9), (10) and (27), the vector of CAPM alphas is given by

                                         = g µg                                             (29)
                                              ¯ )g .
                                         = -(d/a                                            (30)

                                                  12
Eqs. (29) and (30) allow alternative interpretations of . On one hand, Eq. (29) offers a
risk-based interpretation: The elements of g represent exposures to the risky return r
                                                                                     ~g , and
µg is the expected return accompanying a unit of that risk. In other words, one can attribute
assets' non-zero CAPM alphas to that omitted priced risk factor. On the other hand, the
only reason that investors expose themselves to the risk in r
                                                            ~g is that they have non-average
tastes for green and brown holdings. While the popular risk-based interpretation of factor
pricing models is mechanically valid, we see here an example of how that interpretation can
miss the underlying economics. The latter are evident in Eq. (30), which reveals that the
sources of  are tastes for known characteristics, g , not aversion to an additional fundamental
risk. In Section 5, however, we extend our model to include an example of such risk, climate
shocks, and we discuss how g can also reflect exposures to that risk.


3. The ESG factor

    We next introduce an empirically identifiable ESG factor, closely related to the ESG
portfolio, that maintains two-factor pricing. After discussing approaches for constructing
the ESG factor, we analyze its underlying economic sources of risk. The latter analysis
provides insights into ex post versus ex ante performance of green stocks relative to brown.

3.1. Constructing the ESG factor

    We define the ESG factor as
                                       ~
                                       f g = (1/gg ) r
                                                     ~g ,                                 (31)
                          ~
so that the traded factor f g is simply the excess return on a position in the ESG portfolio,

either long or short, levered or de-levered, depending on the sign and value of gg . Using Eq.
(26), we can then rewrite the two-factor model in Eq. (28) as

                                    r
                                    ~ = m r      ~
                                          ~m + g f g +~.                                  (32)

Assets' loadings on the ESG factor, their ESG betas, are simply their ESG characteristics,
                                          ~
g . A higher-than-expected realization of f g boosts the returns on green stocks and depresses

those on brown ones. From Eqs. (23) and (31), the ESG factor's premium is negative:

                                        ~
                                      E f      ¯
                                          g = -d/a .                                      (33)


   One approach to constructing the ESG factor is to run a cross-sectional regression of
                                      ~e  r
market-adjusted excess stock returns, r   ~ - m r
                                                ~m , on the stocks' ESG characteristics, g ,


                                              13
with no intercept. The slope from that regression is

                                          ^      ~e
                                                gr
                                          f g =     ,                                       (34)
                                                gg
                                                   ^
which from Eq. (32) has mean-zero estimation error f     ~
                                                     g - fg = g ~/g g . As N grows large,
the probability limit of this estimation error is zero as long as the covariance matrix of ~ has
bounded eigenvalues and the cross-sectional second moment of the elements of g is bounded
below by a positive value. The ESG factor is thus essentially just a g -weighted average of
market-adjusted stock returns. To obtain the time series of the ESG factor's realizations in
practice, one can run a series of such cross-sectional regressions, period by period.

                        ^
   A simpler version of f g arises if we add the assumptions of g  = 0 and g m = 0; that

is, if we assume that not only the value-weighted average of gn 's but also their equal- and
beta-weighted averages are zero (recall from Eq. (8) that g wm = 0). In this case, g r      ~e in
Eq. (34) equals g r     ^
                  ~, so f g is just a scaled (by g g ) excess return on a zero-cost portfolio
                                                           ^
whose weights are proportional to g . Simplifying further, f g is proportional to the difference

between returns on green-stock and brown-stock portfolios:

                                     ^
                                     f g  r
                                          ~green - r
                                                   ~brown ,                                 (35)

with the weights in the green (brown) portfolio proportional to the positive (negative) el-
ements of g . A popular approach to constructing traded factors (e.g., Fama and French,
1993) is to have them be excess returns on long-short portfolios whose stock weights sum
to zero. Our model provides a formal justification for such an approach in the context of
ESG investing. However, unlike in Fama and French (1993), stocks in our ESG factor are
weighted by their gn 's rather than by their market capitalizations.

3.2. Sources of ESG factor risk

   In this subsection, we extend our model from Section 2 to identify potential sources of risk
in the ESG factor. The strength of ESG concerns can change over time, both for investors in
firms' shares and for the customers who buy the firms' goods and services. If ESG concerns
strengthen, customers may shift their demands for goods and services to greener providers
(the "customer" channel), and investors may derive more utility from holding the stocks of
greener firms (the "investor" channel). Both channels contribute to the ESG factor's risk in
our framework.

   To model the customer channel, we need to model firm profits. Let u
                                                                     ~n denote the financial
payoff (profit in our one-period setting) that firm n produces at time 1, for each dollar

                                               14
invested in the firm's stock at time 0. We assume a simple two-factor structure for the N × 1
vector of these payoffs of the form

                               ~ - E0 {u
                               u       ~} = z
                                            ~m m + z
                                                   ~g g + ~,                             (36)

where E0 { } denotes expectation as of time 0, the random quantities z
                                                                     ~m , z
                                                                          ~g , and ~ have zero
means and are mutually uncorrelated,  g = 0, and the elements of   ~ have identical variances
                                        m
and are uncorrelated with each other. The shock z
                                                ~m can be viewed as a macro output factor,
with firms' sensitivities to that pervasive shock being proportional to their stocks' market
betas. The shock z  ~g represents the effect on firms' payoffs of unanticipated ESG-related
shifts in customers' demands. These shifts can result not only from changes in consumers'
tastes but also from revisions of government policy. For example, pro-environmental regula-
tions may subsidize green products, leading to more customer demand, or handicap brown
products, leading to less demand. A positive z~g shock increases the payoffs of green firms
but hurts those of brown firms.

                                                                       ¯ shifts unpre-
   To model the investor channel, we assume that the average ESG taste d
dictably from time 0 to time 1. We therefore need to price stocks not only at time 0, as we
                                                                    ¯ occurs. To make this
have done so far, but also at time 1, after the preference shift in d
possible in our simple framework, we split time 1 into two times, 1- and 1+ , that are close
to each other. We calculate prices p1 as of time 1- , by which time ESG tastes have shifted
and all risk associated with u                                         ~ at time 1+ . During
                             ~ has been realized. Stockholders receive u
the instant between times 1- and 1+ , these payoffs are riskless. For economy of notation,
we assume the risk-free rate rf = 0.

   There are two generations of agents, Gen-0 and Gen-1. Gen-0 agents live from time
0 to time 1- ; Gen-1 agents live from time 1- to 1+ . Gen-1 agents have identical tastes
        ¯1 , a condition that gives them finite utility, given the absence of both risk and
of di = d
position constraints during their lifespan. Neither a nor g change across generations. At
time 1- , Gen-0 agents sell stocks to Gen-1 agents at prices p1 , which depend on Gen-1
ESG tastes d¯1 and the financial payoff u
                                        ~. This simple setting maintains single-period payoff
uncertainty while also allowing risk stemming from shifts in ESG tastes to enter via both
channels described earlier.

       Given that the payoff u
                             ~n is known at the time when the price p1,n is computed, p1,n
is equal to u
            ~n discounted at the expected return implied by Eq. (9) with m,n set to zero:
                                          u
                                          ~n         gn ¯
                              p1,n =       gn ¯  u
                                                 ~n + d  1 .                             (37)
                                       1 - a d1      a
The approximation above holds well for typical discount rates, which are not too far from

                                             15
zero.6 Representing it as an equality for all assets gives
                                                       1¯
                                                     ~+ d
                                                p1 = u   1g ,                                                (38)
                                                       a
which is the vector of payoffs to Gen-0 agents. Its expected value at time 0 equals
                                                         1    ¯1 }g .
                                      E0 {p1 } = E0 {u
                                                     ~} + E0 {d                                              (39)
                                                         a
Note that p1 - E0 {p1 } equals the vector of unexpected returns for Gen-0 agents, because u
                                                                                          ~n
is the firm's payoff per dollar invested in its stock at time 0. From Eqs. (36) through (39),
these unexpected returns are given by

                                       ~ - E0 {r
                                       r       ~} = m z      ~e + 
                                                      ~m + g f    ~                                          (40)
                                                               g


with
                              ~e = z    1 ¯        ¯
                             f g   ~g + d  1 - E0 {d1 } .                                                    (41)
                                        a
As shown in the Appendix, when N is large,

                                               ~e  f
                                               f   ~         ~
                                                     g - E0 {fg },                                           (42)
                                                 g

      ~
where f g is the ESG factor defined in Eq. (31).


         Eq. (41) therefore identifies the two sources of risk in the ESG factor discussed earlier: z
                                                                                                    ~g
represents the customer channel while the other term represents the investor channel. While
the customer channel follows closely from the structure assumed in Eq. (36), the investor
                                                                   ¯.
channel emerges from the equilibrium dependence of stock prices on d

     The elements of f~e g in Eq. (40) drive a wedge between expected and realized returns
                       g
for Gen-0 agents. Suppose that ESG concerns strengthen unexpectedly, so that f       ~e > 0. A
                                                                                      g
firm's unexpected return in Eq. (40) is then expected to be positive for green firms (for which
f~e gn > 0) and negative for brown firms (for which f ~e gn < 0), because the expected values
 g                                                               g
of z
   ~m and    ~ are both zero. In other words, if ~n denotes the unexpected return for stock
         ~e > 0, gn > 0} > 0, and E{~n |f
n, E{~n |f                                ~e > 0, gn < 0} < 0. We thus have the following
           g                               g
proposition.

Proposition 6. Green (brown) stocks perform better (worse) than expected if ESG concerns
strengthen unexpectedly via either the customer channel or the investor channel.
     6                            gn ¯                                                   1+1       (1+1 )(1+2 )
                ~n - 1 and 2 
         Let 1  u                  a d1 .   The approximation in Eq. (37) follows from   1-2   =      1-2
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           2
(1 + 1 )(1 + 2 )  1 + 1 + 2 , where we assume that the second-order terms 2  2 and 1 2 are small enough
to be neglected. This assumption seems plausible because the magnitudes of 1 and 2 are comparable to
discount rates. We rely on this approximation in the remainder of Section 3.


                                                        16
    As noted earlier, green stocks have lower expected returns than brown stocks. A positive
               ~e , however, boosts the realized performance of green stocks while hurting
realization of f
               g
that of brown stocks. If one computes average returns over a sample period when ESG
                                                                         ~e over that period
concerns strengthen more than investors expected, so that the average of f g
is strongly positive, then green stocks outperform brown stocks, contrary to what is expected.
Furthermore, if ESG concerns strengthen via the investor channel, making d increase, then
green stocks' alphas are more negative at the end of the period than the beginning (see
Corollary 2). In this case, past outperformance of green stocks makes it especially likely
they will underperform in the future.

   To empirically distinguish alphas from unexpected shocks, one could use proxies for shifts
in ESG tastes. Proxies for shifts in investors' tastes could come from investor surveys or
from the flows in and out of ESG-tilted funds. Proxies for shifts in customers' ESG tastes
could come from consumer surveys or from data on firm revenues or profitability. With such
proxies, one could test whether green stocks outperform brown ones when either type of ESG
tastes strengthens unexpectedly. In addition, one could attempt to separate the effects of
investors' and customers' tastes, because only shifts in investors' tastes make green stocks'
future alphas more negative after green stocks outperform.


4. Quantitative implications

    To explore the model's quantitative implications, we consider a special case with two
types of agents: ESG investors, for whom di = d > 0, and non-ESG investors, for whom
di = 0. ESG investors thus enjoy nonpecuniary benefits dg , whereas non-ESG investors
receive no benefits (see Eq. (3)). Let  denote the fraction of total wealth belonging to ESG
investors, so that 1 -  is the corresponding fraction for non-ESG investors.

   We further simplify the two-factor setting in Eq. (32) by assuming that  in Eq. (32) has
a scalar covariance matrix,  2 IN , where IN is the identify matrix. The covariance matrix of
r
~ is therefore of the form
                                  2       2
                                = m m m + f gg +  2 IN .                                 (43)

   Recall that wm g = 0, which here implies  g = 0. We assume that m g = 0, so that ESG
characteristics are orthogonal to market betas. We also assume equal market weights across
stocks, wm = (1/N ). Without loss of generality, we set (g g )/N = 1. In all calculations, we
take limits as the number of stocks, N , grows large.




                                             17
4.1. Parameter values

In this simple setting there are only four parameters whose numerical values are relevant to
the initial set of results we present: , a, m , and  (defined below). We vary  over its
entire [0, 1] range. We set m = 0.20, roughly the historical standard deviation of the market
                                                                  2
portfolio's excess return. Following Eq. (7), we then set a = µm /m with µm = 0.08, roughly
the market's historical mean excess return.7

   Rather than calibrating d, we translate it to a more easily interpreted quantity, . We
define  as the maximum rate of return that an ESG investor is willing to sacrifice, for
certain, to invest in her desired portfolio rather than in the market portfolio. The sacrifice
is greatest when there are no other ESG investors, i.e., when   0, because that is when
the ESG investor's portfolio most differs from the market portfolio. Specifically, we define
                     
  resg - rm , where resg is the ESG investor's certainty equivalent excess return when
                                         
investing in her optimal portfolio, and rm is the same investor's corresponding certainty
equivalent if forced to hold the market portfolio instead. Both certainty equivalents are
computed for  = 0. In this setting,

                                                    d2 gg
                                              =           ,                                          (45)
                                                    2a3
                                                                   
as shown in the Appendix, along with the expressions for resg and rm . Note that  is larger
under stronger ESG tastes (larger d), lower risk aversion (smaller a), and a greener ESG
portfolio (larger gg ). We consider four values of : 1%, 2%, 3%, and 4% per year.

4.2. ESG versus non-ESG expected portfolio returns

    The difference in expected excess returns on the portfolios of the two investor types is

                                    E{r
                                      ~esg } - E{r
                                                 ~non } = -2 ,                                       (46)

as shown in the Appendix. Fig. 1 plots this difference as  goes from zero to one. The
difference is zero at  = 0, but it declines linearly as  increases. At  = 1, ESG tastes are
fully reflected in prices, and the difference reaches its largest magnitude. In that scenario,
the difference is -2% when  = 0.01, but it is -8% when  = 0.04. ESG investors thus
   7             2
     Identifying m in Eq. (43) as the market variance is justified for large N . If we instead denote that
variance as simply  2 , note that the implied variance of the market, wm wm , is

                         2       1    2        2       2        2   2
                         m =            m m + f
                                                 gg +    IN  =    +   ,                              (44)
                                 N2                                 N
noting wm m = (1/N ) m = 1 and recalling  g = 0, so we simply set  2 = m
                                                                       2
                                                                         , the limit as N grows large.


                                                   18
earn significantly lower returns than non-ESG investors when the former account for a larger
fraction of wealth (larger ) and when they have stronger ESG demands (larger ). In both [Fig. 1]
scenarios, ESG tastes exert large effects on asset prices, hurting ESG investors' returns.

                                                                                  
   The certainty equivalent returns of the two types, resg for ESG investors and rnon for non-
                                                                          
ESG investors, are both increasing in , but resg decreases with  whereas rnon increases
with , as we show in the Appendix. As  increases, stock prices are affected more by ESG
investors' tastes, so these investors must pay more for the green stocks they desire. The
                   
resulting drop in resg need not imply, however, that an ESG investor is made less happy
by an increased presence of ESG investors. With the latter, there is also greater social
impact of ESG investing, as we discuss in Section 6. The additional utility that the ESG
investor derives from the greater social impact, as in Eq. (68), can exceed the drop in utility
                            
corresponding to the lower resg . Non-ESG investors, on the other hand, do prefer to be lonely
in their ESG tastes. A non-ESG investor is happiest when all other investors are ESG ( = 1),
because that scenario maximizes deviations of prices from pecuniary fundamentals, which
the non-ESG investor exploits to her advantage. This investor's preference for loneliness in
ESG tastes is even stronger if she derives utility from social impact, because that impact is
maximized when  = 1.

4.3. Correlation between the ESG return and the market return

   The correlation between the return on an ESG investor's portfolio and the return on the
market portfolio is derived in the Appendix:
                                                     m
                              (~
                               resg , r
                                      ~m ) =                        .                     (47)
                                               2 +   2
                                               m      a
                                                        (1   - )2

Fig. 2 plots the value of  (~
                            resg , r
                                   ~m ) as  goes from zero to one. The correlation takes its
lowest value at  = 0. For  = 0.01, that value is nearly 0.9, whereas for  = 0.04, it is
just over 0.7. As  increases, indicating that ESG investors feel increasingly strongly about
ESG, those investors' portfolios become increasingly different from the market portfolio in
terms of  (~
           resg , r
                  ~m ), and this effect is strongest when  = 0. However, as  approaches
one, so does  (~
               resg , r
                      ~m ). When ESG investors hold an increasingly large fraction of wealth,
market prices adjust to their preferences, and all portfolios converge to the market portfolio. [Fig. 2]

4.4. Alphas and the investor surplus

    The alphas of the ESG and non-ESG investors' portfolios are derived in the Appendix:

                                   esg = -2(1 - )                                         (48)

                                               19
                                   non = 22  .                                           (49)


   Panel A of Fig. 3 plots esg as  goes from zero to one. ESG investors earn zero alpha
at both extremes of . Their portfolio differs most from the market portfolio when  = 0,
but all stocks have zero alphas in that scenario, because there is no impact of ESG investors
on prices. At the other extreme, when  = 1, many stocks have non-zero alphas, due to the
price impacts of ESG investors, but ESG investors hold the market, so again they earn zero
alpha. Otherwise, ESG investors earn negative alpha, which is greatest in magnitude when
 = 0.5. At that peak, esg = -0.5% when  = 0.01, but esg = -2% when  = 0.04.                      [Fig. 3]

   Interestingly, these worst-case alphas are substantially smaller in magnitude than the
corresponding 's. For example, when ESG investors are willing to give up 2% certain
return to hold their portfolio rather than the market (i.e.,  = 0.02), their worst-case alpha
is only -1%. The reason is that equilibrium stock prices adjust to ESG demands. These
demands push the market portfolio toward the portfolio desired by ESG investors, thereby
bringing those investors' negative alphas closer to zero. Through this adjustment of market
prices, ESG investors earn an "investor surplus" in that they do not have to give up as much
return as they are willing to in order to hold their desired portfolio.

   The magnitude of this investor surplus is easy to read off Panel B of Fig. 3, which plots
esg as a function of . For any given value of , investor surplus is the difference between
the corresponding solid line and the dashed line, which has a slope of -1. The surplus
increases with  because the stronger the ESG investors feel about greenness, the more they
move market prices. The relation between the surplus and  is richer. Formally, investor
surplus I  esg +  follows quickly from Eq. (48):

                                  I = [1 - 2(1 - )] .                                    (50)

Because 0    1, the value in brackets is always between 0.5 and 1, so I is always between
/2 and . It reaches its smallest value of /2 when  = 0.5 and its largest value of 
when  = 0 or 1. For example, when  = 0.02, I ranges from 1% to 2% depending on .

   Fig. 4 plots non as a function of  and . Like ESG investors, non-ESG investors earn
zero alpha when  = 0 or  = 0. However, non increases in both  or . This alpha can
be as large as 8% when  = 1 and  = 0.04. A non-ESG investor earns the highest alpha
when all other investors are ESG (i.e.,  = 1) and when those investors' ESG tastes are
strong (i.e.,  is large) because the price impact of ESG tastes is then particularly large. By
overweighting brown stocks, whose alphas are positive and large, and underweighting green
stocks, whose alphas are negative and large, the non-ESG investor earns a large positive [Fig. 4]

                                             20
alpha.

   Given our assumptions, the differences between the alphas plotted in Figures 3 and 4 are
equal to the differences in expected returns plotted in Fig. 1. Specifically, from Eqs. (46)
through (49), esg - non = E{r
                            ~esg } - E{r
                                       ~non }.

4.5. Size of the ESG investment industry

    We define the size of the ESG investment industry by the aggregate amount of ESG-
driven investment that deviates from the market portfolio, divided by the stock market's
total value. In general, this aggregate ESG tilt is given by

                                    T =               i Ti di ,                         (51)
                                            i:di >0

where
                                            1
                                   Ti =        |wi - wm | .                             (52)
                                            2
The aggregate ESG tilt, T , is a wealth-weighted average of agent-specific tilts, Ti , across
all agents who care at least to some extent about ESG (i.e., di > 0). Each Ti is one half
of the sum of the absolute values of the N elements of agent i's ESG tilt, |wi - wm |. We
compute absolute values of portfolio tilts because ESG-motivated investors both over- and
under-weight stocks relative to the market. We divide by two because we do not want to
double-count: for each dollar that an agent moves into a green stock, she must move a dollar
out of another stock.

   With two types of agents, the expression for T simplifies to

                                      1         
                               T =      (1 - )   2
                                                    |g | ,                              (53)
                                      N        2af

as we show in the Appendix. The aggregate tilt depends on the absolute values of the
elements of g . To evaluate  |g | in this quantitative exercise, we further assume that the
elements of g are normally distributed across stocks, in addition to the previous assumptions
that these elements have zero mean and unit variance (recall  g = 0 and (g g )/N = 1). Then
 |g | = N E(|gn |) = N 2/ . Therefore,

                                                        
                                   T = (1 - )            2
                                                           .                            (54)
                                                       af

                                                                                   2
   For this analysis we now need to specify the value of one additional parameter, f , the
standard deviation of the ESG factor. We set f = (0.2)m , but the effect of this parameter

                                             21
is easily gauged from Eq. (54). The more volatile is the ESG factor, the more reluctant both
ESG and non-ESG investors are to tilt away from the market and thereby expose themselves
to the ESG factor's risk. Higher risk aversion (greater a) also makes them more reluctant to
do so, but they tilt more when ESG investors have stronger tastes (greater ).

   Fig. 5 plots T for different values of  and . In Panel A,  goes from zero to one. At
both  = 0 and  = 1, we have T = 0 because all investors hold the market portfolio. Again,
we see that dispersion in ESG tastes is needed for an ESG investment industry to exist. The
maximum value of T in Eq. (54) always occurs at  = 0.5, the maximum of (1 - ). In
Panel B,  goes from 0 to 0.04. Larger values of  produce larger values of T . This relation
between  and T is concave (see also Eq. (54)). For example, the ESG industry peaks at
35% of the stock market's value when  = 0.02, but doubling the strength of ESG tastes
(raising  to 0.04) increases that maximum industry size by less than half, to 50% of the
market's value. We see that the price impact of ESG tastes weakens their impact on the size [Fig. 5]
of the ESG investment industry.


5. Climate risk

       Sustainable investing is motivated in part by concerns about climate change. Many
experts expect climate change to impair quality of life, lowering utility of the typical individ-
ual beyond what is captured by climate's effect on wealth. Unanticipated climate changes
present investors with an additional source of risk, which is non-traded and only partially
insurable.8 This section extends our model from Section 2 to include climate risk.

   Let C~ denote climate at time 1, which is unknown at time 0. We modify the utility
                                                ~ as follows:
function for individual i in Eq. (2) to include C

                                    ~ 1i , Xi , C           ~ 1i -b Xi -ci C
                                                ~ ) = -e-Ai W              ~
                                 V (W                              i         .                            (55)

    ¯
Let c      i ci di, the wealth-weighted mean of climate sensitivity across agents. We assume
           i
c                                                 ~ , on average. We also assume C
¯ > 0, so that agents dislike low realizations of C                                ~ is normally
distributed, and without loss of generality we set E{C     ~ } = 0 and Var{C  ~ } = 1. Besides
replacing Eq. (2) by Eq. (55), we maintain all other assumptions from Section 2.

   In principle, "climate" can be interpreted broadly, for example, as "social climate." How-
ever, for shocks to climate to affect asset prices, these shocks must enter the average agent's
   8
     In that sense, climate risk is related to "background risk" analyzed in prior work. Research into the risk
associated with non-marketable assets originates with Mayers (1972). Examples of non-traded systematic
risk factors include human capital (Fama and Schwert, 1977), liquidity (P´   astor and Stambaugh, 2003), and
innovation-induced displacement (Garleanu, Kogan, and Panageas, 2012).

                                                      22
utility, in that c
                 ¯ > 0. This assumption is nontrivial because individuals' views on various
social issues, such as guns and abortion, are quite heterogeneous in practice. We emphasize
the narrow interpretation of climate ("E" in ESG), for which the assumption is likely to
hold. Indeed, the correlations in ESG ratings across rating agencies are higher for the "E"
ratings than for the "S" and "G" ratings (e.g., Berg, Koelbel, and Rigobon, 2019).

5.1. Expected returns and portfolio holdings

    Climate risk affects equilibrium stock returns, as shown in the Appendix.

Proposition 7. Expected excess returns in equilibrium are given by
                                        d¯
                                             ¯ 1 - 2
                              µ = µm m - g + c     mC  ,                                 (56)
                                        a
where  is the N × 1 vector of "climate betas" (slope coefficients on C ~ in a multivariate
                               ~ ), and mC is the correlation between ~m and C
regression of ~ on both ~m and C                                             ~.


   Expected returns depend on climate betas,  , which represent firms' exposures to non-
market climate risk. To understand the regression defining  , recall that ~ is an N × 1 vector
of unexpected stock returns from Eq. (1) and ~m is the unexpected market return. A firm's
                               ~ after controlling for the market return. Climate betas, n ,
climate beta is its loading on C
are likely to be related to ESG characteristics, gn , as we argue in Section 5.2 .

   Compared to Eq. (9), expected excess returns contain an additional component given
by the last term on the right-hand side of Eq. (56). Stock n's climate beta, n , enters
expected return positively. Thus, a stock with a negative n , which provides investors with
a climate-risk hedge, has a lower expected return than it would in the absence of climate
risk. Vice versa, a stock with a positive n , which performs particularly poorly when the
climate worsens unexpectedly, has a higher expected return.

Proposition 8. Agent i's equilibrium portfolio weights on the N stocks are given by
                                        i          i
                           Xi = w m +     2
                                            -1 g -   -1  C          ,                    (57)
                                        a          a
where i  ci - c                                                         ~.
              ¯ and  C is an N × 1 vector of covariances between ~n and C


   Eq. (57), which we prove in the Appendix, implies four-fund separation. The first three
funds are the same as in Proposition 3; the fourth one is a climate-hedging portfolio whose
weights are proportional to -1  C . Agents with i > 0, whose climate sensitivity is above
average, short the hedging portfolio, whereas agents with i < 0 go long.

                                               23
                                                                               ~ . To see this,
   The climate-hedging portfolio, -1  C , is a natural mimicking portfolio for C
note that the N elements of -1  C are the slope coefficients from the multiple regression
   ~ on ~. Therefore, the return on the hedging portfolio has the highest correlation with C
of C                                                                                       ~
among all portfolios of the N stocks. Investors in our model hold this maximum-correlation
portfolio, to various degrees determined by their i , to hedge climate risk. The climate-
hedging portfolio can tilt toward either green stocks or brown stocks, depending on how
returns on each type relate to climate shocks. The latter issue is addressed next.

5.2. Green stocks as climate hedges

    Ultimately the issue of whether green stocks or brown stocks are better climate hedges
is an empirical question, because sensible economic arguments can be made either way.
The argument that green stocks should hedge climate risk can be motivated through both
channels described in Section 3.

   First, consider the customer channel. Unexpected worsening of the climate can heighten
consumers' climate concerns, prompting greater demands for goods and services of greener
providers. These demands can arise not only from consumers' preferences but also from gov-
ernment regulation. Negative climate shocks can prompt government regulations that favor
green providers or penalize brown ones. For example, the new regulations could subsidize
green products and tax, or even prohibit, brown ones. Half of the institutional investors sur-
veyed by Krueger, Sautner, and Starks (2019) state that climate risks related to regulation
have already started to materialize.

   Second, consider the investor channel. Unexpected worsening of the climate can strengthen
                                                         ¯), possibly as a result of stronger pub-
investors' preference for green holdings (i.e., increase d
lic pressure on institutional investors to divest from brown assets. For example, Choi, Gao,
and Jiang (2019) show that retail investors sell carbon-intensive firms in extremely warm
months, consistent with d ¯ rising in such months.

   Climate shocks are thus likely to correlate negatively with both components of the ESG
factor in Eq. (41). Green stocks, which have positive exposures to this factor, are likely to
have negative exposures to C~ . These arguments imply a negative correlation between gn and
n across firms.

   One can also argue that the better hedges of climate risk are brown stocks, not green.
Baker, Hollifield, and Osambela (2020) assume negative climate shocks result from positive
shocks to the output of brown firms. The latter shocks translate to positive unexpected
returns on those firms' stocks, thereby making brown stocks climate hedges. As noted

                                               24
earlier, whether brown stocks or green stocks better hedge climate risk ultimately rests on
empirical evidence.

   The evidence suggests the better climate hedges are green stocks. For example, Choi,
Gao, and Jiang (2019) show that green firms, as measured by low carbon emissions, outper-
form brown firms during months with abnormally warm weather, which the authors argue
alerts investors to climate change. Engle et al. (2020) report that green firms, as measured
by high E-Scores from Sustainalytics, outperform brown firms in periods with negative cli-
mate news. Both studies thus show that a high-minus-low gn stock portfolio is a good hedge
against climate risk, indicating that gn is negatively correlated with n across firms.

   In the special case where this negative correlation is perfect, so that

                                        n = -gn ,                                        (58)

where  > 0 is a constant, Eq. (56) simplifies to
                                           ¯
                                           d
                            µ = µm m -        ¯ 1 - 2
                                             +c     mC  g .                              (59)
                                           a
Stock n's CAPM alpha is then given by
                                    d¯
                           n = -        ¯ 1 - 2
                                       +c     mC  gn .                                   (60)
                                    a
Both terms inside the brackets are positive, so the negative relation between n and gn is
stronger than in Corollary 2. Greener stocks now have lower CAPM alphas not only because
of investors' tastes for green holdings, but also because of greener stocks' ability to better
hedge climate risk. Climate risk thus represents another reason to expect green stocks to
underperform brown ones over the long run. For the same reason, green stocks have a lower
cost of capital than brown stocks relative to the CAPM.

   In this special case, two-factor pricing from Section 3 continues to hold. Each stock has
a zero alpha in the two-factor model in Eq. (32). The ESG factor is still defined as in Eq.
                                    ¯ (1 - 2
(31), but its premium is reduced by c      mC )  , as compared to Eq. (33). This reduction
reflects compensation for climate risk. The compensation is negative because greener firms
are better hedges against this risk. The ESG factor's premium thus has one taste-based
              ¯ , and one risk-based component, -c
component, -d/a                                   ¯ (1 - 2 )  .
                                                             mC



6. Social impact

    Does sustainable investing produce real social impact? This section explores how firms
respond to the asset pricing effects from Section 2. We extend our baseline model from that

                                             25
section to include firms' choices of investment and ESG characteristics.

   We define the social impact of firm n as

                                          Sn  gn Kn ,                                      (61)

where Kn is the firm's operating capital. Social impact captures the firm's total externalities,
which depend on both the nature of the firm's operations (gn ) and their scale (Kn ). We
consider two scenarios. In Section 6.1 , we let the firm's manager choose Kn while taking gn
as given. In Section 6.2 , we allow the manager to choose both Kn and gn . Throughout, the
manager maximizes the firm's market value at time 0.

   The extra assumptions we make here change none of the previous sections' predictions.
Since investors are infinitesimally small, they still take asset prices and firms' ESG charac-
teristics as given, even though firms now choose those characteristics. Firms' choices of Kn
and gn affect their market values, which are consistent with the expected returns derived in
Section 2.

6.1. Green firms invest more, brown firms less

   The firm is initially endowed with operating capital K0,n > 0. The firm's manager chooses
how much additional capital, Kn , to buy, while taking the firm's ESG characteristic, gn , as
given. The firm's capital investment produces a time-zero cash flow of -Kn - 2n (Kn )2 ,
where n > 0 controls capital-adjustment costs. The firm uses capital to produce an expected
gross cash flow at time 1 equal to n Kn , where n is a positive quantity denoting one plus
the firm's gross profitability.

   The optimal amount of additional capital is derived in the Appendix:
                                                                    
                                  1           n
                         Kn (d) =                          - 1 .                           (62)
                                  n 1 + rf + µm m,n - d gn
                                                      a

This value is increasing in gn , indicating that greener firms invest more, ceteris paribus.

   For any firm n, agents' ESG tastes induce social impact equal to the difference between
the firm's actual social impact and its hypothetical impact if agents did not care about ESG:

                           Sn (d) - Sn (0) = gn Kn (d) - Kn (0) .                          (63)

We prove the following proposition in the Appendix.



                                              26
Proposition 9. Firm n's ESG-induced social impact is positive:
                                                       2
                                                    d gn n
         Sn (d) - Sn (0) =                        d
                                                                                 > 0,       (64)
                             an 1 + rf + µm m,n - a gn (1 + rf + µm m,n )

           ¯ > 0 and gn = 0. Moreover, this impact is increasing in d, decreasing in a,
as long as d
increasing in n , decreasing in n , and decreasing in m,n .


   The intuition behind this result builds on Eq. (62), which shows that ESG tastes lead
green firms to invest more and brown firms to invest less. That result relates to Corollary
1, which states that ESG tastes reduce green firms' expected returns and hence their costs
of capital. Green firms' lower costs of capital increase their projects' NPVs, so green firms
invest more. And vice versa, ESG tastes increase brown firms' costs of capital, reducing
their investment. As a result, ESG tastes tilt investment from brown to green firms, which
increases social impact for both types of firms.

    The comparative statics are also intuitive. Social impact is larger when ESG tastes are
                     ¯ is larger) because stronger tastes move asset prices more. The impact
stronger (i.e., when d
is also larger when risk aversion is weaker (i.e., a is smaller) because less risk-averse agents
tilt their portfolios more to accommodate their tastes, again resulting in larger price effects
(see Propositions 1 and 3). The impact is larger when capital is less costly to adjust (i.e.,
when n is smaller) because more investment reallocation takes place. The impact is also
larger when firms are more productive (i.e., when n is larger) because a given change in
the cost of capital has a larger effect on investment. Finally, the impact is larger for firms
with smaller market betas because such firms have a lower cost of capital to begin with, so
the ESG-induced change in their cost of capital is relatively larger.

   In our model, investors' ESG tastes tilt real investment from brown to green firms because
those tastes generate alphas, which affect the cost of capital, which in turn affects investment.
There is considerable empirical support for this mechanism. Baker and Wurgler (2012) survey
studies that find a negative relation between corporate investment and alpha. Most of these
studies interpret alpha as mispricing, whereas our study's ESG-induced alphas do not reflect
mispricing. We expect ESG-induced alphas to have an especially strong effect on investment.
Whereas mispricing is transient, firms' ESG traits are highly persistent, which makes ESG-
induced alphas highly persistent. Van Binsbergen and Opp (2019) show that when alphas
are more persistent, they have stronger effects on investment.




                                               27
6.2. Firms become greener

    We now extend the framework from Section 6.1 by allowing firm n's manager to choose
not only Kn but also gn . The firm is initially endowed with an ESG characteristic g0,n .
The manager chooses both Kn and gn , the change in the firm's ESG characteristic. For
example, a coal power producer can increase its gn by installing scrubbers. Adjusting gn is
                                                                 n
costly: it reduces the firm's time-one cash flow by a fraction   2
                                                                   (gn )2 ,   where n > 0 controls
ESG-adjustment costs.

   We prove the following proposition in the Appendix.

Proposition 10. Firm n's value-maximizing choices of ESG adjustment and investment are
                                     d
                     gn d                                                                     (65)
                                    an
                                                    n
                                                                          
                                    1      n 1 -    2
                                                      (gn (d))2
                    Kn d        =                                - 1 ,                        (66)
                                    n 1 + rf + µm m,n - d gn (d)
                                                        a

where gn (d) = g0,n + gn (d), and the approximation uses log(1 + x)  x for small x.


   Both choices are intuitive given the results from Section 2. When d > 0, expected returns
decrease in gn (Corollary 1), so firms' market values increase in gn . Managers who wish to
maximize market value therefore make their firms greener (i.e, gn > 0). This effect is
especially strong when risk aversion a is low because ESG characteristics then have large
effects on market values. Firms also adjust gn by more when doing so is less costly.

   As in Section 6.1 , ESG tastes lead green firms to invest more and brown firms to invest
less. The denominator in Eq. (66) shows that ESG tastes reduce the costs of capital for
green firms, which increases their projects' NPV and hence investment. And vice versa, ESG
tastes increase brown firms' costs of capital, reducing their projects' NPV and investment.
In addition, ESG tastes affect expected cash flows in the numerator of Eq. (66). Stronger
ESG tastes induce all firms, green and brown, to adjust their gn by more, which reduces
their expected cash flows, and hence also their investment.

   Agents' ESG tastes now increase social impact not only by tilting investment from brown
to green firms, as before, but also by making firms greener:

                Sn (d) - Sn (0) = gn,0 Kn (d) - Kn (0) + Kn (d) gn (d) .                      (67)

The first term reflects the investment effect analogous to Eq. (63). As discussed previously,
when firms cannot change their gn 's, Kn (d) - Kn (0) is positive for green firms and

                                               28
negative for brown firms, making this term positive for both types of firms. When firms
can change their gn 's, the first term in Eq. (67) is still generally positive. The second term
reflects firms' capital becoming greener. This term is also positive since gn (d) > 0, as
implied by Eq. (65).

    Fig. 6 plots the ESG-induced social impact across firms with different initial ESG charac-
teristics. We see that all firms have positive social impact. The two colored regions indicate
the two sources of social impact from Eq. (67). The second source, from firms becoming
greener, is roughly equal across firms (top green region). The first source, from tilting in-
vestment toward green firms, is zero for an ESG-neutral firm, but it is large for very green
or very brown firms, which experience the largest shifts in investment (bottom blue region).
Due to this non-monotonicity, the overall social impact induced by ESG-motivated investors
is largest for firms with extreme ESG characteristics, but it is strictly positive even for
ESG-neutral firms.                                                                                    [Fig. 6]

   The aggregate social impact induced by ESG investors, denoted S (d) - S (0), is the sum
of Sn (d) - Sn (0) across firms n. This sum can be computed off the curve in Fig. 6. Since
this curve is convex in g0,n , S (d) - S (0) is greater when there is more dispersion in ESG
characteristics across firms. A larger dispersion in g0,n deepens the cost-of-capital differentials
between green and brown firms, leading to larger investment differentials. With green firms
investing more and brown firms investing less, aggregate social impact increases.

   Fig. 7 illustrates how aggregate social impact varies with the strength of ESG preferences.
We assume firms differ only in their initial ESG characteristics gn,0 , which are uniformly
distributed with mean zero. The figure shows that S (d) - S (0) increases as ESG preferences
strengthen, which is intuitive. We also see that both sources of social impact from Eq. (67)
grow larger as ESG preferences strengthen. These results hold whether ESG preferences
strengthen because there are more ESG investors (Panel A), or because the ESG investors
have stronger ESG tastes (Panel B).                                                                   [Fig. 7]

   We have made the standard assumption that managers maximize the firm's market value.
This assumption makes sense if, for example, managers wish to maximize the value of their
stock-based compensation. Alternatively, a manager could maximize shareholder welfare,
which depends not just on market value but also on the firm's ESG characteristics (e.g., Hart
and Zingales, 2017). Such behavior could result from shareholders engaging actively with the
firm, so that managers run the firm as shareholders desire (e.g., Dyck et al., 2019), or from
shareholders appointing managers whose preferences match their own. Our model arguably
provides a lower bound on social impact. Extending the model so that managers additionally


                                                29
care about their firms' ESG characteristics should produce gn values (and hence social
impact) even larger than we currently predict. Put differently, we show that ESG-motivated
investors generate social impact even without direct engagement by shareholders, and even
if managers do not care directly about firms' ESG characteristics. Even a "selfish" manager
who cares only about market value behaves in a way that increases social impact.

6.3. Preferences for aggregate social impact

       As noted in Section 2, agents derive utility not only from their holdings, Xi , but also from
                                               N
firms' aggregate social impact, S =            n=1   Sn . We assume each agent i's utility is increasing
in S :
                                    ~ 1i , Xi , S ) = V (W
                                 U (W                    ~ 1i , Xi ) + hi (S ) ,                           (68)

where hi (S ) > 0 and V is the original utility function from Eq. (2). (The additive specifica-
tion is not needed; our results are identical if S enters utility multiplicatively.)

Proposition 11. If agents derive utility also from aggregate social impact (Eq. (68)), all of
our results in Propositions 1 through 10 and Corollaries 1 through 4 continue to hold.


       The inclusion of S in the utility function does not affect any of our prior results. The
reason is that infinitesimally small agents take stock prices, and hence S , as given when
choosing their portfolios. When an agent tilts toward green stocks, she generates a positive
externality on other agents via the hi (S ) term in their utility.9 Being infinitesimal, though,
she does not internalize any of this effect. As the preference for S does not affect portfolio
choice, it does not affect equilibrium asset prices, real investment, or S . In the model of
Oehmke and Opp (2020), agents' preference for social impact does lead to impact because
agents are assumed to coordinate. In our model, agents cannot coordinate. Social impact is
caused by the inclusion of Xi , not S , in the utility function in Eq. (68).

       To provide more intuition for the roles of Xi and S in the utility function, consider why
people vote in elections. Many individuals vote because they derive utility directly from
doing so, analogous to investors deriving utility from their holdings (Xi ) in our setting. This
utility from voting can have various sources; for example, some people enjoy participating
in a democracy, others feel a warm glow from voting for their favorite candidate, and some
might like to tell friends they have exercised their patriotic duty. Each individual's utility
may also depend on the election outcome (S ), but that by itself is not why an individual
   9
    In the presence of externalities, the competitive market solution generally differs from the social planner's
solution. For an example of a social planner's solution in a different setting, with interesting implications
for ESG mandates, see Hong, Wang, and Yang (2020).


                                                       30
votes. If there are a large number of voters, the individual sees her vote as having no effect on
that component of her utility. Just as utility from voting produces an aggregate social good
(a healthy democracy), investors' utility from their portfolio holdings generates aggregate
social impact.

  More research is clearly needed on the real effects of sustainable investing. For example,
what is the relative importance of the investment channel (Kn ) and the "become-greener"
channel (gn )? What if agents care about both social impact and climate, and the effect
of the former on the latter is uncertain? How would social impact change if we combined
the asset pricing effects we examine with direct engagement by large shareholders? We leave
these questions for future work.


7. Conclusion

    We analyze both financial and real effects of sustainable investing in a highly tractable
equilibrium model. The model produces a number of empirical implications regarding asset
prices, portfolio holdings, the size of the ESG investment industry, climate risk, and the
social impact of sustainable investing. We review those implications below.

   First, ESG preferences move asset prices. Stocks of greener firms have lower ex ante
CAPM alphas, especially when risk aversion is low and the average ESG preference is strong.
Green stocks have negative alphas, whereas brown stocks have positive alphas. Green stocks'
negative alphas stem from two sources: investors' tastes for green holdings and such stocks'
ability to hedge climate risk. Green and brown stocks have opposite exposures to an ESG
risk factor, which captures unexpected changes in ESG concerns of customers and investors.
If either kind of ESG concerns strengthen unexpectedly over a given period of time, green
stocks can outperform brown stocks over that period, despite having lower alphas. Stocks
are priced by a two-factor asset pricing model, where the factors are the market portfolio
and the ESG factor. A simple version of the ESG factor is a green-minus-brown portfolio
return, where both green and brown portfolios are weighted by ESG characteristics.

   Second, portfolio holdings exhibit three-fund separation. Investors with stronger than
average ESG tastes hold portfolios that have a green tilt away from the market portfolio,
whereas investors with weaker than average ESG tastes take a brown tilt. These tilts are
larger when risk aversion is lower. Investors with stronger ESG tastes earn lower expected
returns, especially when risk aversion is low and the average ESG taste is high. Yet these
investors give up less return than they are willing to in order to hold their desired portfolio.
In the model extension that adds climate risk, we obtain four-fund separation, with the

                                               31
fourth fund representing a climate-hedging portfolio with a green tilt.

   Third, the size of the ESG investment industry--the aggregate dollar amount of ESG-
driven investment that deviates from the market portfolio--is increasing in the dispersion of
investors' ESG preferences. With no dispersion there is no ESG industry, because everyone
holds the market.

   Finally, sustainable investing generates positive social impact, in two ways. First, it leads
firms to become greener. Second, it induces more real investment by green firms and less
investment by brown firms.

   While the model's predictions for alphas have been examined empirically by prior studies,
most of its other predictions remain untested, presenting opportunities for future empirical
work. One challenge is that our model aims to describe the world of the present and the
future, but not necessarily the world of the past. Although the "sin" aspects of investing
have been recognized for decades, the emphasis on ESG criteria is a recent phenomenon.
How the model fits in various time periods is another question for empirical work.




                                              32
                       0



                    -0.01



                    -0.02



                    -0.03
E(r)ESG - E(r)NON




                    -0.04



                    -0.05



                    -0.06


                                      = 0.01
                    -0.07             = 0.02
                                      = 0.03
                                      = 0.04
                    -0.08
                            0   0.1        0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6    0.7     0.8      0.9      1



          Fig. 1. ESG versus non-ESG expected portfolio return. This figure plots the expected excess
          return on the portfolio of ESG investors minus the corresponding value for non-ESG investors.
          Results are plotted against , the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors, and for different
          values of , the maximum certain return an ESG investor would sacrifice to invest in her optimal
          portfolio instead of the market portfolio.




                                                             33
                            1




                          0.95




                           0.9
Correlation(ESG,market)




                          0.85




                           0.8




                          0.75
                                                                                        = 0.01
                                                                                        = 0.02
                                                                                        = 0.03
                                                                                        = 0.04
                           0.7
                                 0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9        1



   Fig. 2. Correlation of ESG investor's portfolio return with the market return. The figure plots
   the correlation between the returns on the ESG investor's portfolio and the market portfolio.
   Results are plotted against , the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors, and for different
   values of , the maximum certain return an ESG investor would sacrifice to invest in her optimal
   portfolio instead of the market portfolio.




                                                             34
                                                            Panel A. The Role of 

                      0


                  -0.002


                  -0.004


                  -0.006


                  -0.008
            ESG




                   -0.01


                  -0.012


                  -0.014


                  -0.016
                                     =   0.01
                                     =   0.02
                  -0.018
                                     =   0.03
                                     =   0.04
                   -0.02
                           0   0.1           0.2          0.3      0.4       0.5    0.6      0.7          0.8      0.9    1




                                                            Panel B. The Role of 

                      0



                  -0.005



                   -0.01



                  -0.015
            ESG




                   -0.02



                  -0.025



                   -0.03


                                     =   0.1 or 0.9
                  -0.035             =   0.2 or 0.8
                                     =   0.3 or 0.7
                                     =   0.5
                   -0.04
                           0    0.005              0.01         0.015        0.02    0.025         0.03         0.035    0.04




Fig. 3. Alphas of ESG investors. This figure plots the alpha for the portfolio held by ESG
investors as a function of , the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors, and , the
maximum certain return an ESG investor would sacrifice to invest in her optimal portfolio
instead of the market portfolio. Panel A plots the ESG alpha as a function of  for four
different values of ; Panel B flips the roles of  and . The dashed line in Panel B has a slope
of -1. The differences between the solid lines and the dashed line represent investor surplus.


                                                                        35
                                                             Panel A. The Role of 

                  0.08
                                   =   0.01
                                   =   0.02
                  0.07             =   0.03
                                   =   0.04



                  0.06



                  0.05
            NON




                  0.04



                  0.03



                  0.02



                  0.01



                    0
                         0   0.1              0.2          0.3      0.4       0.5    0.6      0.7          0.8      0.9    1




                                                             Panel B. The Role of 

                  0.08
                                   =   1
                                   =   0.75
                  0.07             =   0.5
                                   =   0.25



                  0.06



                  0.05
            NON




                  0.04



                  0.03



                  0.02



                  0.01



                    0
                         0    0.005                 0.01         0.015        0.02    0.025         0.03         0.035    0.04




Fig. 4. Alphas of non-ESG investors. This figure plots the alpha for the portfolio held by non-
ESG investors as a function of , the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors, and ,
the maximum certain return an ESG investor would sacrifice to invest in her optimal portfolio
instead of the market portfolio. Panel A plots the ESG alpha as a function of  for four different
values of ; Panel B flips the roles of  and .


                                                                         36
                                                                         Panel A. The Role of 

                                  0.5


                                 0.45


                                  0.4


                                 0.35
            Aggregate ESG tilt
                                  0.3


                                 0.25


                                  0.2


                                 0.15


                                  0.1
                                                                                                =   0.04
                                 0.05                                                           =   0.03
                                                                                                =   0.02
                                                                                                =   0.01
                                   0
                                        0   0.1           0.2          0.3      0.4       0.5              0.6      0.7          0.8      0.9    1




                                                                         Panel B. The Role of 

                                  0.5
                                                  =   0.5
                                                  =   0.3 or 0.7
                                 0.45             =   0.2 or 0.8
                                                  =   0.1 or 0.9

                                  0.4


                                 0.35
            Aggregate ESG tilt




                                  0.3


                                 0.25


                                  0.2


                                 0.15


                                  0.1


                                 0.05


                                   0
                                        0    0.005              0.01         0.015        0.02              0.025         0.03         0.035    0.04



Fig. 5. Size of the ESG industry. The figure plots the aggregate dollar size of ESG investors'
deviations from the market portfolio (the ESG "tilt"), expressed as a fraction of the market's
total capitalization. In Panel A, results are plotted against , the fraction of wealth belonging
to ESG investors, and for different values of , the maximum certain return an ESG investor
would sacrifice to invest in her optimal portfolio instead of the market portfolio. In Panel B,
results are plotted against  and for different values of .

                                                                                     37
Fig. 6. Firm-level social impact. This figure plots Sn (d) - Sn (0), the social impact induced
by ESG-motivated investors, for different firms n. The horizontal axis indicates the firm's
initial ESG characteristic, gn,0 . The two regions indicate the components of Sn (d) - Sn (0)
from Eq. (67). This figure uses the same parameters as the previous figures, with  = 0.5 and
 = 0.02, as well as rf = 0.02, K0,n = 1, n = 1.2, n = 0.5, and n = 1. These parameter
values produce d = 0.0113, gn (d) = 0.0113, Kn (0) = 0.0909, and Kn (d) ranging from
0.0813 to 0.1007.




                                         38
                                                Panel A. The Role of 


                                Firms become greener
                                Green firms invest more, brown less
                   0.035



                    0.03



                   0.025



                    0.02



                   0.015



                    0.01



                   0.005



                      0
                           0   0.1      0.2          0.3      0.4     0.5    0.6      0.7          0.8      0.9    1




                                                Panel B. The Role of 


                                Firms become greener
                                Green firms invest more, brown less
                   0.025




                    0.02




                   0.015




                    0.01




                   0.005




                      0
                           0    0.005         0.01         0.015      0.02    0.025         0.03         0.035    0.04




Fig. 7. Aggregate social impact. The figure plots S (d) - S (0), the aggregate social impact
induced by ESG-motivated     investors.
                                        We assume the firms' initial ESG characteristics g0,n are
uniformly distributed in [- 3, 3]. (These endpoints maintain g0  = 0 and g0 g0 = 1.) The two
colored regions indicate the components of Sn (d) - Sn (0) from Eq. (67), aggregated across firms.
In Panel A, results are plotted against , the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors,
assuming  = 0.02. In Panel B, results are plotted against , the maximum certain return an
ESG investor would sacrifice to invest in her optimal portfolio instead of the market portfolio,
assuming  = 0.5. All remaining parameter values are the same as in Fig. 6.



                                                              39
Appendix. Proofs and Derivations

Derivation of Eq. (4):
                                                                            ~ 1i = W0i (1 + rf +
    To compute agent i's expected utility, we rely on Eq. (2), the relation W
Xi r
   ~), and the fact that r                          ~  N (µ, ):
                         ~ is normally distributed, r
                     ~ 1i , Xi )                            ~
                E V (W                  = E -e-Ai W1i -bi Xi
                                        = E -e-Ai [W0i (1+rf +Xi r
                                                                 ~)]-bi Xi

                                                                               1
                                                                    -ai Xi [~
                                                                            r+ a bi ]
                                        = -e-ai (1+rf ) E e                        i


                                                                               1
                                                                -ai Xi [E (~
                                                                           r)+ a bi ]+ 1 a2 X V ar(~
                                                                                                   r)Xi
                                        = -e-ai (1+rf ) e                      i       2 i i

                                                                           1
                                                                -ai Xi [µ+ a  bi ]+ 1 a2 X Xi
                                        = -e-ai (1+rf ) e                   i       2 i i
                                                                                                                       (A1)

where ai  Ai W0i is agent i's relative risk aversion. Agents take µ and  as given. Differen-
tiating with respect to Xi , we obtain the first-order condition
                                             1        1
                               -ai [µ +         bi ] + a2 (2Xi ) = 0 ,                                                 (A2)
                                             ai       2 i
from which we obtain agent i's portfolio weights
                                                 1 -1    1
                                        Xi =          µ + bi .                                                         (A3)
                                                 ai      ai

Derivation of Eq. (5):

   The nth element of agent i's portfolio weight vector, Xi , is given by
                                                                W0i,n
                                             Xi,n =                                                                    (A4)
                                                                W0i
where W0i,n is the dollar amount invested by agent i in stock n. Let W0,n  i W0i,n di
denote the total amount invested in stock n by all agents. Then the nth element of the
market-weight vector, wm , is given by
                 W0,n   1                         1                                    W0i
      wm,n =          =            W0i,n di =               W0i Xi,n di =                  Xi,n di =          i Xi,n di (A5)
                 W0     W0     i                  W0    i                          i   W0                 i

Note that N  n=1 wm,n = 1 because
                                      N
                                      n=1 W0,n = W0 , which follows from the riskless asset
being in zero net supply. Plugging in for Xi from Eq. (A3) and imposing ai = a, we have

                         x =           i Xi di
                                   i
                                  1 -1      1
                           =           i µ + bi ]di
                              i   a         a
                             1 -1             1
                           =     µ     i di + 2 -1 g                               i di di
                             a       i        a                                i
                             1 -1      ¯
                                       d
                           =     µ + 2 -1 g .                                                                          (A6)
                             a       a

                                                       40
Proof of the statement in footnote 4:

    Let g ~in denote agent i's perceived ESG characteristic of firm n, known by all agents.
Eq. (3) changes to bi = di g          ~i is an agent-specific N × 1 vector containing the values
                           ~i , where g
of g
   ~in . Eq. (5) is unchanged, with g redefined as

                               g = (1/d)         i di g
                                                      ~i di
                                             i
                                  = E [~
                                       gi ] + Cov di /d, g
                                                         ~i ,                              (A7)

where E and Cov denote the wealth-weighted expectation and covariance, respectively,
across agents. The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A7) is an N × 1 vector whose
nth element is the wealth-weighted average of g ~in across agents. The second term is a vector
whose nth element is the wealth-weighted covariance between agents' scaled ESG tastes, di /d,
and perceived ESG characteristics, g~in . It seems plausible to assume that the second term
is a zero vector, but we do not need to make that assumption. Since Eq. (5) is unchanged,
Eqs. (6) through (9) are also unchanged.

Derivation of Eq. (11):

   Agent i's expected excess return is given by E(~ri ) = Xi µ. We take µ from Eq. (9) and
express Xi in terms of wm by subtracting Eq. (5) from Eq. (4). Recalling the assumption
wm g = 0 from Eq. (8), we obtain agent i's expected excess return as

                      E(~
                        ri ) = Xi µ
                                       i                       ¯
                                                               d
                             =    wm +  2
                                          g -1         µm m - g
                                      a                        a
                                       i               µm        ¯
                                                                 d
                             =    wm + 2 g -1           2
                                                           w m -   g
                                      a                m         a
                                   d       i µ m     i d
                             = µm - wm g + 2 2 g wm - 3 g -1 g
                                   a       a m       a
                                   i d¯
                             = µm - 3 g -1 g.                                              (A8)
                                    a

Derivation of Eq. (12):

   Recall that agent i's excess portfolio return is r
                                                    ~i = Xi r        ~  N (µ, ). Therefore,
                                                            ~, where r

           Var(~
               ri ) = X i  X i
                           i               i
                    =     wm +
                             2
                               g -1  wm + 2 -1 g
                           a               a
                                 i              i           2
                    = wm wm + 2 g -1 wm + wm  2 -1 g + i4 g -1 -1 g
                                a               a           a
                                                 2
                                 i     i       
                    = wm wm + 2 g wm + 2 wm g + i4 g -1 g .                                (A9)
                                a     a        a

                                                 41
                         2
Recognizing that wm wm = m and wm g = 0, we have
                                                           2
                                                          i
                                Var(~      2
                                    ri ) = m +               g -1 g ,                         (A10)
                                                          a4
                                          2
which is Eq. (12). We see that Var(~
                                   ri ) > m as long as i = 0.


Derivation of Eq. (13):

   The second exponent in agent i's expected utility in Eq. (A1) contains the terms -aXi µ,
-Xi bi , and (a2 /2)Xi Xi . The first of these is simply minus a times the expression in
Eq. (A8). The second is given by

                                                      i
                            -Xi bi = - wm +             2
                                                          g -1 [di g ]
                                                      a
                                             d i i
                                      = -        2
                                                   g -1 g,                                    (A11)
                                              a
and the third is given by

                   a2         a2      i            i
                      Xi Xi =    wm + 2 g -1  wm + 2 -1 g
                   2          2       a           a
                               2      2
                              a 2    
                            =    m + i 2 g -1 g,                                              (A12)
                              2     2a
recalling wm g = 0 in both cases. Adding the three terms then gives

                                            i d¯           d i i      a2 2  2
                                                                            i
                    2
-aXi µ - Xi bi + (a /2)Xi Xi        = -aµm + 2 g  g - 2 g  g + m + 2 g -1 g
                                                   -1            -1
                                             a              a         2    2a
                                            a2 2      1             1 2
                                    = -aµm + m + 2 i d - di i + i g -1 g
                                             2       a              2
                                                          2
                                               a 2       
                                    = -a µm - m     - i 2 g -1 g.             (A13)
                                               2        2a
Substituting this exponent into Eq. (A1) gives
                                                                        2
                      ~ 1i , Xi )           -a(1+rf ) -a(µm - a
                                                              2 m ) 2a2
                                                                 2 - i g -1 g
                 E V (W              = -e             e
                                                                                 2
                                               -a(1+rf ) -a(µm - a
                                                                 2 m)
                                                                   2        -    i g   -1 g
                                     =    -e           e                 e      2a2


                                                2
                                       ¯ e- 2ai2 g -1 g ,
                                     = V                                                      (A14)

                                   ¯ , the agent's expected utility if i = 0.
noting that the bracketed term is, V




                                                 42
Derivation of Eq. (42):

    The assumptions below Eq. (36), along with Eq. (40), imply that the covariance matrix
of r
   ~ is of the form
                                                  2
                                    = B B +         I,                             (A15)
in which B = [m g ], and both B B and  are diagonal matrices:
                                                                2
                                   m m 0                       1  0
                          BB=                   ,        =         2       .            (A16)
                                    0  gg                      0 2

Inverting  using the Woodbury identity gives
                                          1      1
                                   -1 =    2
                                             I - 4 B B ,                                (A17)
                                                

in which  is the diagonal matrix,
                                                                  -1
                                   m 0              -1     1
                            =                 =          + 2B B        ,                (A18)
                                   0 g                    

and
                                                2 2
                                                2 
                                        g =   2     2
                                                      .                                 (A19)
                                               + g g2
Post-multiplying the right-hand side of Eq. (A17) by g and recognizing that g m = 0 gives

                                   1   g g g                   1
                          -1 g =    2
                                      - 4    g=           2        2
                                                                     g.                 (A20)
                                                              + g g2

If  g = 0, then from Eqs. (17) through (21) and the surrounding discussion, wg = g/( g ),
and gg = (g g )/( g ). If  g = 0, then wg equals the right-hand side of Eq. (A20), and
gg = (g g )/( 2
                + g g22
                        ). In either case, (1/gg )wg = g/(g g ). The definition of f  ~g in Eq.
(31) implies that pre-multiplying the right-hand side of Eq. (40) by (1/gg )wg , recalling that
wg m = 0, gives
                                    ~
                                    f                ~e ~
                                      g - E0 {fg } = fg + ,                               (A21)
with  ~ = (g  ~)/(g g ). The variance of ~ is  2 /(g g ), which goes to zero as N   if the
                                              
cross-sectional second moment of the elements of g , (g g )/N , is bounded below by a positive
value for all N .

Derivation of Eq. (45):

  First note that  is of the same form as in Eq. (A15), with the relabelings  2 = 2
                                                                                    ,
m = 1 , and f = 2 . Also, as there, m g = 0. Therefore, using Eq. (A20),

                                         1                     1
                          -1 g =             2
                                               g=                 2
                                                                    g.                  (A22)
                                    2   + g gf            2   + N f

                                               43
Using Eq. (A22) and noting g g = N , observe that for large N ,

                                               1          1
                              g -1 g =            2
                                                    g g = 2.                            (A23)
                                          2   + N f      f

Also observe that, because  -1 g = 0 (recall  g = 0), the ESG portfolio has zero cost and
weights wg = -1 g as in Eq. (18). By Eq. (A22), the ESG portfolio goes long green stocks
and short brown stocks. The greenness of the ESG portfolio is given by
                                                            1
                                  gg = wg g = g -1 g =       2
                                                               .                        (A24)
                                                            f

The portfolio weights for each type of investor follow directly from Eq. (14), with i = (1 - )d
for an ESG investor and i = -d for a non-ESG investor:
                                                          d -1
                               Xesg = wm + (1 - )             g                         (A25)
                                                          a2
                                                    d -1
                               Xnon = wm -              g.                              (A26)
                                                    a2
Therefore, using Eq. (A22), the ESG investor's portfolio weights in Eq. (A25) become

                                  1          d        1
                         Xesg =      + (1 - ) 2 -1 g = ( + hg ),                        (A27)
                                  N          a        N
with
                                              (1 - )d
                                     h=               2
                                                          ,                             (A28)
                                          a2 ( 2 /N+ f  )
which, as N grows large, converges to

                                              (1 - )d
                                         h=         2
                                                      .                                 (A29)
                                                a2  f

With expected utility as given by Eq. (A1), an ESG investor's certainty equivalent excess
return from holding her optimal portfolio is

                                   d    a
                 resg = Xesg µ + g - Xesg Xesg
                                   a    2
                         1                 d    d    a
                      =    ( + hg ) µm m -   g + g - Xesg Xesg
                        N                  a    a    2
                              h(1 - )d a
                      = µm +           - Xesg Xesg .                                    (A30)
                                   a     2
Recall that i for the ESG investor is (1 - )d, and thus the variance of the ESG investor's
portfolio return, using Eq. (12), is

                                              2       (1 - )2 d2
                               Xesg Xesg =    m     +        2
                                                                 .                      (A31)
                                                         a4  f

                                               44
Combining Eqs. (A29), (A30), and (A31), we then see

                                             a 2  (1 - )2 d2
                               resg   = µ m - m +       2
                                                             .                           (A32)
                                             2      2a3 f

If the ESG investor is instead constrained to hold the market portfolio, the resulting certainty
equivalent excess return is given by
                                      a            a 2
                           rm = wm µ - wm wm = µm - m  .                                 (A33)
                                      2            2
The ESG investor's certainty-equivalent gain from investing as desired, versus investing in
the market, is therefore
                                             (1 - )2 d2
                                 resg - rm =        2
                                                        .                            (A34)
                                                2a3 f
This difference in certainty equivalents is largest when  = 0. That largest difference, , is
therefore
                                                 d2
                                          = 3 2,                                       (A35)
                                               2a f
                     2
and substituting for f using Eq. (A24) gives Eq. (45). The corresponding value of d is

                                                   2
                                         d=    2a3 f .                                   (A36)


Derivation of the certainty equivalent excess return of a non-ESG investor (Section 4.2 ):

   Proceeding as above, the non-ESG investor's portfolio weights in Eq. (A26) become
                                      1    d        1
                            Xnon =       -  2 -1 g = ( + kg ),                           (A37)
                                      N    a        N
with
                                                    d
                                      k=-                 2
                                                                .                        (A38)
                                            a2 ( 2 /N   + f )
Similarly, the variance of the non-ESG investor's portfolio return for large N is
                                                2
                                    Xnon Xnon = m + k 2 f
                                                        2
                                                          ,                              (A39)

and a non-ESG investor's certainty equivalent excess return from holding his optimal port-
folio is
                                     a
                     rnon = Xnon µ - Xnon Xnon
                                     2
                             1                  d      a
                          =    ( + kg ) (µm m -   g ) - Xnon Xnon
                            N                   a      2
                                  a 2      2 d2
                          = µ m - m + 3 2
                                  2       2a f
                                      2 d2
                           =   rm   + 3 2.                                               (A40)
                                     2a f

                                               45
Derivation of Eq. (46):

   From Eqs. (11) and (A23), the difference in expected excess returns earned by the two
types of investors is
                                                 d2    -1       d2
                                   rnon ) = -
                        resg ) - E(~
                      E(~                           g     g = -     2
                                                                      .              (A41)
                                                 a3             a3  f

Substituting for d2 from Eq. (A36) gives Eq. (46).


Derivation of Eq. (47):

   The covariance between the ESG investor's return and the market return, using Eq.
(A27) is
                                1            2        2
                  Xesg wm =       2
                                    ( + hg ) m m m +  f gg +  2 IN 
                               N
                                2     1
                             = m    + 2,                                             (A42)
                                      N
              2
which equals m  for large N . Combining this result with Eq. (A31) gives the correlation
between the ESG investor's return and the market return as
                                                     Xesg wm
                               (~
                                resg , r
                                       ~m ) =
                                                 m Xesg Xesg
                                                    m
                                           =                                         (A43)
                                                     2       (1-)2 d2
                                                     m   +        2
                                                               a4 f


Substituting for d2 from Eq. (A36) gives Eq. (47).


Derivations of Eqs. (48) and (49):

    Let  denote the N × 1 vector of alphas given by Eq. (10). The alpha of the ESG investor
is given by

                              esg = Xesg 
                                         1                    d
                                     =     ( + hg )      -      g
                                         N                    a
                                                      d2
                                     = -(1 - )           2
                                                           ,                         (A44)
                                                     a 3 f

using Eqs. (A27) and (A29). Substituting for d2 from Eq. (A36) gives Eq. (48). The wealth-
weighted average alpha must equal zero,

                                 esg + (1 - )non = 0,                                (A45)

                                                46
and applying that identity gives Eq. (49).


Derivation of Eq. (53):

   Because  Xesg = 1, ESG investors' stock portfolio weights, wi , are simply Xesg from
Eq. (A27). Using Eqs. (A27) and (A29), along with wm = (1/N ), gives
                                        1
                                 T =       |Xesg - wm |
                                        2
                                        1    1           1
                                      =        ( + hg ) - 
                                        2   N            N
                                        1   (1 - )d
                                      =            2
                                                     g                                                               (A46)
                                        2    N a 2 f

Substituting for d from Eq. (A36), we obtain Eq. (53).


Derivation of Eq. (56):

   Modifying the earlier derivation of Eq. (4), we obtain
                                                    -ai Xi [~  1
                                                            r+ a         ~
                                                                 bi ]-ci C
        ~ 1i , Xi , C
   E V (W           ~)    = -e-ai (1+rf ) E e                      i


                                               -ai Xi [E (~   1
                                                          r)+ a bi ]+ 1                                 ~ )+ 1 c2 V ar(C
                                                                        a2 X V ar(~)Xi +ai ci Xi Cov (~,C              ~)
                          = -e-ai (1+rf ) e                    i      2 i i                                  2 i

                                                          1        1 2
                                               -ai Xi [µ+ a  bi ]+ 2 ai Xi Xi +ai ci Xi  C + 1 c2  2
                          = -e-ai (1+rf ) e                i                                 2 i C
                                                                                                       ,             (A47)
                 ~ ). Differentiating with respect to Xi gives the first-order condition
where  C  Cov(~, C
                                         1
                              -ai [µ +      bi ] + a2
                                                    i Xi + ai ci  C = 0                                              (A48)
                                         ai
from which we obtain agent i's portfolio weights
                                         1 -1    1
                                Xi =          µ + bi - ci  C .                                                       (A49)
                                         ai      ai
Again imposing the market-clearing condition and ai = a gives

                            wm =             i Xi di
                                         i
                                       1 -1   ¯
                                              d       c
                                                      ¯
                                  =       µ + 2 -1 g - -1  C ,                                                       (A50)
                                       a     a        a
which implies
                                              ¯
                                              d
                                µ = awm - g + c   ¯ C .                                                              (A51)
                                              a
Premultiplying by wm , again imposing the assumption wm g = 0, gives
                                               2
                                         µm = am +c
                                                  ¯mC ,                                                              (A52)

                                                       47
where mC  Cov(~m , C  ~ ) = w  C . Solving Eq. (A52) for a and substituting into the first
                              m
term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A51) gives
                                  µm - c
                                       ¯mC    d¯
                          µ =         2
                                           wm - g+c¯ C
                                     m        a
                                             d¯
                             = (µm - c
                                     ¯mC )m - g + c
                                                  ¯ C
                                             a
                                       ¯
                                       d          mC
                             = µm m - g + c
                                          ¯ C- 2 m ,                                     (A53)
                                       a          m
                   2           2
noting m = (1/m      ) m = (1/m  )wm . To see that the third term on the right-hand side of
Eq. (A53) is the same as that in Eq. (56), first observe that in the multivariate regression of
~ on ~m and C~ , the N × 2 matrix of slope coefficients is given by

                2            -1
                m  mC                       1    2            2
    [ m  C ]        2             =   2 2     2
                                                 C  m - mC  C m  C - mC  m ,
                mC C                  m C   - mC
so the second column is given by
                                          2
                                          m  C - mC  m
                                      =     2 2 - 2
                                                       .                                 (A54)
                                           m  C   mC

Using Eq. (A54), we can rewrite the third term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A53) as
                                                      2 2   2
                                      mC              m C - mC
                          ¯ C-
                          c           2
                                         m        ¯
                                                = c       2
                                                               
                                      m                  m
                                                  ¯ 1 - 2
                                                = c     mC  ,                            (A55)

recalling that C = 1.


Derivation of Eq. (57):

   Substituting for µ from Eq. (A53) into Eq. (A49) and setting ai = a, we obtain
              1 -1     1
       Xi =         µ + bi - ci  C
              a        a
              1 -1          ¯
                            d           mC        1
            =       µm m - g + c ¯  C - 2  m + bi - ci  C
              a             a            m        a
              µm -1      1      mC      1   di     d¯      1
            =     m - -1 c    ¯ 2  m + -1      g - g - -1 (ci - c
                                                                ¯)  C
               a         a       m      a   a      a       a
              µm -1      1           m 1     i      ci - c
                                                         ¯ -1
            =     m - -1 (¯     cmC ) 2 + -1 g -            C         (A56)
               a         a           m    a  a         a
                                       2                         m       wm
                           ¯mC = µm - am
Noting from Eq. (A52) that c             , and that m =          2
                                                                 m
                                                                     =   2 ,
                                                                         m
                                                                               we have

                    µm -1  1               i        ci - c
                                                         ¯ -1
           Xi =         m - -1 µm - am
                                     2
                                       m + 2 -1 g -         C
                     a     a              a            a

                                              48
                  2 -1      i -1       ci - c
                                            ¯ -1
                = m  m +      2
                                 g-            C
                            a             a
                       i        ci - c
                                     ¯ -1
                = wm + 2 -1 g -         C ,                                                (A57)
                      a            a
which is Eq. (57).


Derivation of Eq. (64):

   The firm's value at time 0 is
                                      n            n (K0,n + Kn )
                     n = -Kn -          (Kn )2 +                      .                    (A58)
                                      2                          d
                                                 1 + rf + µm n - a gn

The manager maximizes n by choosing Kn . The first-order condition yields
                                                                     
                                   1          n
                          Kn (d) =                        - 1 .                            (A59)
                                   n 1 + rf + µm n - d gn
                                                     a

Substituting into Eq. (63) produces
                                                                                  
                                1          n               n
            Sn (d) - Sn (0) = gn                    -              
                                n 1 + rf + µm n - gn 1 + rf + µm n
                                                 d
                                                 a
                                                                                  
                                                    d
                                  n                   g
                                                    a n
                             = gn                                         ,                (A60)
                                  n (1 + rf + µm n - gn )(1 + rf + µm n )
                                                     d
                                                     a

which produces Eq. (64). Comparative statics for n , n , and n follow immediately from
                                                             ~  d/a and compute
Eq. (64). For the comparative statics for d and a, we define d

                                       gn2
                                           n                           ~ n ) + dg
                                                     (1 + rf + µm n - dg        ~n
          Sn (d) - Sn (0)      =
        ~
        d                        n (1 + rf + µm n )                       ~ n )2
                                                        (1 + rf + µm n - dg
                                 g 2 n             1
                               = n                                ,                        (A61)
                                   n (1 + rf + µm n - dg   ~ n )2

                                                                ~, it increases in d and decreases
which is positive if gn = 0. Since Sn (d) - Sn (0) increases in d
in a.

Derivation of Eqs. (65) and (66):

   The firm's value at time 0 is now

                        n     2
                                 n (K0,n + Kn ) 1 - 2n (gn )2
               n = -Kn - (Kn ) +                                .                          (A62)
                        2                        d
                                 1 + rf + µm n - a (gn,0 + gn )

The manager maximizes n by choosing gn and Kn . The choice of gn depends only
on the third term of Eq. (A62), and we can maximize its log. Using the approximation that

                                               49
log(1 + x)  x and ignoring terms without gn , the choice of gn simplifies to

                                         n         d
                                 max -     (gn )2 + gn .                                (A63)
                                  gn     2         a
The first-order condition delivers Eq. (65). Without taking logs, the first-order condition for
Kn is
                                           n 1 - 2n (gn )2
                         -1 - n Kn +                       d
                                                                =0,                      (A64)
                                          1 + rf + µm n - a  gn
which delivers Eq. (66).




                                              50
References

Albuquerque, R., Koskinen, Y., Zhang, C., 2019. Corporate social responsibility and firm
   risk: theory and empirical evidence. Management Science 65, 4451­4469.
Baker, M., Bergstresser, D., Serafeim, G., Wurgler, J., 2018. Financing the response to
   climate change: the pricing and ownership of U.S. green bonds. Unpublished working
   paper. Harvard University.
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2012. Behavioral corporate finance: an updated survey. In: Con-
   stantinides, G., Harris, M., Stulz, R. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Vol.
   2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 357­424.
Baker, S., Hollifield, B., Osambela, E., 2020. Asset prices and portfolios with externalities.
   Unpublished working paper. University of Virginia.
Bank, M., Insam, F., 2017. Return contributions of factors and characteristics in an inte-
   grated asset pricing approach. Unpublished working paper. University of Innsbruck.
Bansal, R., Ochoa, M., Kiku, D., 2016. Climate change and growth risks. Unpublished
   working paper. Duke University.
Barber, B., Morse, A., Yasuda, A., 2020. Impact investing. Journal of Financial Economics,
   forthcoming.
Bauer, R., Koedijk, K., Otten, R., 2005. International evidence on ethical mutual fund
   performance and investment style. Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 1751­1767.
Berg, F., Koelbel, J., Rigobon, R., 2019. Aggregate confusion: the divergence of ESG
   ratings. Unpublished working paper. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Bialkowski, J., Starks, L., 2016. SRI funds: investor demand, exogenous shocks and ESG
   profiles. Unpublished working paper. University of Canterbury.
van Binsbergen, J., Opp, C., 2019. Real anomalies. Journal of Finance 74, 1659­1706.
Bollen, N., 2007. Mutual fund attributes and investor behavior. Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis 42, 683­708.
Bolton, P., Kacperczyk, M., 2019. Do investors care about carbon risk? Unpublished working
   paper. Columbia University.
Chava, S., 2014. Environmental externalities and cost of capital. Management Science 60,
   2223­2247.
Cheng, I., Hong, H., Shue, K., 2016. Do managers do good with other peoples' money?
   Unpublished working paper. Dartmouth College.
Cremers, M., Petajisto, A., 2009. How active is your fund manager? A new measure that
   predicts performance. Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329­3365.
Dimson, E., Karakas, O., Li, X., 2015. Active ownership. Review of Financial Studies 28,
   3225­3268.


                                             51
Dyck, A., Lins, K., Roth, L., Wagner, H., 2019. Do institutional investors drive corporate
   social responsibility? International evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 131, 693­
   714.
Edmans, A., 2011. Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee satisfaction and
  equity prices. Journal of Financial Economics 101, 621­640.
El Ghoul, S., Guedhami, O., Kwok, C., Mishra, D., 2011. Does corporate social responsibility
   affect the cost of capital? Journal of Banking and Finance 35, 2388­2406.
Engle, R., Giglio, S., Kelly, B., Lee, H., Stroebel, J., 2020. Hedging climate change news.
   Review of Financial Studies 33, 1184­1216.
Fama, E., French, K., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal
   of Financial Economics 33, 3­56.
Fama, E., French, K., 2007. Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices. Journal of Financial
   Economics 83, 667­689.
Fama, E., Schwert, G., 1977. Human capital and capital market equilibrium. Journal of
   Financial Economics 4, 95­125.
Friedman, H., Heinle, M., 2016. Taste, information, and asset prices: implications for the
    valuation of CSR. Review of Accounting Studies 21, 740­767.
Garleanu, N., Kogan, L., Panageas, S., 2012. Displacement risk and asset returns. Journal
   of Financial Economics 105, 491­510.
Geczy, C., Stambaugh, R., Levin, D., 2005. Investing in socially responsible mutual funds.
   Unpublished working paper. University of Pennsylvania.
Gollier, C., Pouget., S., 2014. The "washing machine": investment strategies and corpo-
   rate behavior with socially responsible investors. Unpublished working paper. Toulouse
   School of Economics.
Gompers, P., Ishii, J., Metrick, A., 2003. Corporate governance and equity prices. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 118, 107­156.
Hart, O., Zingales, L., 2017. Companies should maximize shareholder welfare not market
   value. Journal of Law, Finance, and Accounting 2, 247-274.
Hartzmark, S., Sussman, A., 2019. Do investors value sustainability? A natural experiment
   examining ranking and fund flows. Journal of Finance 74, 2789­2837.
Heinkel, R., Kraus, A., Zechner, J., 2001. The effect of green investment on corporate
   behavior. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 431­449.
Hoepner, A., Oikonomou, I., Sautner, Z., Starks, L., Zhou, X., 2018. ESG shareholder
   engagement and downside risk. Unpublished working paper. University College Dublin.
Hong, H., Kacperczyk, M., 2009. The price of sin: the effects of social norms on markets.
   Journal of Financial Economics 93, 15­36.
Hong, H., Kostovetsky, L., 2012. Red and blue investing: values and finance. Journal of


                                            52
   Financial Economics 103, 1­19.
Hong, H., Li., F., Xu, J., 2019. Climate risks and market efficiency. Journal of Econometrics
   208, 265­281.
Hong, H., Wang, N., Yang, J., 2020. Implications of mitigating disaster risks for sustainable
   investing and growth. Unpublished working paper. Columbia University.
Humphrey, J., Kogan, S., Sagi, J., Starks, L., 2020. The asymmetry in responsible investing
  preferences. Unpublished working paper. University of Queensland.
Ilhan, E., Sautner, Z., Vilkov, G., 2020. Carbon tail risk. Unpublished working paper.
    Frankfurt School of Finance and Management.
Kempf, A., Osthoff, P., 2007. The effect of socially responsible investing on portfolio perfor-
  mance. European Financial Management 13, 908­922.
Krueger, P., Sautner, Z., Starks, L., 2019. The importance of climate risks for institutional
   investors. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Luo, A., Balvers, R., 2017. Social screens and systematic investor boycott risk. Journal of
   Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52, 365-399.
Mayers, D., 1972. Nonmarketable assets and capital market equilibrium under uncertainty.
  In: Jensen, M. (Ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets. Praeger, New York, pp.
  223­248.
Oehmke, M., Opp., M., 2020. A theory of socially responsible investment. Unpublished
   working paper. London School of Economics.
P´       Stambaugh, R., 2003. Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of
 astor, L.,
   Political Economy 111, 642­685.
Pedersen, L., Fitzgibbons, S., Pomorski, L., 2019. Responsible investing: the ESG-efficient
   frontier. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Renneboog, L., Ter Horst, J., Zhang, C., 2008. Socially responsible investments: institutional
   aspects, performance, and investor behavior. Journal of Banking and Finance 32, 1723­
   1742.
Renneboog, L., Ter Horst, J., Zhang, C., 2011. Is ethical money financially smart? Nonfi-
   nancial attributes and money flows of socially responsible investment funds. Journal of
   Financial Intermediation 20, 562­588.
Riedl, A., Smeets, P., 2017. Why do investors hold socially responsible mutual funds?
   Journal of Finance 72, 2505­2550.
Zerbib, O., 2019. The effect of pro-environmental preferences on bond prices: evidence from
   green bonds. Journal of Banking and Finance 98, 39­60.




                                              53
